Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, for his comprehensive briefing on the latest
developments in Kosovo. I welcome the presence of
Serbian First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affaris His Excellency Ivica Dacie and thank
him for his remarks. I also thank Ambassador Vlora
Citaku for her statement.

We took note of what Ambassador Tanin said at
the very outset of his statement regarding how much
the quality of dialogue between the two parties
has deteriorated.

Our position on the issue at hand has always been
consistent and clear. We would like to reaffirm our
support for a responsible handling by the two parties
of the challenge they face and for the peaceful and
amicable resolution of all outstanding issues between
Belgrade and Pristina in accordance with the Brussels
Agreement so that there may be reliable and sustainable
peace between the two parties, which can happen only
when there is justice for all and rights are respected.
We welcome the ongoing efforts made by the European
Union (EU) in facilitating the dialogue between Serbia
and Kosovo, as well as its efforts to advance peace and
stability in the region.

In that regard, we are encouraged by the high-
level engagements by the European Union during
the reporting period, including the high-level visits
to Belgrade and Pristina in the months of February
and March. We also welcome the resumption of the
EU-facilitated dialogue and call on Belgrade and
Pristina to continue demonstrating good faith and
positive commitment to the dialogue with a view to
normalizing relations.

The ongoing efforts being made to operationalize
an integrated Kosovo judiciary are a welcome step.
However, we are concerned with the slow progress
on the establishment of the association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo. We
therefore encourage the implementation of all existing
agreements, in accordance with the Brussels Agreement.

We are deeply concerned by the heightened tension
and deteriorating relations following the unfortunate
incident of 26 March. The concerns expressed by the
Special Representative are indeed fully justified. It
is our hope that leaders in both Belgrade and Pristina
will continue to engage in dialogue in good faith and
maintain a positive and constructive spirit with a view
to addressing outstanding issues and disagreements
through peaceful means. That requires that both sides
refrain from actions and statements that could cause
ethnic discord, and exert efforts to create an atmosphere
of trust and confidence conducive for dialogue.

Ethiopia fully supports the work that UNMIK
has been undertaking in discharging its mandates in
line with resolution 1244 (1999). Its engagement and
support to promote inter-community reconciliation and
confidence-building measures in the reporting period
is commendable. Recent developments have indeed
made it imperative that UNMIK continue to discharge
its responsibilities.

It is our hope that UNMIK will continue to promote

political dialogue, strengthen community reconciliation
and ensure security and stability in Kosovo and the
region. We also recognize the significant role of the
European Union on matters concerning Kosovo, and
we commend the European Union Rule of Law Mission
and the Kosovo Force for its valuable contribution in
Kosovo in the areas of the rule of law and security.

In conclusion, I would like to state that security
and stability in Kosovo and the region will ultimately
be ensured when there is political will and resolve
on the part of both parties. In that respect, we once
again encourage both parties to remain committed to
dialogue and negotiation with the view to finding a
mutually acceptable solution.

