Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): Before
beginning my statement on the topic at hand, I am
extremely grateful to you, Madam President, for your
very thoughtful statement on behalf of the members of
the Security Council on the sad news of the execution
of a Korean citizen by a terrorist organization earlier
today in Iraq.

I also cannot but express the deepest sorrow and
outrage of my people and my Government upon the
killing of an innocent civilian, Mr. Kim Sun-il. The
Government of the Republic of Korea condemns the
perpetrators of that act and all heinous acts of
terrorism, and expresses its strong hope that the
international community will work together to find and
bring these criminals to justice. The international
community must not remain silent about atrocities
being committed by terrorist criminals on a nearly
daily basis. All Member States must redouble their
efforts to demonstrate unmistakably that acts of
terrorism will not be tolerated, in order to ensure the
safety and the security of innocent civilians from the
scourge of terrorism around the world. For its part, the
Republic of Korea believes strongly in the efforts of
the international community to rebuild a free and
democratic Iraq and remains committed to that noble
goal.

Turning to today's topic, I wish to extend my
appreciation to you, Madam, for convening this open
debate on the role of civil society in post-conflict
peace-building. To my knowledge, this is the first
opportunity the Council has had to formally reflect on
the key role that civil society plays in the
transformation from war to lasting peace. We hope that
today will be the beginning of an ongoing fruitful
discussion.

As noted in the annex to your letter to the
Secretary-General, in the 1990s non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) began playing a key role in
peace-building efforts in post-conflict countries. At the
same time, these crises saw the traditional mandate of
NGOs expand significantly beyond humanitarian relief
and the protection of vulnerable populations to
resource mobilization and the delivery of assistance for
post-conflict reconstruction. In many cases, their
forward-looking advocacy and tireless efforts have led
to momentous policy changes at both the governmental
and the intergovernmental levels. Through this
enhanced role, NGOs have been transformed and
empowered from important but secondary actors to key
partners in the process of post-conflict reconstruction.
This is a transformation that my delegation fully
supports.

Just in time for our debate today, the Secretary-
General's Panel Of Eminent Persons on United
Nations-Civil Society Relations issued its report
yesterday. We have yet to fully digest the extensive
content of the report, but, on the matter of Security
Council interaction with civil society, we endorse the
report's recommendation that Council members further
strengthen their dialogue with civil society through
various measures.

As the Panel's report notes, today's conflicts are
complex situations requiring on-the-ground knowledge,
new tools and skills in cultural analysis, and the active
involvement of communities and their leaders. Civil
society organizations are often uniquely positioned to
fill these roles, and we are convinced that a deepening
of the Council's engagement with civil society in
peace-building situations will benefit all actors and the
peace process itself.

Some of the measures proposed to achieve this
outcome include increased meetings between Security
Council field missions and local NGOs; convening
independent commissions of inquiry, with civil society
participation, after Council-mandated operations; and
holding an experimental series of Security Council
seminars attended by civil society. We believe that
these are all worthy proposals and we look forward to
seeing their implementation.

My delegation would just like to add that gender
perspectives must be incorporated into all of these
efforts. The Republic of Korea is a strong supporter of
Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security, and expects the spirit of the resolution to
extend fully into the Council's expanded interaction
with civil society. Indeed, we believe that women's full
and equal participation and the integration of gender
perspectives should be incorporated at governmental,
intergovernmental and non-governmental levels to
ensure the success of efforts in conflict prevention and
resolution, peace processes and post-conflict peace-
building.

Peace-building today is a complex process that
involves multiple actors and diverse interests, and
constructive coordination among all actors is essential
to any successful peace-building effort. The first steps
often begin with humanitarian confidence-building
measures, such as prisoner exchanges, free passage and
resettlement for refugees, or the vaccination of
children. In all of these tasks, the active participation
of civil society organizations is essential, as they are
often already established in crisis areas and possess the
kind of local knowledge that can be gained only by
residents of the affected areas themselves.

In conclusion, the Republic of Korea believes that
if post-conflict peace-building is to be successful, the
vigorous participation of civil society in all aspects of
the process is fundamental. We hope that the Council
will remain strongly committed to strengthening the
role of civil society in post-conflict peace-building and
we pledge our firm support towards that end.

