Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank High Representative Inzko for his
briefing. The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
visibly improved since the signing of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, 16 years ago.

At present, the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is generally stable. Progress has been
made in security, constitutional reform, the rule of law
and economic development. China welcomes those
positive developments. However, we have also noted
that Bosnia and Herzegovina is currently facing certain
difficulties in its efforts to achieve stability and
promote development.

China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the choice made by its people
for their country's future. We hope that the various
ethnic groups of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be
guided by the well-being and long-term interests of
their country to actively resolve their difference
through dialogue, enhance mutual political trust and
promote national reconciliation, so as to fully
implement the Dayton Peace Agreement and to make
further steady progress in the various areas concerned.
China wishes to see the early establishment of a new
and broadly representative Government in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a country of major
importance in the Balkan region. Maintaining peace
and stability in the country and promoting its economic
and social development is in the common interest of
the international community, especially the countries in
that area. China hopes that High Representative Inzko
will continue to maintain close contact with the
international community, including the European
Union, and to play a constructive role in furtherance of
the Dayton Peace Agreement.

At the same time, however, we believe that the
issues surrounding Bosnia and Herzegovina are
extremely complex and sensitive. The international
community must therefore adopt a prudent approach in
dealing with the various issues concerning the country
and be highly attentive to the various concerns and
views of all parties.

China supports the extension of the presence of
the European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina
for another term.

