Mr. Abdulla: Last year, the Executive Director
of the World Food Programme, Ertharin Cousin,
reported to the Council (see S/PV.7612), stating her
grave concern about the deepening humanitarian crisis
in Syria and the increasing hardship faced by people
the in besieged areas. She warned then that they were
falling into despair, malnutrition, starvation and death.

Yet, today, despite some cause for optimism, the
situation remains perhaps even more grave. Six years
into the crisis, the humanitarian and food-security
situation in Syria continues to deteriorate. Seven
million people in Syria are already food insecure and an
additional 2 million are at risk. That is 9 million people
inside Syria - half the current population 4 who are
in need of food, agriculture and livelihood assistance.
Four out of five Syrians now live in poverty, with
almost 80 per cent of the households across the country
struggling to cope with food shortages.

An alarming fact is that food production has hit
a record low as widespread insecurity continues to
hamper access to land, farming supplies and markets.
Fuel is in short supply and infrastructure, such as
irrigation systems, is often in a state of damage, all
of which make it increasingly difficult for farmers to
produce and maintain their livelihoods. The wheat
harvest is at an all-time low, estimated at less than
50 per cent of the pre-conflict averages. As such, Syria
is in danger of becoming a country of subsistence
farmers with most of its commercial and large-scale
agricultural base eroded.

Food prices have steadily risen, reaching an
increase of 43 per cent in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas to which the World Food Programme (WFP)
and other humanitarian organizations have no regular
access. The highest cost for staple foods was reported
in the besieged part of Deir ez-Zor city, in which more
than 90,000 people are struggling to survive. The
situation remains precarious in other besieged locations
in which many people are struggling to get just one
meal per day. To date, approximately 4.6 million
people, including an estimated 2 million children, live
in areas throughout Syria that are very hard to reach.
They receive only sporadic humanitarian assistance,
and as Under-Secretary-General O'Brien just said,
more than 640,000 people are living in 13 besieged
locations across of Syria, deprived of the most basic
needs, especially food.

During the first several few weeks of 2016,
following the Munich agreement, access to besieged
and hard-to-reach areas improved considerably. Despite
those improvements, recent outbreaks of fighting,
insecurity and delays in obtaining the necessary
approvals have meant that millions of hungry Syrians
were cut off from supplies and left without predictable
food deliveries. As an example, in the third quarter of
last year, WFP sent food to hard-to-reach and besieged
areas through 23 inter-agency conveys; however, only
12 such conveys took place during the last quarter of
2016. Our persistent efforts to improve access continue
to be challenged by numerous obstacles, and those were
outlined earlier by Under-Secretary-General O'Brien.
Access has been our challenge in Syria since the first
days of the conflict. WFP continues to consider all
options. We have consulted with many partners in world
exports. We have considered airdrops, helicopters and
delivering food by drones, but, in the end, it always
comes down to access and ensuring safety.

I would like to add a few words with regard to Deir
ez-Zor and some of the airlifts to which Mr. O'Brien
referred. Deir ez-Zor has been unaccessible to
humanitarian workers since it fell under the control of
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in March 2014.
In April 2016, WFP, together with numerous partners
and much assistance, began a complex, high-altitude
parachute drop, which, as I will explain, delivered quite
a lot. But the recent aspects of the security deterioration
that Mr. O'Brien mentioned in Deir ez-Zor city, which
was effectively cut in half, and fighting between
Government forces and ISIL forced a suspension of
that operation on 15 January. That operation had been
providing a life line for that besieged population. Yet,
before the operation was suspended, we had carried out
177 airdrops delivering food rations, as well as many
other supplies, such as medical and hygiene supplies
on behalf of all the other humanitarian agencies, to
93,000 people. That amounted to more 3,300 tons of
relief items on 4,500 pallets using more than 10,000
parachutes in an unprecedented, highly technical and
regrettably high-cost operation.

In another operation in July 2016, we began an
airlift operation to the Al-Hassakeh governorate, with
planes taking off from Damascus airport and landing
in Qamishly airport. Those airlifts were also costly
with limited cargo capacity but, again, were the only
option to provide emergency assistance to the most
vulnerable and insecure people in the Governorate.
To date, we have completed 294 airlifts to Qamishly,
delivering 10,000 tons of many food items as well as
numerous other humanitarian supplies. Those airlifts
have enabled those supplies, food assistance and many
other urgently needed items to reach approximately
64,000 people and are part of an inter-agency operation
that, I have to advise, is running short of funds.

As I conclude, I would like to say a few words
and convey a key message in Arabic, the language of
the region.

(Spoke in Arabic)

Access to besieged areas cannot be arbitrary,
improvised or accorded only after our repeated requests.
Access to all areas that require assistance should be
reasonably safe and consistent. Access should not be
subject to an unreasonable approval process.

(spoke in English)

The Council may rest assured that the World Food
Programme will continue to do its utmost to overcome
setbacks and challenges to provide life-saving
assistance. Together with partners, we continue to
look towards new and innovative ways to reach people
while hoping that a permanent ceasefire will be put in
place to allow for increased, immediate and, above all,
sustained access.

But ultimately peace and security are the only
solution to the Syrian crisis. As Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien said, there is no humanitarian solution
to the crisis. A new political commitment to peace is
needed so that we can then focus all our energy and
efforts on the future of Syrian families, thereby helping
them rebuild their lives and livelihoods.

