Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and all
members of the brotherly Mission of Azerbaijan on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We are fully ready to cooperate
with you. I would also like to thank Ambassador Susan
Rice and the United States Mission for their presidency
last month, which was very successful and positive.

The Kingdom of Morocco voted in favour of
resolution 2046 (2012), which urges the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan to immediately cease all
confrontation, to undertake to implement all previous
agreements, and to respect each other's sovereignty
and territorial integrity.

In that regard, the Kingdom of Morocco
appreciates the decision of the Government of the
Sudan to settle outstanding issues between the two
countries. Deeply convinced of the need to abjure force
in interactions between countries, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, the Kingdom of
Morocco believes that at this stage it is absolutely
crucial to give priority to dialogue and negotiations and
to encourage both parties not to support rebel groups
that undermine the territorial integrity of the other side.
We would also call on international partners and
mediators of both countries to resolve pending issues
and to implement the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. That would restore trust between the two
neighbours and contribute to a shared future of
coexistence, cooperation and solidarity.

Here, I reaffirm Morocco's long-standing position
in favour of the principle of dialogue and negotiation.
We also believe in sanctions only when they are
absolutely necessary. Thus, in accordance with the
resolutions of the League of Arab States and the
Security Council, I cite the Arab League resolution
adopted on 26 April, which firmly condemns the attack
on Heglig, calls for respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Sudan, also calls on the two
parties to settle the problems between them through
negotiation, and reiterates the League's readiness to
help the African mediation efforts. Furthermore, in the
resolution the Arab League proposes the establishment
of a commission of inquiry to assess the damage
caused by the attack on Heglig.
7

