Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour to see you here in the
Chamber once again, Mr. President, and we welcome
you to New York. We commend the Security Council's
substantive programme of work under the presidency of
the State of Kuwait, including this important briefing.

We express our immense gratitude to Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States for their briefings, and
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland for his
statement.

Based on conviction and experience, we firmly
believe that, through cooperation and inclusive
dialogue, a better result can be achieved - and one
that contains a broader range of considerations and
recommendations that allow us to come closer to more
suitable and lasting solutions. Accordingly, we support
efforts and strategies that deepen cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations as fundamental building blocks for the
maintenance of peace and security, on the basis of the
Charter and relevant law.

The so-called multilateralism network or
multilateral collaboration, which was created to
address the excessively complex, multidimensional
and unpredictable challenges we face and to improve
collective security, is a major feature of the culture
of the United Nations, and it is extremely significant
in the Middle East, thanks to the contributions of
the League of Arab States. In keeping with that
indispensable model of collaboration that the United
Nations maintains with other regions of the world
through its representative bodies, and in the light ofthe
persistence and nature of the conflicts in the Middle
East and surrounding regions, including the question of
Palestine and the conflicts in Syria, Libya and Yemen,
which take up a large part of the Council's agenda, we
agree with the assertion that we would benefit from
a comprehensive regional approach, which is why it
is important to strengthen our partnership with the
League of Arab States.

Experience throughout the conflict cycle, including
efforts aimed at prevention or to achieve the peaceful
resolution of conflicts, allows us to recognize the
contributions of regional and subregional organizations,
whose direct impact and relationship to the realities on
the ground are unique and non-replicable, particularly
in terms of cooperation on issues related to water,
human rights, sexual violence in conflict, migration,
refugees and counter-terrorism - central themes in the
collective effort for international stability.

We therefore agree on the importance of an effective
partnership between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States through regular consultations and
coordinated action at strategic and operational levels,
and welcome as positive developments the forthcoming
opening ofa United Nations liaison office at the League
of Arab States headquarters in Cairo and the League's
efforts to build capacity in prevention, management,
mediation, negotiation and peacekeeping.

We also welcome today's meeting today's meeting
and its effective follow-up, aware that the Council
can only benefit from a deepening of the cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States in areas related to security policy, thereby
contributing to the collective effort aimed at resolving
the conflicts that persist in the Middle East in fulfilment
of the legitimate aspirations of the peoples of the region
to live in peace and security.

