The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I too would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zerrougui, Monseigneur
Utembi and Ms. Furaha for their really helpful
briefings. I think the whole Council has benefited from
being able to hear from them. I also thank the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO) for all
the work it does to try to bring peace and stability to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Ijust wanted to say that I think that, at this crucial
time, it is important that the Security Council receive
information from key players. We are therefore, like
others, disappointed that the Independent National
Electoral Commission of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was unable to join this briefing.

We very much share the concern about women's
participation, which the representatives of Bolivia and
Equatorial Guinea, in particular, set out so clearly after
Ms. Furaha's briefing. We have noted the continuing
progress on the electoral calendar, the closure of the
application process for presidential candidates and the
confirmation that President Kabila Kabange will not
run for a third term. As others have said, that is a critical
step forward, and it will help ensure that credible and
inclusive elections in December lead to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's first-ever democratic and
peaceful transition of power. That is an immense prize,
but it is still a vulnerable one.

Ambassador Haley set out forcibly how we are still
four months from elections and there is a long way
to go. This about more than the timeline; it is about
creating the conditions for free and fair elections. We
join others in calling on the Government to implement
the New Year's Eve agreement in full, and that includes
the confidence-building measures, to demonstrate its
credibility and potential for government. We also look
to the opposition to engage constructively. The electoral
process should be transparent and proactively address
the concerns of Congolese civil society. I would like to
make three points in that regard.

First, we call on the Independent National Electoral
Commission to clarify election protocols to enable
effective observation and to address concerns around
the electoral register and the voting machines. Many
representatives today have set out those difficulties in
full and we endorse their concerns.

Secondly, we note that the Commission has
refused logistical assistance from the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to organize the
elections, and we therefore urge the Commission to
clarify its logistical plan or to accept MONUSCO's
assistance urgently.

Thirdly, inclusivity is a vital element in building
trust in elections. We note with concern the lack of
confidence of several opposition parties in the electoral
process following the release of the provisional list
of presidential candidates. Elections need to be fully
inclusive and they need to see the engagement of all the
Congolese people.

It is clear that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
faces many challenges and those have had a devastating
effect upon the population. A number of speakers today
referred to the violations of human rights across the
country, the link between political uncertainty and
instability and the other drivers of violence, which
the ongoing Ebola crisis risks exacerbating. We share
those concerns and hope that they can be addressed.
I call again for the New Year's Eve agreement to be
implemented fully. Delays in elections and a lack of
public trust only risk further violence. That will have
an effect not just on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo but risks destabilizing the wider region too.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

