Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): This is the first
time that I have addressed the Council since our term
ended. It gives me great personal pleasure to
congratulate an old friend and colleague on the
assumption of the presidency. As you know, Sir, you
are presiding at a crucial moment in the Council's
history; we have full confidence in you. I would also
like to congratulate Ambassador Pleuger and his team
for the tremendous job they did last month.

Today's meeting is both timely and critical. The
Security Council is at a crucial decision-making point
on Iraq. We all agree that the preference is for a
peaceful resolution of the issue of Iraq. We also agree
that war must always be a last resort. And of course all
of us would like to see a second Security Council
resolution adopted.

At the same time, we must not overlook certain
fundamentals. The primary responsibility remains with
the Government of Iraq, not the international
community, to demonstrate compliance. It is imperative
that Iraq disarm immediately and comply fully with all
Security Council resolutions. During Singapore's term
on the Security Council, we consistently took the
position that the Iraqi authorities must comply with all
Security Council resolutions. This position was based
on the important point of principle that international
law must be observed. On 8 November 2002 Singapore
voted in favour of Security Council resolution 1441
(2002) in the expectation that international law and
order would be preserved.

It is important to bear in mind that resolution
1441 (2002) was not the Council's first resolution on
this issue. Iraq has had, unfortunately, a miserable
record of complying with Security Council resolutions.
In fact, resolution 1441 (2002) was the Council's
seventeenth resolution on the issue since resolution 678
(1990) of 29 November 1990, which was designed to
restore international peace and security in the area
following Iraq's illegal invasion of Kuwait.
Subsequently, the ceasefire terms adopted by the
Council in resolution 687 (1991) of April 1991
required Iraq to end its weapons of mass destruction
programmes, recognize Kuwait, account for missing
Kuwaitis and third-party nationals, return Kuwaiti
property and end support for international terrorism.
Resolution 687 (1991) was designed as a
comprehensive framework to restore peace and
maintain the security of the region. Regrettably, Iraq
has not complied with many of the terms of resolution
687 (1991), even though almost 12 years have passed.

When we negotiated resolution 1441 (2002), our
understanding was that Iraq was in material breach of
its obligations and that it would be the final
opportunity for Iraq to comply or face serious
consequences. Resolution 1441 (2002) was specifically
designed to discourage Iraq from reverting to its past
patterns of non-cooperation and evasion.

It has become increasingly clear that Iraq has
only a few more days to comply with resolution 1441
(2002) or face the consequences. We therefore hope
that it will comply immediately, actively, fully and
unconditionally with the United Nations weapons
inspectors. As Mr. Hans Blix said in his most recent
statement to the Council on 7 March 2003,

"It is obvious that, while the numerous
initiatives, which are now taken by the Iraqi side
with a view to resolving some longstanding open
disarmament issues can be seen as active, or even
proactive, these initiatives, three to four months
into the new resolution, cannot be said to
constitute immediate cooperation, nor do they
necessarily cover all areas of relevance."
(S/PV.47I4, p.5)

Clearly, many unanswered questions remain to be
addressed by the Iraqi authorities. The Financial Times
today contains a report of an interview with Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei. He made a suggestion to a
delegation of Arab foreign ministers travelling to Iraq
that they urge dramatic action by Baghdad. We agree
with Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei's comments that, "what
is required is a dramatic change in spirit and sincerity".
He added that
"the Iraqi president [could] himself announce on
television that he is prepared for complete
cooperation and that he is giving directives to all
Iraqi officials to cooperate completely and
present all the documents they have, or even if
they have weapons, to reveal them".

It is our hope that the Security Council will act in
a way that will preserve the unity we achieved by
resolution 1441 (2002). A unified position will send a
clear message to Iraq from the Council that continued
defiance of its obligations will not be tolerated.

It will also send the signal to the rest of the world
that the development and proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction pose a grave threat to international
order that cannot be ignored. Indeed, the issue under
discussion today is only one example in a broader
problem of weapons of mass destruction proliferation.

But even as we focus on these important
questions, we must never lose sight of the human
dimension of the Iraq issue. Singapore attaches great
importance to improving the humanitarian situation of
the people of Iraq. They have already suffered greatly
as a result of the Government of Iraq's failure to
comply with its disarmament obligations. Their
suffering should not be prolonged. Once again, we urge
the Government of Iraq to make the right decision.

