Mr. Radomski (Poland): Iwould like to congratulate
you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council, and to assure you of our full
support. I would also like to thank the delegation of
Sweden for leading the Council through the month of
July in an exemplary manner. I would like to thank
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Mr. John Ging,
Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), for their informative briefings.

I would like to begin by taking this opportunity
to express our enormous appreciation to OCHA and
the United Nations staff members and international
humanitarian personnel who continue to provide
life-saving assistance to the Yemeni people in extremely
challenging circumstances.

Poland fully support the Special Envoy's framework
for political dialogue in Yemen. We once again call for
the resumption of an inclusive intra-Yemeni political
process aimed at achieving a political solution to the
conflict. We welcome the fact that the first round of
the negotiations is scheduled to take place in Geneva
in September. The parties to the conflict must cease
to engage in Violence and refrain from taking further
action that could lead to additional displacement,
casualties, damage to civilian infrastructure and
disruptions of humanitarian and commercial access.
All parties and stakeholders must abide by the
principles of international humanitarian law and ensure
the protection of civilians. Children in particular must
be taken under special protection from the atrocities
of war.

It is with great concern that we have received
reports of air strikes in Al-Hudaydah in the past few
hours, including an attack on the city's main hospital
and fish market. We are alarmed by the escalation of
violence, which further increases the humanitarian
cost of the conflict and poses a real risk to the prospect
of peace talks. We reiterate our full support for the
Special Envoy's efforts to find a solution to the situation
in Al-Hudaydah and we urge the parties to engage
constructively with him to demonstrate flexibility.
We expect those involved to make the necessary effort
to reach a compromise on the management of the
city and its port. It will be crucial to prevent a fully
fledged attack on Al-Hudaydah, which would further
deteriorate the humanitarian situation, not only in the
city itself, but across the entire country.

We note that there have been three successful vessel
discharges of food and fuel in Al-Hudaydah in recent
weeks. However, that is simply not enough to provide
life-saving assistance to 22 million Yemenis. We
therefore call on all parties involved to guarantee that
all of Yemen's ports are fully operational. It is crucial
to ensure unimpeded access to humanitarian deliveries

throughout the country. Access for humanitarian and
medical personnel to people in need inside Al-Hudaydah
city and the surrounding districts must be guaranteed,
and safe passage ensured for those who wish to leave
the city.

Let me conclude by underscoring that there cannot
be any military solution to the conflict in Yemen. I
reiterate Poland's strong support for the Special Envoy,
Martin Griffiths, and for his efforts to bring about an
inclusive political solution to this tragic conflict.

