Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome Mr. Jan Kubis and thank him
for his extensive briefing.
The achievement of an effective and long-term
Afghan settlement is a key task for the international
community. The conferences in Istanbul, Bonn and
Vienna have confirmed our joint commitment to
achieving the aims of the Kabul process. The efforts
undertaken must lay a solid basis for the development in
Afghanistan of democratic processes, socio-economic
recovery and the establishment of that friendly country
as a peaceful, independent, prosperous and neutral State
that is free from the threats of terrorism and drugs.

However, despite the efforts of the Afghan
authorities and those of the international community,
the situation in Afghanistan is still far from stable.
Against the background of the ill-preparedness of
national armed forces and police to clamp down on the
threat of drugs and terrorism on their own, of particular
concern is the ongoing worsening of the situation
related to the escalation of violence on the part of
Taliban and Al-Qaida fighters.

Unfortunately, oil often gets poured on the fire by
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
The recent unfortunate incidents that have produced
intense reactions among Afghans attest to that fact. We
deem it ill-considered to set artificial deadlines for
withdrawing international forces from Afghanistan. We
must not forget that one of the main tasks given to
those forces by the international community was to
ensure the establishment of viable national security
structures that could maintain basic order in the
country. Our long-term efforts must not have been be
in vain.

ISAF troops must fully carry out their mandate to
eradicate threats emanating from Afghanistan. I would
like to remind the Council that the mandate of the
coalition was given by the Security Council. We would
therefore be right to expect a final Council report
before a withdrawal of the coalition forces takes place.

We need to be careful when we talk about
national reconciliation. We are convinced that that is
only going to be productive if the process is led by the
Afghan Government itself. An important aspect of
national reconciliation and a settlement in Afghanistan
is the implementation of the sanctions regime pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) and the three key basic
principles.

Of serious concern is the production of, and
illegal trade in, drugs in Afghanistan. The Afghan drug
trade is currently a direct and open threat to
international peace and stability. It is the source of
financing for terrorist activities. We can only combat
the threat together.

Unfortunately, the trends in that area do not give
rise to hope. The production of opiates increased by
almost 60 per cent in 2011. The key aim here is to
eradicate the fields of drug crops and the infrastructure
for producing drugs. It must become a real priority for
international security forces. Of course, we need to
react to the difficult situation along the whole of the
drugs trafficking route running from Afghanistan, but
without strict, stringent measures to eradicate drug
crops we will only be treating the symptoms. The
outcome of the Third Ministerial Conference of the
Paris Pact, which took place in Vienna on 16 February,
is of significance in that context.

We are concerned about the information in the
report on UNAMA indicating that more than 3,000
Afghan civilians died in 2011, representing 8 per cent
more than in the previous year. An increasing number
have died as the result of air strikes by coalition forces
in Afghanistan. We continue to deem it necessary to
ensure that all parties in Afghanistan uphold human
rights and the norms of international humanitarian law,
and that no harm be done, even unintentionally, to the
country's population and infrastructure.

It is important to note that the picture painted in
the Secretary-General's report is oversimplified. Some
problems are noted only in passing. This is particularly
true concerning the political sphere and the security
situation. Little mention is made of the terrorist threat
and not one word is said about Al-Qaida. The basic
Security Council sanctions resolutions are not
mentioned. With respect to the drug problem, the report
conveys the impression that there is no problem. A
successful resolution of the problems facing the
international presence, in particular UNAMA, will
require a completely objective analysis of the situation
in the country.

Russia is working to broaden its assistance to
Afghanistan. We are prepared to cooperate in
rebuilding economic facilities built by Soviet
specialists, and to jointly undertake projects to
construct hydroelectric stations, infrastructure, and oil
and gas plants. We have joined the ranks of donors and
international financial institutions, including in
providing our own resources, including $500 million
for the enormous CASA-1000 transnational energy
project.

In conclusion, I stress yet again that achieving
long-term stability in Afghanistan will be possible only
through a comprehensive approach on the part of the
international community and the phased, careful
transfer of responsibilities for the situation to the
Afghan authorities. We will ensure that, by
strengthening the coordinating role of the United
Nations and coordinating the activities of external
players in the interest of the Afghan people, peace and
stability in Afghanistan and the region as a whole.

