Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Once again I convey my condolences to the
delegation of Bahrain on the death of the Amir, who was
a most important figure of that region.

We shall vote in favour of the draft resolution
contained in document S/1999/262 because it contains the
elements needed to promote a solution in Sierra Leone and
because it sends a substantive ethical and moral message.

We fully support all those elements: continuing and
strengthening the United Nations presence in Sierra Leone;
the need for logistic and financial support for the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG); strict compliance with the arms
embargo against the rebels, and a study of measures to
increase its effectiveness; and adequate protection for
humanitarian personnel as they carry out their noble tasks.

Moreover, the message of the draft resolution is
genuinely relevant. It expresses clear support for President
Kabbah, for democratic legitimacy and for the values of
freedom and tolerance. We acknowledge the value of
President Kabbah's invitation to dialogue. We hope that his
offer will be reciprocated in equally good faith.

Secondly, the draft resolution contains an unequivocal
condemnation of the atrocities perpetrated by the rebels on
the civilian population, and a commitment that these acts,
which offend the shared conscience of humankind, will
not go unpunished. This forceful position on the part of
the Council must be heard by those who have placed
themselves beyond the law.

Thirdly, there is an appeal for solidarity with the
people of Sierra Leone and an expression of support for
the sacrifices made by the Economic Community of West
African States Monitoring Group troops in order to
restore peace in that country.

I cannot conclude without expressing the
appreciation of Argentina to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Okelo, and to all those
countries that are cooperating by providing human,
financial and diplomatic resources to protect democracy
and freedom in Sierra Leone. Argentina, as a member of
the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic,
has a direct interest in having these values prevail among
its member States.

Finally, we thank the Ambassador of Sierra Leone
for his statement.

