Mrs. Beckett (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom very much welcomes the adoption of this
resolution. Its objectives are clear: to bring about full
cessation of hostilities, to create the space for an urgent
humanitarian relief effort and to begin a process
leading to a permanent ceasefire and a durable peace.
That last point is crucial. It is why it has taken long and

06-4649]

intensive negotiations to arrive at today's decision. We
needed to achieve a resolution that looked beyond the
short term and held out the prospect of a lasting
solution. That meant agreeing upon a text that took
sufficient account of the positions of both parties: the
sovereign and elected Governments of Lebanon and of
Israel. That was not straightforward; it has taken time
and effort. But the United Kingdom firmly believes it
was the right thing to do.

The resolution underlines the international
community's determination to support the Lebanese
people and Government in making a new start, for
there can be no going back to the way things were. We
have seen the tragic consequences of that all too
clearly in the past weeks: hundreds of dead - mostly
civilians - thousands wounded and hundreds of
thousands displaced. We grieve for and with them, and
we offer our condolences to the Governments of
Lebanon and of Israel, and to the families of all those
affected, for the losses they have suffered. Such
tragedies must not be repeated, and we will do all we
can to help Lebanon move forward to live in peace and
prosperity with all its neighbours.

The immediate priority is to address the
humanitarian crisis. United Nations agencies have been
working tirelessly, but have faced extremely difficult
conditions on the ground. We hope a full cessation of
hostilities will allow for rapid expansion of those
efforts and those of other relief organizations and
bilateral donors; the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) will have an important role to play
in that regard.

The United Kingdom will play its full part. We
are taking immediate steps to provide practical and
other support for the Government of Lebanon. The
British team of humanitarian experts and experts in
post-conflict reconstruction has been in Lebanon, and
Prime Minister Blair has been in touch with Lebanese
Prime Minister Siniora about ways in which the United
Kingdom can support the recovery effort. The United
Kingdom is contributing £62 million to meet priority
relief needs in Lebanon. Most of that will be channelled
through United Nations agencies. We will also support the
Red Cross and a number of non-governmental
organizations, whose role will be critical.

Faced with a crisis, the international community
is often generous in its response. But that very
generosity can pose a challenge of coordination. So we

06-4649]

are grateful to the United Nations for the leading role it
is playing on that front. We urge all parties to take all
necessary measures to ensure that humanitarian relief
workers can go about their life-saving business without
hindrance or fear of attack.

At the heart of this resolution is the need to
pursue the twin objectives of Lebanese sovereignty and
Israeli security. We cannot achieve one unless we
guarantee the other. And that is why this resolution sets
out a framework for establishing peace, security and
stability in southern Lebanon on the basis of extending
the Government of Lebanon's control throughout its
territory and, in particular, through implementation of
Security Council resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680
(2006). For far too long, Lebanon has suffered from
occupation, interference and conflict, and it is the
civilian population, both in Lebanon and in Israel,
which has suffered most. As Prime Minister Siniora has
said, this must now end.

But we must also see an end to Hizbollah's
random attacks continually directed against Israeli
civilians. No country can accept its citizens having to
live under the shadow of rockets fired from across the
border. Hizbollah faces a historic choice: whether to
continue on the path of violence and destruction or to
support the aspirations of the Lebanese people for a
peaceful future through a political path which is itself a
path of peace.

To implement this resolution we look first and
foremost to all the parties to respect its terms. But we
also look to those with influence to play their part.
Hizbollah's backers, notably Syria and Iran, must now
consider their positions - whether they want to work
with the rest of the international community to build a
peaceful future in the region or to oppose those efforts,
at a high cost to the region and ultimately to
themselves. I look to their leaders now to give full
support, both to this resolution and to resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1680 (2006), including by denying support
for continued warfare to Hizbollah and refraining from
other actions that destabilize the region.

And I cannot make such an observation without
referring to the recent remarks about Israel by the
President of Iran. Such comments are wholly
unacceptable in themselves, and they have the capacity
to promote further violence.

Our chief focus today is inevitably on the crisis in
Lebanon. But we must, at all costs, as a number of
colleagues have said, not lose sight also of the situation
in Gaza, where violence continues to take a heavy toll
and where the humanitarian situation of the Palestinian
people - itself compounded by conflict - continues
to cause great concern.

We reiterate our full support for President Abbas
and others who are working to resolve the current
situation, and we offer our condolences to Palestinians
on their losses. Real peace throughout the Middle East
can come only on the basis of a lasting, comprehensive
settlement. As our Prime Minister said in his speech in
Los Angeles on 1 August, we need a new strategy for
the Middle East, one that tackles extremism and
promotes moderation and reconciliation. Our priority
must be to create the conditions for an early
resumption of negotiations based on the Quartet road
map. There is no military solution to these problems.
Negotiation is the only viable way to bring peace and
prosperity to the people throughout the Middle East.

Our own Prime Minister has announced this
evening his intention to visit the region, in particular
Israel and Palestine, over the coming period, and to
consult those there - and, of course, members of the
Quartet - on what might be the best way forward.

The step we are taking in this resolution today, to
bring peace to Lebanon, must be part of a larger
process to bring peace to all of the people of the region
as a whole. The United Kingdom will do all it can to
help bring this about.

