The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I would like to begin by welcoming President
Touadera to the Council and thanking him for his
briefing, as well as the other briefers for theirs.

It has been a significant 12 months for the Central
African Republic. The peaceful and credible elections
that saw President Touadera elected were a welcome
moment of hope for a country that has endured crisis
for far too long. And the National Plan for Recovery
and Peacebuilding, agreed in November, sets out a
clear pathway forward. It will move the country on
and away from the cycle of conflict. In that effort, the
Central African Republic will have the international
community's support, including $44 million from the
United Kingdom.

But the Central African Republic needs more
than just plans and pledges. What it really needs is
implementation delivery, both by the Government and
by us in the international community, because as the
past 12 months have sadly shown, progress is fragile.
The hope of March 2016 risks being replaced by the
violence, displacement, humanitarian emergency and
fear of the past. Having come so far, the risk of reversal,
the risk of deterioration and a return to the chaos of the
past are now a painful reality that we must confront. In
response, we see four steps.

First, the Government of the Central African
Republic, with the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), must
secure an agreement with armed groups to cease
attacks on civilians, as well as for their disarmament
and demobilization. They cannot be allowed to derail
progress in pursuit of their own short-term selfinterest.

Secondly, more effort needs to be made on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
Seleka faction and anti-Balaka groups. We welcome
the President's consultative committee as the formal
framework for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, with all armed groups represented, as we
heard today. Efforts to support mediation, in particular
the Angola-led African initiative, are all welcome. Any
initiative must support the President's authority, be
in coordination with the United Nations, and respect
the will of the Central African Republic people to end
impunity, as demonstrated at the Bangui Forum.

Thirdly, for long-term stability, it is essential
that the Central African Republic's own armed forces
can provide the security and stability that the people
deserve. That means reform of the armed forces, and
we stand ready to support the country in that effort.

Fourthly and finally, if the Central African
Republic is to move beyond the violence, there must be
accountability. Not only will that bring justice for those
who have suffered, but it will also send a clear message
to armed groups that they cannot kill and maim with
impunity. The Council has given its support for the
development of a special criminal court and mandated
MINUSCA to help make it happen. And now we need
to see implementation.

In conclusion, the Central African Republic is at a
critical juncture. There is a possibility for sustainable
peace, but that possibility narrows as the security
situation deteriorates. Having endured conflict and
chaos for so long, and having stepped away from the
brink of genocide in 2014, the people of the Central
African Republic deserve a peaceful future, not a return
to a hateful past. We stand ready to support President
Touadera so that the Central African Republic can
finally break the cycle of conflict.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 4.55 pm.
