Mr. Dihn (Viet Nam): At the outset, on behalf of my delegation, I would like to warmly welcome His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Niger to this meeting. I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the situation in Guinea-Bissau (S/2020/105) and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, and His Excellency Ronaldo Costa Filho, Permanent Representative of Brazil, for their comprehensive statements. My delegation following observations. wishes to make the First, we commend the efforts made by national stakeholders and welcome the generally peaceful conduct of the presidential elections held in 2019 in Guinea-Bissau. We also commend the work of international partners, the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) for their support and mediation efforts in ensuring that the elections took place as scheduled. Secondly, we took note of the recent political developments in Guinea-Bissau. We look forward to the completion of the electoral cycle and the confirmation of the election results by the relevant organs in Guinea-Bissau. It is important that the relevant parties resolve their differences within the constitutional and electoral-law framework and work together to implement and ensure a peaceful implementation of the election results once announced. Thirdly, we call on the future President of Guinea- Bissau, members of Parliament and all concerned parties to work in a collaborative manner to seize this opportunity to move forward towards national unity and to enact the critical reforms envisioned in the Conakry Agreement, the Stability Pact and the ECOWAS road map. We stress the importance of intensifying the fight against drug trafficking and transnational crime and of strengthening bilateral cooperation with the United Nations and other partners in addressing those challenges. We emphasize the need for the protection of civilians and increased participation of women and youth in the decision-making process and development course of Guinea-Bissau. Fourthly, we reiterate our position in support of the implementation of resolution 2458 (2019), the presidential statement issued on 11 February on the situation in West Africa and the Sahel (S/PRST/2020/2), and the final communique of the ECOWAS Extraordinary Summit held on 8 November 2019. Fifthly, we call on the United Nations, UNIOGBIS, the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), ECOWAS and the future Government of Guinea-Bissau to work closely together in implementing and completing the subsequent phases, leading to the transfer of UNIOGBIS's residual peacebuilding activities and its gradual drawdown and planned closure by 31 December 2020. In conclusion, Viet Nam reaffirms its commitment to work closely with the United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS, the future Government of Guinea- Bissau and the relevant parties in sustaining peace, security and sustainable development in Guinea-Bissau.
