Mr. Khair (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank Mr. Simonovie for his briefing.

Jordan has taken note of the contents of the fourth
report of the United Nations human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine and the recommendations it
contains. In that respect, we would like to express our
support for the United Nations efforts and those of
the Secretary-General to achieve a peaceful political
solution to the conflict in Ukraine. We also urge all
parties in Ukraine to cooperate with the United Nations
human rights monitoring mission and to guarantee the
freedom ofits members and their safe and secure access
to the various sites throughout Ukraine.

Jordan would like to express its concerns regarding
the wide scale chaos and terror and the intimidation,
arrests and executions of civilians in eastern Ukraine,
as noted in the report, which have resulted in the
displacement of a great number of civilians. We would
like to reiterate the need for the Ukrainian Government
to protect civilians in keeping with international law and
applicable international humanitarian norms. We urge
the parties to avoid targeting civilians or carrying out
reprisals against them and to protect the most vulnerable
categories of the population, including children. We
urge all parties that possess some sort of influence in
Ukraine to work to put an end to the deterioration of the
situation in order to create an environment conducive to
a political solution to the conflict.

Jordan welcomes the progress achieved by the
Ukrainian authorities on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the previous three
reports. We call on the Ukrainian authorities to devote
greater efforts to promoting the rule of law and human
rights, as outlined in the most recent report. We also
call on them to work to reform the civilian and security
sectors. Similarly, it is essential to be mindful of the
concerns of minorities and groups whose primary
language is not Ukrainian, in order to achieve a
democratic, pluralistic society in which all citizens can
enjoy their full rights.

Jordan expresses its concern regarding the
deterioration of the security situation in eastern
Ukraine and its impact on the investigation of the crash
site of the Malaysian aeroplane. All the relevant parties
must therefore abide by resolution 2166 (2014), which
demands that an end be put to military activities in
areas near the crash site in order to guarantee the safety
and security of the international investigation.
We urge all parties to exercise restraint and not to
resort to hostile acts or engage in provocative actions. It
is also essential that they distance themselves from any
hate speech and other wrong type of speech to ensure
that displaced persons can return to their homes as
quickly as possible.

