Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): I wish to thank you and
your country, Rwanda, Mr. President, for convening
today's important open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine. My
delegation would also like to express its appreciation to
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing. Malaysia associates
itself with the statements delivered, respectively, by the
representatives of Iran, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and by Djibouti, on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Let me begin by addressing the most pressing
priority for my delegation, which is the deteriorating
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. Despite
last month's visit to the Middle East by the President of
the United States, we have yet to see any meaningful
progress on a two-State solution. Malaysia is deeply
disturbed about the condition of the thousands of
Palestinian prisoners and detainees who have been
unlawfully detained by the occupying Power. It is a
mockery of the rule of law that Israel, which time and
again declares itself to be the only democracy in the
Middle East, unlawfully detains elected Palestinian
officials, as well as women and children. We are
extremely concerned about the fact that a number of
detainees have died in prison, which many Palestinians
fear has been the result of torture by their Israeli captors.
My delegation also condemns Israel's disproportionate
use of violence against peaceful protesters opposing
the maltreatment of Palestinian prisoners, which
resulted, unfortunately, in casualties, including several
teenagers.

Malaysia continues to strongly condemn Israel's
ongoing settlement activities, which the General
Assembly, the Human Rights Council, the Economic
and Social Council and the International Court of
Justice, as well as the Security Council itself, have all
declared to be illegal. If those bodies indeed sincerely
believe that those settlements should be outlawed,
they should join Malaysia in condemning the even
more heinous practice of preventing Palestinians from
building on and farming their own lands. We should
not fool ourselves by thinking that Israeli settlers
are innocently exploring unoccupied plots of land
and untapped resources, seeking a brighter and more
virtuous future. The harsh reality is that those illegal
settlers have consistently committed acts ofviolence and
harassment against Palestinians, and have deliberately
invaded, stolen from or damaged Palestinian-owned
olive groves during harvest time. Even the water from
aquifers in the region is being diverted by settlers
into Israeli pipes, to be used, among other purposes,
for irrigating crops originally tended by Palestinians.
One does not need to guess who will also benefit from
selling overpriced water back to its rightful Palestinian
owners, who are themselves denied the right to drill for
water in their lands.

Sadly, while at the village level Israeli settlers
coordinate to build houses on Palestinian soil, there
is a similar degree of coordination in the macro-level
planning and development of the E-l area in order
to undermine the future and viability of a State of
Palestine. The international community may have
awoken a little too late to prevent the illegal settlement
activities, but now we should not hesitate to condemn
and take action on the incidents of settler violence and
other illegal acts, before the consequences become even
greater.

The illegal blockade in Gaza remains in place,
despite the urgent need to resolve the serious
humanitarian situation there, especially with regard to
the food security of its residents. Israel also continues
to restrict entry for building materials, including
those that could be utilized for building much-needed
educational and health facilities. The occupying Power
is literally taking away the building blocks for the peace
process, and at the same time is starving the population
to death. Malaysia therefore demands a complete and
immediate end to the illegal blockade. What is left for
the Palestinians when their homes, land, food, water,
groves, mosques, schools and hospitals have been taken
away? There are many wrongs that must be addressed
concerning the question of Palestine. In that regard,
Malaysia reiterates its support for an independent State
of Palestine in all of the Palestinian territory occupied
by Israel in 1967, including East Jerusalem as its capital.

Malaysia would also like to underline its concerns
about the situation in Syria. We have always believed
that a political solution to the crisis there is achievable,
but it should be based on resolutions 2042 (2012) and
2043 (2012), as well as the joint communique of the
Action Group for Syria issued in Geneva on 30 June
2012 (S/2012/523, annex). My delegation underlines
the need for a Syrian-led inclusive political process
that is acceptable to the Syrian people and meets their
collective aspirations and legitimate rights.

