Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): My delegation extends its
appreciation to the Venezuelan presidency for convening
this Security Council open debate on an issue of high
importance in the ongoing evolution of the role and
function of the United Nations in accordance with the
principles and purposes contained in its Charter.

Indonesia remains convinced that just as this

issue was highly pertinent in the past, so it is in the
present and so it will be in the future, in the context of
achieving international peace, security and prosperity.
Furthermore, Indonesia reaffirms the validity of the
principles and purposes of the Charter, which should
remain key elements for maintaining international
peace and security. Yet Indonesia also agrees that the
Organization must undertake new or strengthened
multilateral approaches to implement these principles
and purposes, should it wish to remain relevant and
competent in addressing the multifaceted challenges
that exist today and will likely exist in the future. We
therefore support approaches that would reinforce the
ability of the United Nations to deal effectively with
challenges in the fields ofinternational peace, security
and development. In this regard, my delegation would
like to highlight the following.

First, the imperative to modernize the Organization,
in particular the Security Council, to reflect today's
reality and plurality is obvious. Reforming the
Council's structure and the way it fulfils its mandates
and responsibilities is key in this regard. Observing
democratic principles and taking into account the value
of inclusiveness and transparence are highly relevant
to improving the legitimacy and effectiveness of the
Council's work. There should be a new responsibility-
sharing arrangement among States, in particular by
giving emerging powers a greater role commensurate
with their respective capacities and competencies in
contributing to regional and global peace and security.
In this regard, Indonesia remains supportive of the
intergovernmental negotiations process and believes
that incremental progress should be pursued to reform
the Security Council.

Secondly, the Security Council must be bold
and innovative in addressing persistent situations
of concern, in particular protracted conflicts. There
should be a mechanism to deal with problems stemming
from lack of unity among Security Council members,
especially among the permanent five, which until now
has prevented the Council from taking any action.

Thirdly, an arrangement should be developed to
ensure that the Security Council works in a harmonious
and productive manner with the General Assembly
and other main organs while respecting the various
strengths and mandates of each one. Sustainable peace
and security can only be created and nurtured through
an integrated approach to the three United Nations
pillars, namely, peace and security, development, and
respect for human rights and the rule of law. Respect
for the rule of law at the national and international
levels is essential to the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Fourthly, in the framework of efforts to strengthen
peace and security, greater attention and more resources
must be invested in conflict prevention. Hence
conflict prevention, which also entails pinpointing
early warning, should be a priority. In this process,
the Security Council must leverage the strength of
other relevant organs. While we support the Council's
resolve to address imminent and ongoing conflicts, a
greater mandate should be given to the Economic and
Social Council to address issues pertaining to the root
causes of conflicts. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1)
provides a pertinent framework in this regard.
Furthermore, the Council should contribute to the
strengthening and the effective use of all available
means for the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Finally, in the context of international peace and
security, the threat posed by nuclear and other weapons
of mass destruction must also be addressed effectively.
For as long as these fatal weapons exist as part of the
defence doctrines of some, the danger and threat to
humanity will remain. Thus, it is vital for the United
Nations to reach a multilaterally agreed decision aimed
at redoubling efforts to accelerate the work of the
multilateral disarmament machinery, in particular to
achieve complete nuclear disarmament. Building on our
collective commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter, we can and must together build a world
that is peaceful, stable and prosperous for everyone.
Indonesia, on its part, is determined to continue playing
its role actively to help realize such a world.

