Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I would like to thank
Special Representative Yamamoto and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. Fedotov, for their briefings, as well as the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Saikal, for his statement. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2018/1092).

At the outset, let me reiterate our heartfelt
condolences for the loss of innocent lives during the
latest heinous terrorist attacks that took place in Kabul.
We once again strongly condemn those cowardly acts
of terror. Turkey stands in full solidarity with the
Government and people of Afghanistan in the fight
against terrorism.

Afghanistan stands at a crucial juncture in terms
of its political, security and economic transformation.
As the country approaches the midpoint of the
transformation decade, it continues to face significant
and complex challenges. The highest number of civilian
casualties recorded by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in the six-month
period between January and June attests to the volatile
security situation.

Turkey has been active in supporting the security of
Afghanistan since 2001. We have pledged $60 million
for the period 2018-2020 in support of the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces. As one of the
Resolute Support Mission framework nations, we will
maintain our support for Afghanistan both bilaterally
and through NATO.

Under those precarious circumstances, the
engagement of the international community remains
vital. We were pleased to see the continued support
at the recent Geneva Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan. We thank the Government of Afghanistan
and UNAMA for convening the Conference, which
provided a crucial moment to renew partnership and
cooperation for Afghanistan's peace, prosperity and
self-reliance. It is now imperative that we live up to the
commitments made.

Turkey's development and reconstruction assistance
to Afghanistan has been one of our most comprehensive
development programmes. The total amount of our aid
exceeds $1.1 billion. More than 1,000 projects have been
completed all around the country. We have pledged a
further $150 million of development assistance for the
period 2018-2020.

The Secretary-General indicates in his report
that insecurity, violence, poverty and unemployment
continue to heavily impact the young people of
Afghanistan. We share that assessment and dedicate the
largest part of our development assistance to education
in Afghanistan. So far, more than 700,000 Afghan
children have received education in 85 schools built by
Turkey. We attach particular importance to the education
of girls so that they can reach their full potential and
contribute to the stability of their country. Habibe
Kadiri High School for girls, which has operated in
Jowzjan since 2008, has changed the lives of hundreds
of girls and their families. The ongoing project of the
Turkish-Afghan University of Mevlana Celaleddin-i
Rumi in Kabul will constitute another significant step
in the field of higher education for young Afghans. We
also fully support regional connectivity projects, such
as the Lapis Lazuli transit agreement.

The Afghan people need peace, and that can
be reached and sustained only if it is Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned. We congratulate the Afghan
Government on undertaking key reforms on good
governance, the macroeconomy and private-sector
development. A more focused approach is now needed
to implement long-term strategies.

With the ceasefire during Eid Al-Fitr and the
parliamentary elections, held on 20 October, Afghans
once again displayed their desire for peace and
democracy. Improvements to the electoral system and
the reinforcement of the fight against corruption will
further consolidate democracy across the country. The
upcoming presidential elections will be crucial for
Afghanistan to achieve stability, security and prosperity.

Enhanced cooperation and increased dialogue
among the countries of the region are also necessary.
In fact, it is the region itself that has the greatest role,
interest and responsibility in establishing and sustaining
a secure and peaceful Afghanistan. The Heart of Asia-
Istanbul Process is a stunning example of regional
ownership for cooperation. The next ministerial
conference of that Process will take place in Turkey in
2019. As a long-standing friend of the Afghan people,
Turkey will maintain its contributions to the country
with a comprehensive and integrated approach.

