Mr. Takasu (Japan): I should like to applaud the
initiative of Burkina Faso to organize today's debate on
drug trafficking as a threat to international security. I
should also like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa for
their statements.

Drug trafficking poses a serious threat to
international peace and security. We share the deep
concern about the increasing linkage between drug
trafficking and other forms of organized crime, such as
trafficking in small arms and persons, money-
laundering, corruption and cybercrime. In some areas,
drug trafficking finances terrorist activities.

Drug trafficking has a highly destabilizing
impact, particularly on States in conflict and post-
conflict situations. Given their vulnerable and weak
governance, those countries become easy targets as
transit points for international organized crime groups.
Instability creates the risk of relapse into conflict,
while instability in one country may spread to
neighbouring countries and threaten regional stability.
Once it has penetrated a soft target, it will easily spread
to an entire region.

Drug trafficking also decomposes the social
fabric from inside. With profits from drug trafficking,
small arms and weapons proliferate, while soldiers -
including child soldiers - can easily fall into addiction
and become vicious killers. This process prolongs
conflict itself, prevents the establishment of the rule of
law and impedes sustainable development. It is
therefore most appropriate for the Security Council to
discuss problems related to drug trafficking from the
point of view of securing stability and preventing
conflict.

Such critical security consequences of drug
trafficking are manifested most acutely in West Africa.
Many States of the region are still in fragile situations
as they emerge from conflict. Due to the weakness of
their regulatory institutions and judicial systems, these
countries remain attractive to those exploiting illicit
drug trafficking across national borders. West Africa
remains largely a transit point from South America to
Europe, but the transit of large amounts of narcotics is
posing a growing threat of local addiction.

The number of drug seizures in the region seems
to be diminishing. We may take this as a positive sign
that the collective efforts and regulations have had a
positive effect. However, new and disturbing trends are
emerging. Trafficking routes may merely have been
displaced further South along the West African coast.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) and INTERPOL have found large amounts
of precursor chemicals for drug processing to convert
pasta basica into high-grade cocaine. Intra-continental
drug trafficking between East and West Africa has even
been noted. We should conclude from this that drug
trafficking is seriously undermining efforts in West
Africa to build safe, sound and prosperous societies.
The situation is becoming a threat to international
security, and concerted efforts are necessary.

In West Africa, a regional response is essential in
order to break this negative cycle. First of all, we need
to universalize the international legal framework to
address illicit drug trafficking. More than
180 countries, including many in West Africa, have
becomes parties to three United Nations conventions:
the Convention on Narcotic Drugs, the Convention on
Psychotropic Substances and the Convention against
Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances. These agreements are cornerstones of the
international effort to combat drug trafficking. We
should focus on effective implementation of those
Conventions in West Africa.

Secondly, the countries of the region must
commit themselves to enforcing tighter border controls
and customs, anti-corruption policies and internal
security. The international community needs to provide
those countries with capacity-building support through
the training of experts, the sharing of information and
the supply of logistical support.

Thirdly, it is critical for the countries of West
Africa to coordinate their efforts to tackle drug
trafficking with comprehensive peacebuilding
strategies. In countries emerging from conflict, the
military and police are frequently integrated without
proper vetting and training. In order to prevent the
infiltration of illicit drugs into the security services, it
is important to take measures to reform the military
and police and to establish the rule of law. To prevent
former soldiers and young people from becoming
involved in the drug trade, it is important to reintegrate
ex-combatants and create job opportunities for youth.
Disarmament and the collection of small arms are also
important to preventing organized crime groups from
acquiring more advanced weapons.

There is clearly an important linkage between
counter-narcotics policy and successful peacebuilding
efforts. The integrated peacebuilding strategies for
Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau place a high priority
on counter-narcotics measures, together with the
promotion of security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the integration of ex-
combatants and job creation for youth.

This linkage for preventing the recurrence of
conflict should be emphasized in future discussions of
regional issues that the Security Council will take up,
and also in the Peacebuilding Commission. Various
United Nations entities are supporting the
implementation of the regional action plan of the
Economic Community of West African States to
address illicit drug trafficking and organized crime. We
wish the activities of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Political Affairs, the
United Nations Office for West Africa, UNODC and
INTERPOL to be better coordinated and strengthened.

They may draw useful lessons from other regional
operations, for instance, the Asia-Pacific Operational
Drug Enforcement Conference, to further promote
regional cooperation.

In conclusion, the drug problem is discussed in
many United Nations forums, including the Security
Council and the General Assembly. The Commission
on Narcotic Drugs adopted this year a Political
Declaration and a 10-year Action Plan, stretching until
2019. I believe that today's debate in the Security
Council provides a broader security perspective and
insights with which the entire United Nations system

may more efficiently - but also effectively and
comprehensively - address the drug trafficking
problem.

