Mr. Mootaz Khalil (Egypt): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC). The OIC Group thanks Pakistan
for its initiative in organizing this important debate. It
allows us to reflect on the current approach taken by
the United Nations to counter terrorism and address the
challenges we all face in the fight against that global
threat. The OIC Group reaffirms its full cooperation
with the United Nations and the international
community in that regard.

We would like to thank Her Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan for presiding over the
meeting and for her opening remarks. We would like
also to convey the condolences of the Group to the people
and the Government of Pakistan in connection with the
terrorist attacks that took place in Quetta last Friday. In
addition, we would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his participation and for his introductory statement.

At the outset, let me reiterate the position of
the member States of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation in condemning unequivocally all acts
of terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations,
irrespective of its motivation and objectives, and
regardless of the nature of the perpetrators, be they
individuals, groups or States.

The OIC believes that the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy constitutes an ongoing
effort. It is a living document that should be updated
regularly. We reaffirm the importance of the balanced
implementation of the Strategy in all its aspects, in
particular concerning conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism; measures to prevent and combat
terrorism; and capacity-building and respect for human
rights and the rule of law while countering terrorism.

The Organization of Islamic Cooperation is very
much aware of the fact that terrorism is one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security.
The member States of the OIC have been the prime
targets of terrorist acts. Despite its best intentions,
the world community has yet to enhance its response
in addressing this dangerous phenomenon. Applying
the following principles could improve the efforts of
the United Nations and its Member States to combat
terrorism.

First, the evolving nature of terrorism makes
effective regional and international cooperation
indispensable in the combat against terrorism. There
is a need to improve institutional cooperation between
Member States and to enhance the efforts of the United
Nations in that regard.

Secondly, the United Nations should stress that all
terrorist acts should be combated within a single legal
paradigm, so as to end the use of double standards in
addressing this serious threat. Criminalizing all acts
of terrorism, regardless of their motivation, should
be accompanied by the pursuit of all perpetrators
of terrorist acts under due process of law, be they
individuals, groups or States. Criminalizing terrorist
acts committed by State actors is as necessary as
criminalizing acts committed by non-State actors. The
United Nations should increase its efforts to combat
terrorist acts committed by States and develop the
necessary legal instruments to penalize State terrorism.

Thirdly, there is a need to adopt a comprehensive
approach in criminalizing incitement to terrorism.
Security Council resolution 1624 (2005), adopted in
September 2005, was an important step in that regard.
Yet all forms of incitement should be criminalized and
prosecuted. Indirect incitement, which may take the
form ofracism, xenophobia or insulting religious beliefs
and symbols, is a very insidious trigger for terrorism.
It can be more dangerous than direct incitement. The
United Nations should effectively address the dangers
posed by racism, xenophobia and offences against
religion, as such acts constitute a grave incitement to
terrorism.

Fourthly, we cannot rely on security and legal
measures alone to eradicate terrorism. The most
effective way to combat terrorism is to eliminate its
root causes. The international community should work
collectively towards resolving existing protracted
conflicts. It should recognize and fulfil the legitimate
right ofpeoples to self- determination. The international
community should also assist the efforts of all nations
towards poverty eradication, equity, raising the
standard of living and improving educational policies.
That will undoubtedly contribute to removing the
major root causes of terrorism. Furthermore, there is
a need to intensify international cooperation, dialogue
and understanding among cultures and civilizations to
eliminate prejudice.

The OIC Group notes with deep concern the
instances of intolerance, discrimination, profiling,
negative stereotyping, stigmatization, religious
hatred and violence against Muslims, as well as the
denigration of their religion and its symbols, including
the Koran and the Prophet - peace be upon him - that
occur in many parts of the world. Such acts contravene
international human rights norms. They are against the
principle of the freedom of religion. They are against
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions. They have implications that may result in
serious threats to international peace and security. We
acknowledge and respect the importance of the freedom
of expression in promoting tolerance and understanding
among nations. We condone the freedom of expression
that respects diversity and combats the myth of the
clash of civilizations, not the one that is used to incite
hatred or to target one specific religion or culture and
that deepens ignorance and disregard towards the other.

The OIC Group reiterates as well the need to
make a clear distinction between terrorism and the
exercise of the legitimate right of peoples to resist
foreign occupation. That distinction is duly observed
in international law, international humanitarian law, in
Chapter VII, Article 51, of the Charter of the United
Nations and in General Assembly resolution 46/51.

Before I conclude, I would like to add a few words
in my national capacity.

Egypt has suffered throughout its recent history
from the dangers of terrorism. We have always
supported international and regional counter-terrorism
efforts. Under the former regime, we resorted mainly
to military and security means at the expense of other
solutions. The policies that were adopted in the late
1980s and early 19905 had limited success. We came to
realize the dangers of radical and extremist thinking,
and therefore adopted innovative policies to address
such ideologies. We embarked upon a programme that
promoted teaching the true principles of Islam that
are based on tolerance and moderation and that reject
violence and extremism in order to review and redress
radical ideologies. Al-Azhar University, the main centre
of Islamic thought for centuries, increased the training
of religious leaders from Egypt and other countries on
combating radicalization and extremism. The teachings
exposed the fallacies of extremist ideologies that claim
a religious foundation.

An effective response to terrorism came with the
Egyptian Revolution in January 2011. It proved, in a
practical way, that change can occur by peaceful means.
It showed that people should not resort to terrorism
to achieve political change. The fact that people may
say no, stand up for their rights without violence and
succeed in fulfilling their goals peacefully meant that
there was no justification for terrorism. The fact that
Islamic political parties that believe in democracy
and resort to the ballot box can actually reach power
through such means serves to expose the lies of criminal
groups that claim an unfounded religious justification
for their crimes. That has been one major contribution
to international peace and security brought about by
the Egyptian revolution. The real defeat of extremist

terrorist ideologies did not occur by security means or
by the force of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. It happened in Tahrir Square with the success
of the revolution in institutionalizing peaceful change.

