The President: I have received letters from the
representatives of the Central African Republic and
Chad, in which they request to participate in this
meeting. I propose to invite those representatives to
participate in this meeting without the right to vote, in
accordance with relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Members have before them document S/2010/611,
which contains the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad.

I have been authorized by the Council members
to make the following statement on their behalf.

"The Security Council takes note of the
report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic
and Chad (MINURCAT) dated 1 December 2010
(S/2010/611), the lessons learned and the
recommendations contained therein, and
expresses its intention to take them into account
in the framework of its ongoing work to enhance
the overall effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping.

"In the context of the expiration of the
mandate of the Mission on 31 December 2010,
the Security Council commends the contribution
of MINURCAT for providing, without prejudice
to the primary responsibility of the Government
of Chad, security for refugees, internally
displaced persons and humanitarian actors in
eastern Chad and for its efforts to enhance the
capacity of the Chadian Detachement integre de
securite (DIS). The Council notes the importance
of action by the Government of Chad, supported
as appropriate by the United Nations country
2

team, on justice, including the prison sector,
sexual and gender-based Violence, child
protection, human rights, local reconciliation and
mine action, following MINURCAT's withdrawal.

"The Security Council recalls the
commitment of the Government of Chad, outlined
in the letter sent to the President of the Security
Council dated 7 September 2010 (S/2010/470), to
assume full responsibility for the security and the
protection of the civilian population in eastern
Chad, including refugees, internally displaced
persons, returnees and host communities, with a
particular focus on women and children and
United Nations and humanitarian personnel and
assets, in accordance with its obligations under
international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law.

"The Security Council encourages the
finalization of the establishment of the
Coordination nationale pour 1e soutien aux
humanitaires et au DIS to allow efficient
interaction of the Government of Chad with
humanitarian partners and other key actors. It
welcomes the establishment of the Bureau de
securisation et des mouvements in eastern Chad
for the local coordination with humanitarian
actors on security issues, joint analysis and
escorts.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
critical role the DIS will have to perform in the
foreseeable future for the protection of civilians.
It takes note of the revised national plan for the
sustainment of the DIS (S/2010/536). The
Security Council welcomes the commitment of
the Government of Chad to assure the future
sustainability of the DIS and the funding it has
pledged. It welcomes the work of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees with the relevant
national Chadian authorities to establish a
mechanism for the mobilization and management
of donor support for the DIS after 1 January 2011.
It especially welcomes the establishment of a new
basket fund in support of the DIS administered by
UNDP. The Security Council calls upon Member
States to ensure that the necessary donor funds
are made available to meet the budgetary
requirements of the DIS. The Council urges the
10-70102
Government of Chad to assume full responsibility
for the sustainment of the DIS as soon as possible.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary General to report by the conclusion of
the MINURCAT liquidation phase on 30 April
2011 on the progress made in eastern Chad on the
protection of civilians, especially women and
children, including (i) the status of refugees and
internally displaced persons and durable solutions
to their displacement, (ii) unimpeded, safe and
timely humanitarian access, including the
movement and security of humanitarian personnel
and the delivery of humanitarian aid, (iii) the
measures taken to respond to violations of
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, and
(iv) the overall security situation as it affects the
humanitarian situation.

"The Security Council has taken note of the
complete withdrawal of MINURCAT from the
Central African Republic on 15 November 2010.
It remains seriously concerned by the challenges
facing the security forces of the Government of
the Central African Republic in Birao and stresses
the importance of bilateral partners' work to
enhance the capacity of the Central African
Armed Forces in support of the wider security
sector reform process. The Council also remains
seriously concerned by the security situation in
the Central African Republic. It condemns all
attacks by local and foreign armed groups,
including the Lord's Resistance Army, that
threaten the population as well as the peace and
stability of the Central African Republic and the
the

subregion. The Security Council encourages
further cooperation between the Governments of
the Central African Republic, Chad and the Sudan
in order to secure their common borders. The
Security Council recognizes the contribution of
the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in
Central African Republic (MICOPAX) in support
of durable peace and security in the Central
African Republic and calls on regional and
subregional organizations to consider, upon
request of the Government of the Central African
Republic, further actions to support security in
the Central African Republic, such as reinforcing
MICOPAX.

"The Security Council commends the
Special Representative of the Secretary General,
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, for his leadership, and
MINURCAT personnel for their dedication, as
well as the commitment of troop-contributing
countries to the Mission. It encourages the
Government of Chad to continue to extend its full
support for the orderly withdrawal from the
country of all remaining MINURCAT staff and
assets until the end of the liquidation phase."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2010/29.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.
