Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): It is a pleasure to participate
in this debate, Mr. President, under your eminent
leadership of the Security Council. We thank the
Secretary-General for his frank and revealing briefing.
It honestly portrays the grim picture of the vortex
of violence that is the Middle East today. Conflict
and chaos have been endemic in the enduring Arab-
Israeli dispute. Palestine's suffering is epic. It is our
conviction that enduring peace in the Middle East
cannot be restored until there is a just resolution of
the Palestinian-Israeli dispute. The basic prerequisite
for a just solution is the creation of an independent,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine, based on
the pre-l967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital. Unfortunately, that appears to be a more distant
prospect than at any recent time.

The report of the Middle East Quartet reflects the
fact that the most serious impediment to a solution is
the continued illegal construction of Israeli settlements
on occupied Palestinian land. After the report was
issued a week ago, Israel announced the building of 560
additional housing units in the West Bank settlement.
Unless Israel's illegal settlements are halted and
reversed, it will be impossible to create a Palestinian
State that is contiguous or viable.

While creating those unilateral facts on the ground,
the present Israeli Government has obfuscated on the
revival of the peace process, posing conditions that no
Palestinian leadership, no matter how accommodating,
could be expected to accept. Meanwhile, the oppressive
occupation of the Palestinians continues. Protests
evoke brutal responses. Gaza remains a virtual prison.
Conditions in the West Bank continue to become more
chaotic and more violent. The international community
cannot continue to shirk its responsibility to promote
a just solution to the problem. The Security Council
cannot continue to avoid its obligations under resolution
242 (1967) and its successors to enforce ajust solution
to the conflict, which is at the core of the challenges
that confront the Middle East today.

Even as the world has failed to resolve the Israeli-
Palestinian problem, violence and war have spread
to engulf all of the Middle East region and beyond.
The violence and suffering of the Iraqi people began
under a cruel dictatorship, escalated during external
intervention and persists today in a grinding fight
against terrorism and sectarian violence. Iraq's tragedy
has been joined by that of the people of Syria, with
hundreds of thousands killed in a brutal and complex
war and millions displaced internally or externally
as refugees in neighbouring countries, or flowing in
great masses, often with tragic consequences, to the
ostensibly safe borders of Europe.

In both Iraq and Syria, ISIS has emerged as a
principal adversary. The brutal brand of its ideology
and reign of terror must be defeated. Welcome advances
have been made on the ground in facing that monstrous
movement. Pakistan supports the steps being pursued
by the international community to roll back ISIS from
its strongholds and restore peace over the large tracts of
Syria and Iraq that it continues to occupy.

As it retreats on the battlefield, ISIS has shifted
strategy to undertaking terrorist attacks on civilian and
security targets within and outside the region. Pakistan
condemns the brutal terrorist attacks that have killed so
many innocent people in Iraq, Syria, Turkey, Lebanon
and Saudi Arabia. To defeat ISIS, it is essential first
for the States bordering Syria and Iraq and the external
Powers that have become involved in these conflicts to
reconcile their own divergent objectives and priorities
and evolve agreed measures to overcome the political,
religious and ethnic divisions within those suffering
countries. Only then will it be possible for all the
concerned parties to concentrate their efforts to defeat
ISIS and the threat it poses to regional and international
peace and security.

We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy and encourage his endeavour to secure
a cessation of hostilities that would enable the casing
of humanitarian suffering and the evolution of political
structures for a transition to peace. The regional and
major Powers have a heavy responsibility to evolve a
viable and agreed plan to realize these objectives.

Yemen, too, has been in the throes ofa war whose
origins were internal but which has been exacerbated
by the external armament and encouragement of certain
groups. It has not been easy to restore legitimacy,
reconciliation and peace in Yemen. It is terrorist groups,
including Al-Qaida and ISIS, that have exploited the
war to secure a more prominent presence in Yemen.
The restoration of peace through political reconciliation
and respect for international law is in the vital interest
of the people of Yemen, all of its neighbours and the
international community. My country supports all
genuine efforts to this end.

The lesson of history - indeed, of recent
history - is that protracted conflicts can be resolved.
The recent example of Colombia is an inspiring case
in point. What is needed is firm resolve, concerted
action and, above all, strong political will to build
lasting peace.

