I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Meagher La Lime for her briefing and her tireless efforts to create an atmosphere of trust and ownership in Haiti. I would like to address three aspects today: first, the importance of the elections, stability and political accountability; secondly, the need to promote human rights and to combat impunity and insecurity; and, thirdly, the role of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). First, the political climate remains highly polarized and a common political agenda is lacking. Uncertainty over the electoral calendar, the composition of the new Provisional Electoral Council and the necessary constitutional reform remain factors of instability. We are concerned about the increase in violent gangs and their impact on State institutions. For the legitimacy of the political system, it is urgent to agree a realistic timetable for the holding of the elections. Women must be involved at all stages of the electoral process. Secondly, with regard to human rights and combating impunity and insecurity, we strongly condemn the shocking assassination of Monferrier Dorval, a highly respected lawyer. The active participation of civil society is, for us, particularly crucial. It cannot be silenced. We urge the authorities to spare no effort in bringing the perpetrators to justice. We remain deeply concerned that the perpetrators of large-scale massacres are still at large and that there are ongoing allegations of collusion between gangs and State agents. In that regard, we welcome the steps to increase the operational capacity of the General Inspectorate of the National Police. Policing should remain a primary concern of BINUH and major donors, who have invested heavily, including in the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, to achieve a more professional and reliable Haitian National Police. The gains in that area cannot be lost, particularly in the run-up to politically sensitive deadlines for the country. The pandemic has highlighted protection challenges, especially for women and girls, who face increased risks of sexual and gender-based violence. The United Nations-European Union (EU) Spotlight Initiative on gender supports the national response in that regard. The new penal code brings Haiti's legal framework further in line with international legal and human rights standards. We hope that, among other things, this will lead to a more humane approach to law enforcement, help to reduce prison overcrowding and better protect the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons community. Finally, Belgium fully supports the work of BINUH in facilitating political dialogue in Haiti. Given the high level of polarization, it is now more important than ever to address the trust deficit and promote a more conducive political environment. We welcome the close cooperation between BINUH and the United Nations country team in implementing the integrated strategic framework. We encourage the Haitian authorities to approve the establishment of a stand-alone office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the country, which could assist it in addressing the various challenges that I have discussed today. Haiti cannot face its challenges alone. Together with our EU partners, we are providing financial, technical and political support, and we call on all international partners to do the same.
