Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing. We
also welcome the Foreign Ministers of the Netherlands,
Australia, Luxembourg and Malaysia to the Security
Council.

By adopting resolution 2166 (2014) on the tragic
downing ofMalaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, the Security
Council asserted with one voice that we must ensure
that the tragedy is fully investigated. In that regard,
the Republic of Korea welcomes the preliminary report
of the international investigation team. We especially
appreciate the Government of the Netherlands, the
International Civil Aviation Organization and all the
independent international experts who have worked
on the investigation. We have full confidence in those
experts' credibility and independence in carrying out
their duties.

We take this opportunity once again to call
attention to the importance of establishing the solid
facts and bringing those responsible to justice. In order
to shed full light on the tragic event, the investigation
team must gain safe access to the crash site once
again and complete its work. We further hope that the
horrible incident leads to collective efforts to reinforce
the current regime for the safety and security of civil
aviation.

With the important elections scheduled in October,
we would like to reiterate that an inclusive political
process is the essential foundation for a stable and
democratic future for all Ukrainian people. In that
regard, we welcome the progressive steps made by the
Ukrainian Government in implementing the provisions
of the Minsk protocol. Notably, the draft law that grants
special status to the eastern region is an important step
towards a more inclusive political process, which we
hope can provide a sound basis for the de-escalation of
tensions.

In conclusion, we are encouraged by ongoing
diplomatic efforts towards the stabilization of
Ukraine, in particular those of the United Nations, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the European Union and other bilateral partners. We
encourage all parties to continue such efforts to seek a
peaceful political solution.

