Mr. Sandoval Cojull'ln (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Guatemala thanks Japan for convening
this open debate under its presidency, and Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Ambassadors Amina
Mohamed and Smail Chergui for their briefings. We
welcome the timely adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/12.

My delegation endorses the content of the concept
note for this open debate (S/2016/586, annex), which
indicates that the involvement of various sectors
of society - such as women, youth, children and
organized civil society - is necessary to consolidate a
stable and sustainable peace. In this regard, the report
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture refers to the importance
of involving different sectors of society in the peace
process and of their sense of ownership of the process
of dialogue and reconciliation for sustainable peace.

Peacebuilding in Africa has set an example for
good practices, but it has also seen instances where
the implementation of sustainable peace has not met
expectations, including when the situation on the
ground has deteriorated, affecting the civil population,
Blue Helmets and diplomats. My delegation takes this
opportunity to condemn such acts vigorously. Guatemala
appreciates the work of all military contingents, staff
officers and military observers deployed in Africa,
who remain on the ground in order to fulfil their
mandates, often in situations of extreme violence that
have left dead and wounded. We appreciate the role of
peacekeeping missions deployed in Africa in protecting
civilians, but it is important to stress that the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians lies with
Governments.

When the time came to seek peace in Guatemala,
a country that was afflicted by conflict for more
than three decades, it was crucial that Guatemalan
society play a key role in achieving peace and in the
national reconciliation process. It should be clear that
the achievement of a firm and lasting peace must be
based on participatory socioeconomic development
that is oriented to the common good and meets the
needs of the entire population. Such development
requires social justice as one of the pillars of national
unity and solidarity, and sustainable economic growth
as a condition for meeting the social demands of the
population. The effective participation of citizens from
all sectors of society is also critical in the process of
open and inclusive dialogue and national reconciliation
through truth commissions, which contribute to the
restoration of trust and the social fabric. The State
must facilitate these opportunities for participation as
a guiding force of national development. At the same
time, it is imperative to focus efforts, where necessary,
on implementing programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of parties to the
conflict into society.

As I mentioned early in my statement regarding the
importance of organized society's direct participation
in seeking a sustainable peace on the ground, it is
imperative to facilitate, respect and strengthen the
participation of civil society so as to ensure that
processes are democratic and strengthen sustainable
peace. In cases where conflicts have abated, the national
context provides an opportunity to revitalize State
institutions so that they can consistently guarantee
life, freedom, justice, security, peace and the integral
development of the person to all its citizens.

Finally, it is important to recognize that at present
the United Nations has at its disposal relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly and Security Council, as well
up-to-date reports, for the membership to consult and
implement at the national level so as to achieve peace on
the ground before, during and after conflict. We need to
remember that where the Organization has failed most
has been in the implementation of its own decisions
and in the provision of genuine follow-up. Such has
been the case for peacebuilding. It is in the interests
of everyone to ensure the effective implementation of
Council decisions, as well as to strengthen and build
upon the work of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
General Assembly and the Council itself.

