At the outset, permit me, on behalf of the Niger, South Africa, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1), to thank Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-General; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under- Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs; and Ms. Nyachangkuoth Rambang Tai, Gender and Social Justice Manager, Assistance Mission for Africa, for their detailed presentations. As a sovereign nation in its nascent stage, South Sudan continues to navigate turbulent waters in its quest for a prosperous future. Today South Sudan is faced with a plethora of complex challenges, both internally and externally, as are evident in the Secretary-General's recent report (S/2020/890). The A3+1 welcomes the positive developments in South Sudan, in particular the formation of the executive arm of the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity. We are steadfast in our view that the full implementation of the provisions of the 2018 Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, especially key elements such as the filling of the position of governor in the Upper Nile and adherence to the 35 per cent quota participation of women in all Government institutions is imperative to establish a peaceful environment and improve the protection of civilians. We further echo the appeal made by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) for the dissolution of the current Transitional National Legislative Assembly and for the parties to reconstitute the Assembly in accordance with the Revitalized Agreement. The maintenance of the ceasefire is also crucial to advancing the dialogue processes, specifically with the non-signatories to the Revitalized Agreement. To that end, we call on all parties to continue respecting the ceasefire. We welcome the overall decrease in political violence and appreciate President Salva Kiir Mayardit's determination to tackle lingering security issues, specifically the escalation of intercommunal violence in Jonglei, Lakes, Warrap, Unity and Western Bahr el-Ghazal. We also applaud the decision for the disarmament of civilians and the formation of a national task force to address enduring intercommunal challenges and pastoralist conflict, as well as the establishment of an investigation committee on atrocities committed against civilians. In addition, we urge the authorities to redouble their efforts and strengthen the State's security apparatus to ensure the safety of its citizens. South Sudan continues to demonstrate political growth as a maturing democracy, not only domestically but regionally and internationally. The admirable approach to convening successful peace talks in Juba are a testament to this truth. At the same time, South Sudan continues to face a dire humanitarian situation that has been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic. This, together with the economic challenges stemming from plummeting oil prices in the global market and acute food insecurity whereby an estimated 6 million people are food-insecure, remain extremely worrying. We acknowledge the support of the international community to complement the Government's humanitarian response efforts, but much, much more needs to be done. We therefore encourage the international community to assist in filling the deficit and achieve the $1.9 billion required for South Sudan's Humanitarian Response Plan for 2020. Similarly, we call on South Sudan leaders to assist in facilitating humanitarian access and urge the authorities to protect humanitarian personnel in the exercise of their duties. We strongly condemn the killing of two humanitarian aid workers and urge thorough investigation into those acts of violence. Equally, we are worried about the ongoing violence against the groups made most vulnerable and stress the need to respect international humanitarian law and human rights law. Beyond the headlines of South Sudan's humanitarian challenges, the tale of climate change also needs considerable attention and action, as its deleterious effects are underscored by severe weather events including seasonal floods, causing loss of lives and livelihoods. Changes in weather patterns also create a fertile breeding ground for desert locusts, which have infiltrated Eastern Equatoria, threatening the livelihoods of many who depend on subsistence farming. In closing, the A3+1 remains in solidarity with the people and the Government of South Sudan. We take this opportunity to reiterate our appreciation and support for the constructive efforts of UNMISS, IGAD, the African Union, the European Union, the Community of Sant' Egidio and all other relevant stakeholders in seeking to bringing peace and stability to South Sudan.
