Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome
the presentation made this morning by the Emergency
Relief Coordinator and very much appreciate his
presence this afternoon during the debate.

Landmark decisions have been taken by this body
over the past few years relating to the protection of
civilians, in particular resolutions 1265 (1999) and
1325 (2000). The Secretary-General's 10-point
platform for action offers the Council and other players
a good basis for carrying out the necessary work to
effectively ensure such protection. The full
implementation of those texts would go a long way
towards achieving that goal.

Prevention is the key aspect in the protection of
civilians. It must be made clear that abuses against
civilian populations, often carried out against their
most vulnerable members, in particular women and
children, are violations of international law that will
not go unpunished. The States concerned have primary
responsibility for holding the perpetrators of such
crimes accountable, but, at the same time, crimes such
as genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
are of concern to the international community as a
whole and thus to the Security Council, which
represents the international community in matters of
international peace and security.

An unequivocal and credible message that there
will be no impunity, in any situation, for such crimes
would have a strong deterrent effect and thus serve as a
very useful tool of prevention. It is worth recalling that
the Council has the authority, under the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court, to refer situations
to the Court, even in situations in which the State
concerned has not subscribed to the Statute. We hope
that the adoption of the relationship agreement between
the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court earlier this year will lead to effective and
practical cooperation between the two organizations,
and we welcome the emphasis that the High-Level
Panel of the Secretary-General has placed on the role
of the Court in general as well as on the Council's
referral power in particular.
We also welcome the appointment of a Special
Adviser for the Prevention of Genocide, which will
serve as an early-warning instrument and thus assist us
in fulfilling our obligation to prevent genocide. A
regular formal and informal working relationship
between the Adviser and the relevant
intergovernmental bodies, that is, the Council, the
General Assembly and the Commission on Human
Rights, as well as with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, will allow for the
optimal use of this new position within the United
Nations system. Regular briefings by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and by holders of mandates under the special
procedures established by the Commission on Human
Rights could greatly contribute to the capacity of the
Council both to effectively prevent abuses of civilian
populations and to monitor the implementation of the
relevant provisions of resolutions it has adopted.

The concept of the responsibility to protect has
been endorsed by the High-level Panel as an emerging
norm in the area of collective international
responsibility. We welcome the emphasis given to this
concept which has rightfully been playing an
increasing role in the international discourse, and we
look forward to further discussions thereon. The
protection and well-being of civilian populations must
remain the primary responsibility of the State
concerned. However, where the inability or
unwillingness of a State lead to massive and large-scale
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, with all their devastating human, social and
economic consequences and their effects on
international peace and security, the Council must
become active in order to live up to its responsibility
under the Charter.

While all perpetrators of abuses and violations
against civilians must be held accountable, such abuses
are especially appalling when they are committed by
those who have the task of ensuring the very protection
of a civilian population. Reports on such abuses
committed by peacekeeping personnel are therefore
most disturbing and need to be thoroughly
investigated. Such incidents gravely jeopardize United
Nations work in this area as well as in more general
terms, and we therefore trust that the necessary steps
will be taken to bring perpetrators to justice and to
restore the full credibility of the Organization in that
respect.

