Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like, on behalf of my delegation,
to extend our appreciation to you and your delegation
for having convened this open debate on the role of the
Security Council in supporting security sector reform.

Security sector reform (SSR) remains a
contentious and complex subject. This forum is
therefore beneficial in that it gives us an opportunity to
have an exchange of ideas and experiences on the
subject in a complementary manner, with a View to
obtaining a better picture of the subject and of the role
of the United Nations in general, and the Security
Council in particular, in that regard.

My delegation recognizes that reform of the
security sector at the country level can take place at
any point in the development of a country, but the
urgency of SSR is generally strong and its
manifestation particularly noticeable when the country
in question is experiencing a transformation, including
democratic transition, or when it is emerging from a
conflict situation.

In both contexts, reform in the security sector is
interlinked with reform in other sectors. When crafted
carefully and implemented consistently, and when the
participation of civil society is ensured, reforms in
different sectors will be mutually reinforcing.

Some seven years ago, Indonesians were facing
the challenges and multidimensional problems
resulting from the Asian financial crisis. Yet the crisis
did not stop Indonesians from pursuing transformation
in the political, economic, legal, and governmental
landscapes. They embraced democracy - in fact,
Indonesians regarded that democratic transition as a
means of salvation and of recovery from the crisis.

Based on its experiences, Indonesia holds the
View that reform in the security sector will be
meaningful if national ownership is present and if the
participation of various stakeholders is ensured.
Reform in one sector will lay the foundation for reform
in other sectors. Security sector reform should be
pursued in a manner which is neither too hasty nor too
drawn out.

As far as the United Nations approach to the
subject is concerned, we underline that such an
approach should be confined to post-conflict contexts.
The demand for coherence and coordination in
supporting SSR activities in post-conflict situations
warrants managerial and institutional reform at
Headquarters as well as at the field level. Agencies
within the United Nations system that have SSR
support programmes should collaborate more closely
and coherently.

My delegation also underlines the central role
that the Peacebuilding Commission can play in
enhancing the United Nations capacity to support
security sector reform and the effectiveness of the
United Nations mission in strengthening such reform
as part of peacebuilding efforts. We welcome the
intention of the Peacebuilding Commission to consider
the SSR aspect of peacebuilding strategies in Burundi
and Sierra Leone.

My delegation believes that SSR should be
nationally owned and rooted in the particular needs and

conditions of the country concerned. It is a national
project that requires leadership on the Government's
part and participatory contributions from civil society.

For post-conflict countries, security sector reform
often requires substantial resources. We believe that
financial and technical assistance from the
international community would be meaningful for such
countries in helping them to cope with resource
challenges and in building national capacities that
could strengthen national ownership of SSR.

Diversity in security sector reform should be
respected. In our view, there is no single type of SSR
that can fit all situations. That should not, however,
prevent us from generating lessons learned and best
practices.

Security sector reform is a long-term process and
requires steadiness and unflagging commitment from
the country concerned. Rushing SSR has the potential
to ruin a country's institutional foundation and to
uproot its indigenous components. There is no
universal blueprint for SSR, and its implementation
depends on the basic needs of national political
processes and dynamics. There is therefore no quick-
fix solution for post-conflict security sector reform.
Accordingly, my delegation emphasizes the need for a
balanced realization of all aspects of security sector
reform, including institutional capacity, the
affordability and sustainability of programmes,
sequencing, timing and flexibility.

As regards the role of the Security Council in
supporting SSR activities in a post-conflict
environment, we believe that the Council could
propose, through its mission mandates, the parameters
for security sector reform in post-conflict countries,
particularly in the transition from an initial
peacekeeping activity to post-conflict peacebuilding
programmes. In order to develop viable SSR structures,
the Council should consult with relevant organs within
the United Nations system, including the Economic
and Social Council and the General Assembly, and
should take into account the concerns of the countries
involved.

Finally, my delegation wishes to reaffirm its
commitment to participating in an active and
constructive manner in future discussions of the
subject.

