Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should like
to welcome the presence here of the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey Vershinin, and to thank the
Russian Federation for having organized this important
meeting and invited us to participate. We also thank
the Secretary- General, Mr. Guterres, for his statement
this morning.

At the outset, it must be noted that although there
is international consensus about the importance of
the Middle East and North Africa in achieving and
sustaining international peace and security, there is still
an urgent need for greater regional and international
cooperation in order to resolve the crises in this region
and put an end to the suffering of the peoples involved.
Jordan believes that the region needs a genuine
political commitment to peace. It is up to the
international community to maintain stability and
security in the region, and the international community
has a joint responsibility to help the peoples of the
region to overcome the challenges that they face, in
keeping with the resolutions of international legitimacy,
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
We cannot achieve peace and security as long as the
root causes of the conflicts exist.

Peace and stability in the Middle East require ajust
and comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
crisis on the basis of the relevant international
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. We need to
hold serious negotiations with a set timetable in order
to address all final-status issues and bring about the
two-State solution. This is the only solution that
will create an independent, viable State of Palestine
within the borders of4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, which can live in peace and security
alongside Israel.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan would warn
against Israeli attempts to change the identity and
character of Jerusalem and to make changes to
the historical and legal status of the Al-Aqsa Holy
Mosque, because this would affect millions of Muslims
throughout the world. The Kingdom will continue
to defend Jerusalem and its holy sites, Muslim and
Christian, in accordance with the historical Hashemite
custodianship thereof, which is incumbent on King
Abdullah II of Jordan. We underscore here that
Jerusalem is one of the final-status issues that must be
addressed through negotiations. As for East Jerusalem,
it is an integral part of territories occupied in 1967.

There must be an effective international response to
the needs of countries that are suffering from conflict,
and help must be offered to the countries of the region
that are hosting refugees. Jordan has been dealing with
various waves of refugees, the latest of which is that of
Syrian refugees, which puts a strain on various parts
of our society, as Jordan hosts more than 1.3 million
Syrian refugees. We ask the international community
to take responsibility and help Jordan to deal with
them, because we cannot take the strain alone. We must
also make every effort to strengthen the humanitarian
and ethical role of the international community to assist
the Palestinian refugees and provide financial support
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) through
long-term funding. This would send an important
political message to the effect that the international
community has not forgotten Palestinian refugees and
will not deprive 1.5 million Palestinian students of
their right to education in the five areas of operation
of UNRWA. That work needs to continue until such
time as the Palestinian question has been resolved in a
just manner.

My country reiterates that international efforts to
politically resolve the Syrian crisis must continue by
guaranteeing the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria in the context of a solution that is accepted by
the Syrians in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
Jordan has attempted to reduce the level of violence and
to bring about stability in Syria. This can be seen in
the de-escalation agreements in the south of Syria, and
this is a very important step in stopping violence and
creating the conditions necessary for a lasting political
solution in Syria and for the return of refugees. We
are very concerned at what is taking place in southern
Syria, and we reiterate the importance of respecting the
de-escalation agreements. We call on the international
community to put an end to the military escalation in
southern Syria.

We also reiterate that the Hashemite Kingdom
will continue to assist our Syrian brothers and sisters
and help to meet the needs of Syrian refugees. Jordan
will play its part in helping refugees, and so must
the international community. Jordan is bearing full
responsibility for those refugees. The international
community has to bear its responsibility too, and the
United Nations must address any new displacement in
southern Syria. Jordan will assist to the extent possible
all efforts to support our Syrian brothers and sisters
within and outside of Syria.

Jordan reiterates that the only solution to the
Yemeni situation is a political one that is agreed upon
by all the Yemeni people in order to ensure the country's
unity and territorial integrity. Jordan also underscores
the importance of implementing resolution 2216
(2015), which represents a comprehensive and balanced
road map for resolving the crisis. We underline the
importance of continuing work on the political track on
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Arab Gulf Initiative and the outcome of the National
Dialogue Conference.
We also stress the need to fight terrorism in all
its forms. Jordan will continue to cooperate with the
international community in fighting terrorism and
eradicating its threat. We must also focus on achieving
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
its Sustainable Development Goals that are based on
the national interests of the countries of the region,
so as to include all sectors of society and ensure the
empowerment of women and youth in order for them
to participate at all levels. We must also strengthen the
interconnection between security, peace, human rights
and development.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore the
important central role played by the United Nations in
supporting the countries of the region in order to bring
about security, peace and stability.

