The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 37 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Jacob Zuma, Deputy
President of South Africa.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Mr. Jacob Zuma, Deputy President of South
Africa, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I welcome His Excellency Mr. Jacob
Zuma, Deputy President of South Africa.

I should like to inform the members of the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Burundi, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Gert Rosenthal,
President of the Economic and Social Council.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Gert Rosenthal to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Jacob
Zuma, Deputy President of South Africa.


