Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to begin, Madam President,
by drawing attention to the fact that the theme of the
briefing as it was designated in the Security Council's
December programme of work is somewhat different
from what you have proposed for our discussion today,
according to the explanatory note. We assume that you
no doubt realized that replacing the topic of terrorism
issues with the politicized concept of the prevention of
violent extremism could meet with a negative reception.

However, my statement will focus on the meeting's
original concept, which proposed a discussion of the
sources of terrorist threats in West Africa, an exchange of
views with the countries concerned and a consideration
of ways to end the crisis with the participation of key
international bodies. In that connection, I would like to
thank Mr. Chambas and Mr. Chergui for their detailed
briefings on the experience they have accumulated and
the evaluations of the situation that they have developed
based on the policies of the bodies that they head.

The Russian Federation would like to express its
sincere condolences to the people and the Government
of the Niger for the deaths on 10 December of more than
70 Nigerien soldiers as a result ofa terrorist attack on a
military camp near the border with Mali. We hope that
the perpetrators of this heinous crime will be found and
duly punished. We affirm our full support to Niamey in
its fight against the threat of terrorism.

The terrible events that took place in the Niger
unfortunately confirm the further deterioration of the
security situation in that part of the continent. Almost
weekly we receive tragic reports about the deaths of
dozens of military personnel or civilians at the hands
of criminal gangs in a country of the region. The States
ofthe Gulf of Guinea are also at risk of destabilization.

We share the concerns of other members of the
Security Council that Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham have strengthened
their presence on the African continent. Of particular
concern is the establishment of the Islamic State in
West Africa, which has consistently proclaimed the
goal of building a global caliphate in the countries of
the region and is actively engaged in terrorist activities
at the junction of the borders of Cameroon, Nigeria, the
Niger and Chad.

Unrestricted migration flows, which allow terrorists
to capitalize on economic difficulties and recruit new
members, the collapse of arms control systems, and
in some cases even the failure to establish them, and
the ongoing cross-border smuggling, including of
narcotics, have enabled terrorist groups to have a robust
resource base.

Today some countries are seeking to prove to us
that conflicts between farmers and nomadic herders
have become the primary reason for the upsurge in
violence in the region, as we have seen in the concept
note for today's meeting. It is not the reason for but the
consequence ofwhat is happening. In general, we do not
agree that the real root causes of terrorism in Africa are
linked only to domestic economic and political issues.

It is important to adopt a balanced approach that
takes into account the full range of issues that give
rise to terrorism, including external interference, as
clearly demonstrated in Syria and Libya, for example.
West African States are compelled to reap the fruits of
the collapse of Libya's statehood as a result of NATO's
intervention. We believe that, without the normalization
of the situation in that country, namely, Libya, and we
are told this by Africans themselves, it is virtually
impossible to bring about lasting stability in the region.

Instead of honestly answering the question as
to why a power vacuum has developed in certain
countries of the region and from where terrorists
receive such weapon stockpiles, our Western partners
seek to indulge West African States with all kinds
of programmes based on their one-sided approach to
preventing violent extremism.

In the absence ofa universally recognized definition
of violent extremism enshrined in international law,
we call on our partners to avoid language that has not
been agreed, including new terms such as "homegrown
violent extremist organizations".

Working directly with civil society and
circumventing the Government, which lies at the heart
of the approach to preventing violent extremism, in
our view sets the stage for interference in internal
affairs, including in order to provoke so-called colour
revolutions or their like. Let me stress that we do not
dispute the idea in itself of harnessing civil society in
conjunction with strengthening the law enforcement
counter-terrorism component. However, that capacity
should be used in line with the characteristics and
traditions of the State without undermining its leading
role in counter-terrorist activities based on international
legal norms rather than certain rules of the world order.

If the sponsors of such an approach to preventing
violent extremism really want to demonstrate its
effectiveness, let them first try to delegate law
enforcement functions to non-State actors on their
territories. We doubt that this will enable them to
resolve the pressing issues of the proliferation of
xenophobic and neo-Nazi ideas and the resurgence of
right-wing extremist organizations calling for violence
against those of other races, ethnicities and religions. In
the meantime, selective activities for the prevention of
violent extremism with a focus on developing countries
appear to be a tool for political manipulation. We believe
that the only way to effectively counter the threat of
terrorism is by avoiding double standards based on a
comprehensive approach, combining both robust law
enforcement and multifaceted preventive activities.

We are convinced of the need to further coordinate
the efforts of both Africans and the international
community to combat terrorism in the Sahara-Sahel
region. To that end, we support the efforts of the
States of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Lake
Chad basin to deploy forces to combat terrorism and
organized crime. It is necessary to effectively counter
the expansion of extremist ideology, to tackle head on
pressing socioeconomic problems, to strengthen State
institutions and to foster a culture of respect for human
rights. In that regard, we attach great importance to
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel in the
region. In addition, we support the decision adopted at
the Niamey summit by States members of the Economic
Community of West African States to invest up to
$1 billion in improving the situation in the region.

Russia is closely monitoring the situation in
West Africa and the Sahel. We are already providing
a number of countries with relevant military and
technical assistance and training for military and
police personnel. We call on all States to strengthen
multifaceted counter-terrorism cooperation with
the countries of the region that is not limited just to
resolving intercommunal disputes or substituting such
efforts with abstract speculation about the threat of
violent extremism.

