Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
presenting his report (see S/2012/307) on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and on the progress
achieved in the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. I assure him of our full support.

Today's Security Council debate is taking place at
an important moment in the history of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, because it coincides with the anniversary
of the admission of the country to the United Nations.
Mr. Inzko has described for us, with great eloquence
and passion, the symbolism attached to that event.

The latest report of the High Representative
comes at a time when national politics are difficult in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but there are nevertheless
some significant and encouraging developments, from
the formation of a new Council of Ministers to the
adoption of the budget, the progress on the question of
military and public assets and the adoption of laws on
the census, public assistance and the distribution of
property. Those developments reflect a spirit of
dialogue, compromise and reconciliation, which we
welcome. It is a spirit that augurs well for the future of
the country and of the entire region. The progress to
date, however, is unfortunately overshadowed by real
threats, including those targeting the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the cancellation
of laws and regulations adopted at the federal level and
the non-recognition of federal authorities by certain
regions. Should they continue, such machinations
threaten to undermine the efforts made in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and by the international community since
the Dayton Peace Agreement to put the country back
on the path of peace, harmony and reconciliation.

We therefore call on the various protagonists in
the Bosnian political arena to abstain from any word or
act that might undermine the current process of
national reconciliation or the efforts of Bosnian
authorities to establish a viable and peaceful country. It
is not in the interest of any community to exacerbate
the tension and sow discord and divisiveness at a time

when Bosnia and Herzegovina needs unity and the
support of the communities making it up in order to
take up the vast challenges of reconstruction and
development that it is facing.

As an ambassador accredited to Bosnia and
Herzegovina between 1995 and 1999, I was able to
take stock first hand of the extent of the destruction
and suffering in the aftermath of the war, but at the
same time I also witnessed the spirit of openness and
tolerance and the love of life of the people. Morocco
has always firmly believed in peace in that region and
it has contributed thereto and will continue to do so. It
is hard to establish such peace, and it will take a long
time to consolidate it, but it is vitally necessary and
beneficial for each of the peoples in the region.

The young Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has travelled a long way on the path to reconciliation
and the establishment of a democratic State. All
Bosnians feel protected by the rule of law. It is up to us
to help this country by every means possible to build
and develop.

