Mr. Manis (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend to you, Mr. President, my
sincere congratulations on the important achievements
of the Security Council during your presidency. I also
wish to thank you for having convened this very
important meeting to consider current developments in
Palestine. I must also extend my thanks to the
delegation of Mauritius for its very excellent conduct
of the work of the Council last month.
In this regard, Sudan would like to pay tribute to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for the statement he
made in the Council last Thursday. We would also like
to hail his efforts to contain the deteriorating situation
in the region.

The situation in the Palestinian occupied
territories is so dangerous that the Security Council
must assume its responsibility for safeguarding
international peace and security. It must act quickly to
halt the ominous deterioration of the situation, which
might push the entire region into a global
conflagration, due to the use of excessive military force
by the occupying Israeli forces against innocent
Palestinian civilians and the isolation of villages and
towns in Palestine, as well as the destruction of all
institutions of the Palestinian Authority. In an alarming
development, this blockade has included the very
symbol of the Palestinian cause, President Yasser
Arafat, the legitimate leader of the Palestinian people.
This measure is totally unacceptable, and it must be
condemned by the international community.

The Security Council must act quickly to end the
Israeli Prime Minister's criminal plans aimed at
creating buffer zones around the cities and towns of
Palestine and at constructing a wall to separate East
Jerusalem from West Jerusalem in a serious attempt to
create total isolation of and between the Palestinians.

The Secretary-General affirmed in his statement
to the Council that there were no security measures or
military solutions to the Palestinian problem, and he
reaffirmed what many delegations have already
repeated on many occasions to the Council, that Israel
must understand that violence cannot guarantee the
security it desires, because such security cannot be
attained as long as Israel continues its expansionist
policies, its acts of violence, repression and aggression.

The only way to bring about peace in the Middle
East is to put an end to Israeli occupation in the
Palestinian occupied territories and the Arab occupied
territories - the Golan Heights and Shebaa' Farms in
Lebanon. Israel must show its total commitment to the
resolutions of international legitimacy and the Security
Council, particularly 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and
allow the Palestinian people to establish their own
independent State with Jerusalem as its capital, as well
as respect the terms of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
In conclusion, we hope that the Council will The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
endeavour to use the present momentum to take rapid Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
measures and assume its fundamental role in ensuring consideration ofthe item on its agenda.
international peace and security, that it will work
promptly to halt Israeli aggression against the citizens
of Palestine and that it will impose respect for Security
Council resolutions regarding the Palestinian cause. The meeting rose at 8.05pm.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
