Mr. Sautter (Germany): Let me express our condolences on the passing of His Highness the Amir of the State of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, a tireless mediator in the Middle East. Let me also express our thanks to Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing and his important work. I would like to make five points. First, on the normalization agreements between Israel and the United Arab Emirates, as well as between Israel and Bahrain, Germany welcomes the recent signings of the normalization agreements between Israel and the United Arab Emirates and between Israel and Bahrain. We acknowledge the role played by the United States in that regard and express our hope that those agreements will contribute to achieving peace and stability in the Middle East. The momentum generated by the signing of those accords should now be focused on finally reaching a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the Israeli- Palestinian conflict on the basis of international law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and the internationally agreed parameters. Normalization must not result in consolidating the status quo but, rather, it should accompany the resumption of peace talks. My second remark is on the two-State solution, Germany remains committed to a negotiated two- State solution, where two sovereign, democratic and independent States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace within secure and recognized borders on the basis of the 4 June 1967 lines. That is the only viable and the most realistic path to fulfil the legitimate aspirations of Palestinians and Israelis for a life in peace and dignity with equal rights. We call on both parties to recommit to their signed agreements and to fully restore the cooperation under the Oslo Accords and the Paris Protocol. Together with our partners Egypt, France and Jordan, we will continue our efforts and offer our active support and our good offices in facilitating a path back to a credible dialogue and towards a negotiated, peaceful settlement. At our meeting in Amman last week, we emphasized that such serious, meaningful and effective negotiations must be based on international law and agreed parameters and be conducted either directly between the parties or under a United Nations umbrella, including the Middle East Quartet. We have taken note of the call by President Abbas on the Secretary-General to convene an international conference early next year. Germany would be willing to participate in such a conference and encourages the Secretary-General and Special Coordinator Mladenov to consult with all relevant parties. My third remark is on settlement activities. We reiterate our position that Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal under international law. They severely undermine the prospects for ending the occupation and for a viable and contiguous Palestinian State within the framework of a negotiated two-State solution. We trust that Israeli annexation plans are truly and permanently suspended. We call upon Israel to end the expansion of settlements, in particular in critical areas around East Jerusalem, and the legalization of settlement outposts in order to prevent a de facto annexation. We are particularly concerned about the ongoing confiscation and demolition of Palestinian-owned structures and properties in Area C of the West Bank. Such practices, as currently under way in so-called Firing Zone 918 in the South Hebron Hills, lead to the forced eviction and displacement of vulnerable Palestinian residents in the midst of the pandemic. In some cases, they contravene existing property rights of Palestinian residents in the area, rendering such practices incompatible with international law. Any changes to the legal and traditional status quo on Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount, as well as in the city of Hebron, would further erode the substance of signed agreements and mutual trust at a time when the coronavirus disease crisis warrants close cooperation. My fourth remark is on the full implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). We call on both sides to fully implement resolution 2334 (2016) with regard to settlement activities, as well as all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terrorism, incitement, provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric. In that context, we reiterate Germany's condemnation of all attacks and threats against Israel by Hamas and other terrorist groups, including the repeated firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel. Israel has the right to defend itself against such acts in a proportional manner. My fifth, and last, remark is on intra-Palestinian reconciliation. We keep stressing that intra-Palestinian reconciliation remains key to achieving a negotiated two-State solution. Gaza and the occupied West Bank must be reunited under a single Government. The democratic legitimacy of Palestinian institutions must be renewed, and governance and responsiveness to the needs of the Palestinian population must be strengthened. We therefore welcome the recent agreement to hold parliamentary and presidential elections in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Gaza. We hope that such elections will take place soon.
