Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): On behalf of
the Chairmen of the three subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) dealing
with the issue of terrorism, I have the honour to update
the Security Council on the continued cooperation
between the three Committees and their groups of
experts. Taking account of the fact that the full
statement of my briefing has been distributed to
members of the Council, I shall deliver a summarized
version.

The three Committees continue to attach great
importance to the coordination and cooperation
between their respective groups of experts, the
Executive Directorate (CTED) of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, the Monitoring Team of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and the Group of Experts the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004));
2

welcome their continued efforts to engage in joint
outreach activities, exchange of information and joint
meetings; and encourage the three groups to further
enhance their cooperation.

The three expert groups continue to implement
the common strategy on dealing with non- or late-
reporting States through exchange of information and
joint visits, when appropriate, and in assisting Member
States in submitting their responses to the three
Committees on their implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

The three expert groups continue to participate in
platforms of common interest, such as the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF), the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the Pacific
Islands Forum and the Intergovernmental Action Group
against Money laundering in West Africa. Also, both
CTED and the Monitoring Team are observers at the
Eastern and South African Anti-Money Laundering
Group.

CTITF continues to provide a useful framework
within which the three groups of experts can continue
to coordinate their activities and to share information,
particularly on technical assistance. The groups of
expert contribute to the work of several CTITF
working groups, and the Monitoring Team and CTED
have assumed leading roles in some of these groups.
The three groups of experts also participate in the
Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism
initiative.

Exchange of information is carried out on a
regular basis and through joint work conducted by two
or more groups when participating in the same event,
such as the recent CTED workshop on challenges to
border control in the Maghreb and the Sahel, in which
the Monitoring Team participated. Similarly, the
Monitoring Team joined the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's recent special meeting with international,
regional and subregional organizations, held at the
headquarters of the Council of Europe in Strasbourg,
on measures related to the prevention of terrorism.
Both CTED and the Group of Experts of the 1540
Committee also participated at the ninth meeting of
national focal points of contact of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism, organized by the
Organization of American States in March 2011.
11-33901

The three groups of experts continue to hold
regular meetings in preparation for visits, workshops
and other joint activities related to specific States,
regions or themes. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
also regularly invites the other two groups of experts,
CTITF and other relevant United Nations entities to
meetings with international and regional organizations
and to its thematic briefings in the framework of its
official meetings.

Another emerging area of cooperation is for one
of the three groups to represent another group at
certain events. For example, the Monitoring Team
represented CTED at the FATF meeting in Cape Town
in November 2010, and CTED represented the
Monitoring Team during its participation in the
meeting of the Pacific Islands Forum Working Group
on Counter-Terrorism in Auckland, New Zealand,
which was co-chaired by New Zealand and the Pacific
Islands Forum secretariat this month. In general, during
their participation in these various events, the groups
of experts continue to explain to participants the
respective activities and mandates of the three
Committees, as well as the content and purpose of the
Global Strategy.

As mentioned in the previous joint statement (see S/PV.6424), the co-location of the three groups of
experts would greatly contribute to enhanced
cooperation and information exchange among them.
We therefore appreciate the response of the Secretariat
that it will continue exploring all options with a view
towards co-locating the groups at the earliest possible
opportunity, notwithstanding the challenges associated
with such co-location.

The three subsidiary bodies and their respective
groups of experts will continue to cooperate and to
coordinate their work, within their respective
mandates, with a view to ensuring an effective and
efficient approach to counter-terrorism. The three
Committees look forward to receiving further guidance
from the Council on areas of common interest and to
further strengthening their joint activities.

