Mr. Kamau (Kenya): I would like, first of all, to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting. I would also like to thank Mr. Achim
Steiner for his statement this morning.

My delegation very much welcomes the
opportunity to speak on this issue today, because for us
climate change presents a real and present danger that
consistently haunts the existence and lives of our
people. This happens in five key dimensions. The first
is human security; the second is economic security; the
third is national security in the collective sense; the
fourth is in the context of peace and stability; and the
fifth is in the context of trying to find solutions for
these issues.

Insofar as human security is concerned, for us
climate change impacts on the lives and livelihoods of
Kenyans in ways that are very difficult to describe
because, for the most part, they impact in ways in
which lives are lost, children suffer and we all
collectively find ourselves in a spiral of deteriorating
circumstances. The food security situation in our
country, the situation of prices driven by food
insecurity, the situation with regard to water, the
situation with regard to the drying up of rivers and the
situation with regard to access to shelter driven by the
disappearance of forests, where we get the timber for
many houses 4 all these are conditions that are
directly correlated to the human security of our people
and their livelihoods. Health and education are affected
directly as people find themselves forced out of their
homes and communities by situations of drought and
lack of water and food. This situation becomes real. As
we have seen over the past 10 to 15 years, the situation
has continued to accelerate. Currently we have yet
another drought, after having faced one as recently as
in 2008.

As far as economic security is concerned, as
everyone here knows, many of the countries in our

 

region 4 and Kenya is no exception 4 are weather-
based economies. We depend upon agriculture,
livestock and wildlife. Agriculture is the backbone of
our economy. It is not irrigation-driven, it is weather-
based. We have had cycles of drought and floods,
which continue to undermine our ability to provide the
food security that we wish to provide for our people.
We have determined that we suffer a 2 to 5 per cent
loss in economic growth every two or three years as a
direct consequence of climate change driven by
droughts and floods. This difference is essentially the
difference between attaining full growth that can drive
the transformation of our economies and meet our
Millennium Development Goals, or not.

With regard to climate change and national
security, again, in the case of Kenya we are very
conscious of the fact that we are in a country and an
economy with truly scarce resources.

Less than one-third of our country is arable; two-
thirds of the country is basically shrub and land that is
not conducive to agriculture. Therefore, land is a
premium product and something that we consider to be
fundamentally important to the livelihoods of people.
Struggles around land, water, livestock and food
become a fundamental part of people's existence and
therefore drive their interrelationships. In the northern
part of our country, we have seen cattle-rustling and
other acts that drive the inability of the country to
maintain security become correlated to the weather
patterns of that region. We see people migrating
internally 4 huge population movements driven by the
consequences of poor weather. These are real issues for
us.

In the context of the regional perspective, we see
people coming in to our country. Over the past month,
we have seen yet another 1,300 people added to the
already 500,000 who are there from Somalia alone. As
the Secretary-General said in his presentation, we have
seen close to 53,000 people coming in to the country,
driven primarily by the consequences of the lack of
water, food and security in our neighbour Somalia.
This is a real concern for us, and the correlation
between it and climate change is direct.

My fourth point relates to peace and stability. The
three issues that I have just spoken about 4 human
security, economic security and national security 4
fundamentally affect peace and stability not only in
Kenya, but in the region in which our country exists. It

 

has already been said here by many that the Horn of
Africa is undergoing the severest drought it has
experienced in the past two generations. Not since the
1950s have we seen anything as serious as what we are
witnessing in northern Kenya and much of Somalia.
We are therefore very conscious of what this means for
the efforts that we are undertaking in our country not
only to promote peace and stability, but to try to put in
place the kind of economic growth that will allow us to
overcome poverty and achieve the Millennium
Development Goals.

Lastly, we have come to realize 4 and we have
come here because we want to emphasize - that we
need a clear, determined and long-term solution. In this
context, we associate ourselves with the statements
made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Group of 77. It is imperative that we, as the
international community, begin to take extremely
seriously the consequences of climate change,
particularly for poor countries. As I said earlier, the
consequences are real to us. They drive livelihoods and
they drive lives. They undermine the well-being of our
families and leave our children devastated and without
opportunities to learn and maintain good health.

I very much welcome the presidential statement
that has just been adopted (S/PRST/2011/15) because it
signals to us that the Security Council and, by
extension, the General Assembly are truly beginning to
understand that this situation is serious enough to
deserve not just a paper outcome, but also clear,
determined solutions that we can all use to seize the
opportunity to improve the lives of our children.

