Mr. De Mistura: As the Secretary-General has
said, these are indeed chilling days for Syria, and for
the people of Aleppo in particular. The past week has
been one of the worst ones in Syria during the nearly
six years of this devastating conflict. Earlier in the
week, I had to deeply regret the fact that the meeting of
the International Syria Support Group (ISSG) did not
yield the results we were hoping for, and actually saw
an outcome that put in jeopardy the agreement reached
in Geneva by the two co-Chairs on 9 September, which
we believed, and want to continue to believe, was meant
to reinvigorate the concept and the implementation of
the cessation of hostilities.

The ISSG meeting took place in the middle of news
that the Government of Syria had declared an offensive
in eastern Aleppo - now de facto besieged. It came
on the footsteps of two unrelated, but compounding,
tragic events. One was the incident in Deir ez-Zor,
the second one was the attack on a humanitarian
convoy. I can only reiterate the concern expressed
by the Secretary-General on the first incident, which
was acknowledged as a tragic mistake by the United
States, and our shared deep outrage about the deadly
attack on the humanitarian convoy. But no incident,
irrespective of whether it can be attributed or not,
justifies what is taking place before of our own eyes,
that is, the unravelling ofthe cessation of hostilities and
the simultaneous unleashing of unprecedented military
violence, which is affecting innocent civilians as well.

Let us recall briefly that, following the
9 September announcement of the agreement between
the Russian Federation and the United States, which
was a complicated agreement that took long time
and required long evening and night discussions, the
renewed cessation of hostilities that came into effect
three days later did indeed reduce violence. Even
Aleppo witnessed a reduction in military activities.
We heard of families coming out of their shelters and
houses to celebrate Bid on the streets. People started
to become cautiously optimistic. But there was still
sporadic shelling inside the city and some airstrikes in
the countryside, but at a lower level.

Then, on 18 September, airstrikes resumed on
Aleppo city, when five districts were hit, reportedly
by five severe airstrikes. When the Government
unilaterally declared the end of the cessation of
hostilities on 19 September, we began to hear reports
of the use of barrel bombs and airstrikes in eastern
Aleppo, where, I want to remind everyone, 275,000
people are currently de facto trapped. Fair enough,
there are 1.6 million people on the other side of Aleppo.
But they are not isolated, like those in eastern Aleppo.
Only minutes after the Government's announcement,
our own team in Aleppo clearly heard the sounds of
shelling and bombardment begin. They happened to
be there because we had sent them to accompany and
assist the truck convoy that was possibly meant to leave
Turkey in order to get to eastern Aleppo via the Castello
Road, .

As the Secretary-General has reported to the
Council, on the evening of 19 September as well there
was a horrific attack against a humanitarian convoy
travelling to Oram Al-Kubra, killing 20 humanitarian
Syrian workers and drivers, including the team leader,
and destroying 18 out of 31 clearly identified trucks.
We condemned that attack in the strongest terms, as
did many members around this table, who have offered
condolences and have been calling for an inquiry and
accountability for those who committed that act.

Since that fateful day, we have seen the situation
in eastern Aleppo deteriorate to new heights of horror.
Amid intensive airstrikes reported on Friday, following
the announcement of the beginning of a Government
offensive - an announcement made by the Government
itself - the community in opposition-controlled
eastern Aleppo even called off their own Friday
prayers. Information received by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
indicates dozens of airstrikes on Friday and Saturday,
which hit residential buildings across the de facto
besieged eastern Aleppo, reportedly causing scores of
civilian deaths and injuries, including those of many
children.

First responders appear overwhelmed and unable to
respond to many of the sites. We have seen reports of
three of the four centres operated by the White Helmets
in eastern Aleppo being hit. As numbers of casualties
are rising, rescue workers struggle to remove people
from under the rubble. Even tools that might have
been able to mitigate some of the suffering of civilians
have reportedly been destroyed in the attacks against
the civil defence stations. Information received from
sources on the ground suggest the following numbers to
date, allegedly due to airstrikes on areas held by armed
opposition groups. We cannot verify them, but these are
the figures we are seeing at the moment: 213 fatalities
in Aleppo province, 139 fatalities in eastern Aleppo
and 74 fatalities in rural Aleppo, all including dozens
of women and children.

How many airstrikes? Obviously, we have no
independent capacity to verify that. Sources on the
ground tell us that they no longer have the capacity
to count them accurately, given the chaos in Aleppo
city and the fact they often take place at night and
with remarkable new intensity. We heard the word
"unprecedented" used to describe the quantity, scale
and type of bombing. We have seen reports, videos
and pictures of the reported use of incendiary bombs
that create fireballs of such intensity that they light
up the pitch darkness in eastern Aleppo, as though it
were actually daylight. We now hear of bunker-busting
bombs being used, and see pictures oflarge craters in the
ground much larger than in previous aerial bombings.
If it is confirmed, the systematic indiscriminate use
of such weapons in areas where civilians and civilian
infrastructure are present may amount to war crimes.
Civilians across town must be asking themselves where
on Earth it is now safe to be in that tormented city.

We have also seen reports of armed opposition
groups firing hellfire rockets. Do members know
what they are? They are basically gas canisters full
of nails, stones and iron, which are being launched in
a rudimentary way across the other side of the line.
These do in fact kill civilians, including one which hit
the Al-Maari school in Hamidiya neighbourhood on
22 September. On 19 September, the area close to the
United Nations hub in western Aleppo was hit by two
mortar shells coming from the opposition, killing one
civilian.

There are ongoing reports that medical centres
are being targeted, including an alleged strike on an
ambulance and medical triage centre in an area held
by armed opposition groups in south-western Aleppo,
which also caused fatalities among medical staff once
again. We hear of streets so filled with rubble - huge
piles of rubble - due to these new types of bombs that
ambulances cannot even pass through them.

As I mentioned at the beginning, up to 275,000
people in eastern Aleppo - and, frankly, they cannot
all be terrorists - have now been under a form of de
facto siege for almost 20 days, since the Al-Ramouseh
corridor was closed and after the Castello Road was
blocked on 7 July. Since that closure, the humanitarian
situation has taken a turn for the worse. In essence,
supplies are running out. World Food Programme
(WFP) stocks inside eastern Aleppo amount to only
12,000 food rations, which means sufficient supplies
for 60,000 out of 275,000 people. There is no prospect
for replenishing them, since both roads are blocked.
Bakeries are being hit and bread is available only
for three days a week, which could decrease again in
coming days. There is a lack of fuel for general public
use, thereby reducing availability for transport services,
private wells and household use, especially for cooking.

As the Security Council is aware, the United Nations
and WFP had planned to send a convoy to eastern
Aleppo at the beginning of the renewed cessation of
hostilities. WFP mobilized a convoy of 40 trucks - I
have the pictures here - which have been ready and
waiting to go every morning at 5 o'clock, loaded with
supplies sufficient to provide full food rations for
approximately 35,000 people, and wheat flour assistance
for an additional 130,000 people of the 275,000. We all
know what happened. The convoy never moved because
it never received sufficient guarantees - frankly, let
us be honest - from either side, and the cessation of
hostilities broke down. Complicated arguments were
raised by the Government, such as driving licences
suddenly becoming crucial in the conflict. On the
opposition side, arguments were made asking for all
sorts of impossible conditions in order to make sure
we would have the guarantees. Obviously, there was
hesitation on both sides to see the convoy moving, and
we saw the result of that.

Currently, 2 million people have no access to
running water through the public network, after intense
fighting stopped the flow of water from the two key
pumping stations that service the population in both the
eastern and western parts of the city. On 22 September,
the Bab Al-Nairab water pumping station, which serves
the eastern part of the city, was reportedly hit by
airstrikes. In retaliation, Jaish Al-Fateh turned offwater
to 1.5 million people in the western part of the city.
There is therefore no water, in a grave tit-for-tat type
of move. Luckily, water is now back on more regularly,
we hope, after difficult last-minute negotiations led
by UNICEF. However, people in eastern Aleppo still
remain at risk due to interruptions to safe drinking
water. Water from wells, which used to be plentiful,
has become highly contaminated due to the conflict.
People, particularly vulnerable children, are at risk
of catastrophic outbreaks of water-borne diseases.
God forbid: that is the last thing we need at a moment
like this.

If nothing else, from a humanitarian point of
View, we ask the Security Council, first, to press for
a cessation of the violence and for the protection of
civilians and civilian infrastructure; secondly, to press
for weekly 48-hour pauses in the fighting to ensure at
least that the United Nations and its partners can reach
eastern Aleppo, without preconditions from either the
Government or, frankly, from the opposition; and,
thirdly, to press for medical evacuations. There are
several urgent cases in eastern Aleppo at the moment.

Returning to the military situation on the ground,
we have seen several accounts of almost every event.
There are reports of the Government announcing its
intention to retake all of Aleppo city. Shortly after
the agreement announced in Geneva by Russia and
the United States at almost midnight on 9 September,
President Al-Assad visited what was left of Darayya
and announced his intention to "liberate every inch
of Syria". Furthermore, we saw reports that indicated
that the reported objective of Government and pro-
Government forces was to "squeeze out terrorists
without civilian casualties" and to maintain a corridor
for fighters to leave eastern Aleppo. However, what we
are seeing is civilians dying in large numbers.

The last few days have seen intense military clashes
on major front lines, including Handrat, Sheikh Said,
Old Aleppo, Old Ramousa and Hammadiah districts.
Yesterday, Government forces said they had taken over
Handrat district, north of the city, a claim that armed
opposition groups now dispute. Whatever the case, it
is a fact that there has been heavy fighting there. There
were contradictory statements from the opposition as
to whether counter-offensives were being led by the
Al-Nusra Front or by Fateh Haleb Operations Room of
Free Syrian Army groups. We have seen information
from other sources that tells us that more than half of
the fighters present in eastern Aleppo are Al-Nusra. We
have also seen reports alleging the intentional placement
of firing positions close to social infrastructure and
inside civilian quarters. We have seen that in other
conflicts, but it is not a reason for anyone to destroy the
whole building.

The one constant in this violently unpredictable
conflict is that neither side Will win, and therefore both
ultimately will lose. Above all, the Syrian people are
going to lose; they are losing their lives day by day. All
we can expect in Aleppo if the Syrian Government is
intent on retaking it completely - and this is a military
analysis done by people far more competent than us - is
a slow, grinding, street-by-street fight over the course
of months, if not years, whereby the ancient city will
be almost completely destroyed. In the face of these
illusions of imminent victory, I must reiterate What we
now believe to be an almost self-evident truth, but a
truth that does not seem to be actually implemented:
a so-called military solution or victory in Syria is
impossible, including in Aleppo.

Syrians on all sides are still making clear their
demand for a ceasefire and a credible political solution.
But trust is seriously broken. On 9 September, in
Geneva that night, I remember very much both Sergey
Lavrov and John Kerry being concerned about it, saying
they could not go on making statements that did not
have follow-up. But I want to believe - because I am
still a naive United Nations official - that they really
meant what they said and that they really negotiated
hard, comma by comma, because they wanted it work.
But frankly, the international community and the
Syrians are swiftly losing any remaining hope, and the
international community is losing any credibility with
the parties, unless we salvage what was agreed upon. A
tiny window of opportunity still exists, and we want to
believe that it does, for the Russian Federation and the
United States to help the Syrians and the region step
away from the brink of more years of a bloody conflict
risks becoming even worse.

On Wednesday (see S/PV.7774) I reported to the
Security Council that the Secretary-General had asked
me to present to the sides a framework of proposals as
a starting point for negotiations in resumed talks, as
requested by the ISSG co-Chairs. I am ready to do just
that. But the ISSG and the co-Chairs, and the Council
itself - and as suggested in an important comment
made by the Chinese Foreign Minister at the ISSG
meeting on Thursday - the Council has a responsibility
to ensure the relaunching of the cessation of hostilities
and its implementation without delay, with all the risks
and difficulties that entails.
We all know that this conflict cannot be resolved
through negotiations without the help and assistance
of the co-Chairs and the region. I am therefore asking,
indeed urging, both ofthem to go the extra mile to see if
they can save their agreement of 9 September, and do so
at the eleventh hour. The agreement not only provides
some basis for the resumption of talks, it also provides
a broader framework for how to combat terrorism - we
have no doubts about that, and I want to believe we all
agree on that - and to de-conflict the region more
generally, as well as for grounding the Syrian air force,
as that too was part of the agreement.

My appeal to the Council today is the following:
please, develop a common course of action to enforce
a cessation of hostilities in Syria. I am still convinced
that we can turn the course of events. We have proved
that more than once before. We have come a long way
to date to allow the small but tangible achievements of
the cessation of hostilities to be buried under the dust
of Aleppo's rubble.

I have been repeatedly asked by many,

"Mr. De Mistura, why do you not resign at this
point? Frankly, all this is leading nowhere and this
will send a strong signal."

No, I will not, because any sign of my resigning
would be a sign that the international community was
abandoning the Syrians. The United Nations will never
abandon the Syrians, and neither will the Council. We
do not need that kind of sign, which would make news
for five minutes. And then not only would Syria be
abandoned by everyone, but so too the hope that the
international community does want to end the conflict.

