Ms. Morrison Gonzalez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we thank our invited
speakers for their important briefings.

The Dominican Republic takes this opportunity to
encourage all actors on the ground to pursue their efforts
to bring peace to Ukraine and restore the conditions
that will make it possible to lay the foundations for the
stability and sustainable development of the country.
It is very timely to reiterate our country's commitment
to respecting the best practices of international law
and the principles contained in the Charter of the
United Nations, to contributing to the maintenance
of international peace and security, and to complying
strictly with international treaties and conventions to
which we are signatories.

With regard to the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, four years after they were signed major
challenges continue to be reported on the ground. We
note with concern that the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine reported 9,500 ceasefire violations
between 24 and 27 January this year. We are disturbed
to learn that the conflict continues to wreak havoc on
civilians; hunger and poverty have affected more than
3.5 million people, not to mention more than 1.5 million
internally displaced persons.
The Dominican Republic understands that, despite
all ofthe setbacks and continued violations ofthe Minsk
agreements, those agreements nonetheless constitute
the legal basis for achieving a political solution that
will put an end to the conflict in eastern Ukraine and
all its repercussions in the region. We express our
strong support for the package of measures endorsed
by the Council in 2015 in order to achieve the effective
implementation of the agreements. In that regard, we
encourage the resumption of the prisoner exchange as
an expression of the goodwill of the parties to move the
peace process forward.

We welcome the statements made by the parties in
support of the implementation of the Minsk agreements
and hope that the conditions will be met for the
establishment of a joint United Nations and OSCE
peacebuilding mission in the conflict zone. We also
take this opportunity to encourage the parties to heed
the call for a ceasefire and to strive to honour their
responsibilities and commitments under the agreements
in order to make progress in the process and put an end
to a conflict that is a source of concern for international
peace and security, in particular for the region.

We welcome the solidarity of the international
community and the efforts made by the United Nations
not only to alleviate the problems suffered by civilians
affected by the conflict, but also and above all for the
high level of commitment to building sustainable peace
for the Ukrainian people. We must continue supporting
all actions to improve access to assistance and basic
services for the most vulnerable.

Our delegation takes this opportunity to express
our commitment to defending Ukraine's independence,
territorial integrity and sovereignty, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. We encourage
respect for the principle of the peaceful settlement of
disputes and express our rejection of any violation of
international norms, international law and international
humanitarian law. We also join efforts to ensure that
those violating such international provisions are
brought to justice.

Lastly, as we commemorate the fourth anniversary
of the Minsk agreements, we encourage the parties
to maintain dialogue in the current Normandy
format and the Trilateral Contact Group. We call for
concerted efforts to make significant progress towards
stability and peace in Ukraine, thereby contributing to
international peace and security.

