Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I should like once again, Sir, to welcome your
presence among us and to express our admiration for,
and commend your dedicated participation in, the work
of your country's presidency of the Security Council. I
should also like, through you, to thank Poland for having
included this important debate on the programme of
work for the month of August, which is a critical time
for the peoples of the Middle East.
My delegation would also like to thank the team
represented by the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeira Viotti, for the very
detailed briefing she has just given us. We welcome the
presence with us today of Mr. Mike Pompeo, Secretary
of State of the United States, and Mr. Andreas
Michaelis, State Secretary of the Federal Foreign
Office of Germany.

Today's meeting affords us an excellent
opportunity for the Security Council to address threats
to peace and security in the Middle East in an in-depth,
comprehensive and objective way. An acceptable level
of calm has not been seen since the previous century,
least of all now, as rising ethnic, cultural, religious,
economic and ideological tensions fuel open military
conflicts and ever-more-frequent terrorist acts.

The protracted and deteriorating nature of these
internal conflicts, along with sectarian violence, is
polarizing countries across the region. In general,
we note that many of these conflicts are interlinked
and risk spreading throughout the region, with
consequences affecting other regions through
humanitarian crises, unprecedented flows of migrants
and refugees, smuggling and trafficking in persons,
illicit arms trafficking and asymmetric threats that
undermine security.

Furthermore, as if the situation were not alarming
enough, Equatorial Guinea is particularly concerned
at certain statements and decisions relating to recent
unexpected developments in the Persian Gulf and the
surrounding region charged with significant potential
to generate high-risk unrest and uncertainty and
further stoke tensions in the Middle East. This risks
jeopardizing billions of dollars in trade in a region
that has for several years contributed not only to the
development of its coastal populations but also to
progress in many other parts of the world.

In the face of all those concerns, our delegation
would like, first of all, to underscore the crucial need
for a joint comprehensive strategy aimed primarily
at creating an atmosphere of trust among the various
peoples of the region. To that end, bearing in mind
that the same ethnic and religious families coexist in
many countries of the Middle East, national politicians
must show leadership and promote policies of national
cohesion that seek to harmonize and normalize the
coexistence of those religions and cultures. Reaching
that objective would not only facilitate the coexistence
of the various peoples of the Middle East, but would
also improve relations among nations in the region.
Moreover, the United Nations plays a critical role in
any process to bring peace and stability to the Middle
East, be it through the Security Council or through the
good offices of the Secretary-General. The Council, as
the primary organ for the promotion and maintenance
of international peace and security, has a key role to
play in facilitating and supporting genuine and broad
efforts to prevent and address violence, as well as in
creating and sustaining initiatives for lasting peace in
the Middle East.

In that connection, the unity of all Council
members on all key issues is critical. Due to their
proximity and knowledge of the environment, regional
and subregional organizations can also support the
efforts of the United Nations in preventive diplomacy,
mediation and confidence-building.

With regard to the ongoing conflicts and wars,
we know that reaching a just and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question on the basis of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and past agreements
continues to be a top priority and a necessary condition
to achieving peace and security in the region. In this
conflict, there has always been a desire to see just
and sincere collaboration by influential countries in
the region.

We have all seen how the wars in Syria, Yemen
and elsewhere have wreaked havoc on their own
civilians, including women and children. Millions
are now refugees and are creating a heavy burden
for destination countries, to which we pay tribute for
their hospitality. What these conflicts and wars are
missing is political solutions to put an end to human
suffering and enabling the dignified return of the
displaced to their countries of origin. We therefore
stress the importance of respecting international law,
particularly international humanitarian law and human
rights law, in ongoing conflicts, as well as of combating
terrorism, which is spreading due to the destabilization
of State institutions.

I conclude by expressing our concern about
regime-change policies, interventionism and
interference in the internal affairs of other States, which,
in some cases, have been political instruments that have
resulted in regime change and weakened institutions,
giving way, in turn, to loose border controls and the
emergence of chaos in certain States, as we see today
in Libya - the effects of which are being acutely felt in
West Africa and Central Africa.

