Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for arranging today's meeting. We
warmly welcome His Excellency President Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed to the Security Council and thank him
for his briefing. Our appreciation also goes to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Augustine
Mahiga and his team for their important work in
Somalia.

With the approaching end of the transition period,
in three months' time, a new page is being turned in the
history of Somalia. It is our shared hope that August
will be a propitious month with regard to ending the
conflict and bringing lasting peace to Somalia.

Domestic political consensus among all Somali
stakeholders is essential to usher in a new era. We
recognize the progress achieved at the two Conferences
held in Garoowe and at the follow-up meetings to work
for a representative post-transition Government in
Somalia, in line with the Transitional Federal Charter,
the Djibouti Agreement, the Kampala Accord and the
transition road map.

Each step in that challenging journey is
invaluable, since progress towards constitutional
development and State-building is fraught with myriad
obstacles. No one should underestimate the complexity
of addressing such intricate and complex issues as the
nature of federalism, the codification of religious and
tribal traditions and the composition of the Constituent
Assembly. We would therefore like to send a message
of encouragement and solidarity to the Somali people
and their leadership at this critical hour.

In the same vein, it is also essential for all
political stakeholders in Somalia to seize this moment
in history, rise above their differences and work
towards a broader agreement on pending road map
issues. The unique opportunity that is presenting itself
in form of unanimity on the broad contour of future
governance and the political framework, as well as the
sustained engagement of international community,
must not be lost.

Political progress in Somalia will remain fragile
without corresponding gains in the area of security.
The role of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in ensuring security and development, and
thereby consolidating political gains, is absolutely
critical. The African Union and countries contributing
troops to AMISOM. deserve special praise and all
possible assistance. We welcome the increased role of
AMISOM. in enhancing the effectiveness of Somali
forces.

The Secretary-General's latest report on Somalia
(S/212/283) rightly underscores the scarcity of
resources as undermining progress on the integration of
Somalia's armed forces, on the development of civilian
police and justice systems and on programmes for
demobilized combatants. The Secretary-General has also
highlighted the fact that, besides the impasse within the
Transitional Federal Parliament, the lack of resources
also obstructs the smooth implementation of the road
map. While appreciating all financial contributions made
in Somalia, we hope that the issue of resources will
merit our due attention, as rightly pointed out by
President Ahmed, who called for financial and
capacity-building support for various institutions of
Somalia.

Pakistan supports a comprehensive approach to
addressing maritime piracy off the coast of Somalia
and in the Gulf of Aden. We have consistently
emphasized the need to tackle that menace by
addressing its root causes, which include, inter alia,
economic downturn, unemployment and environmental
damage to Somali coastal areas. To counter piracy, we
support the addition of a maritime component to
AMISOM, as well as the actions of the international
naval coalition against piracy. Pakistan is an active
participant in that coalition. We also urge that we not
lose sight of the plight of many hostages, including
Pakistani nationals, being held by the pirates and that
we work towards their early release. Any help that the
Government of Somalia can possibly extend in that
regard would be highly appreciated. The entire
Pakistani nation is worried about the hostages. The
President of Pakistan, His Excellency Mr. Asif Ali
Zardari, is personally overseeing efforts for their
release.

We share the concerns expressed by previous
speakers about the humanitarian situation in Somalia.
Despite improvement with regard to the famine
situation, humanitarian challenges persist and require
our sustained attention.

In conclusion, we commend the initiative of
Turkey in hosting the forthcoming Istanbul conference
on Somalia. We hope that the event will contribute to
realizing the aspirations of the Somali people for a
better life and future. We also hope that it will promote
the objective of long-term peace and stability in
Somalia with full respect for its unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We wish the initiative every
success.

