Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to greet you, Mr. President, and
all the elected members of the Security Council for
the period 2019-2020, as well as to wish them and
their delegations success. I also congratulate His
Excellency Ambassador Singer Weisinger on presiding
over the work of the Council this month. I wish you
and the friendly delegation of the Dominican Republic
every success.

I would furthermore like to thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths for his efforts to find a political solution to
put an end to the conflict and bring lasting peace to
Yemen, based upon the agreed terms ofreference. I also
thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his briefing and efforts
and those of his team in the field. They seek to mitigate
the suffering of the Yemeni people, caused by the
coup d'etat of the Houthi militias. I also thank retired
Major General Patrick Cammaert for his important and
effective role in enhancing the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement and strengthening the role of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC) in the
city of Al-Hudaydah.

The Yemeni Government welcomed resolution
2451 (2018), on the Stockholm Agreement. We have
undertaken to implement the Agreement in line with
the timelines set out, including the withdrawal of the
Houthi militias from the city and ports ofAl-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Isa, as well as the implementation of the
mechanism under the prisoner exchange agreement and
the declaration of understanding on Taiz.

Since the ceasefire was announced on 18 December,
the Houthi militias have continued to carry out
ongoing violations of the ceasefire agreement and the
redeployment agreement in the city of Al-Hudaydah.
Up until 7 January, there were 434 such violations,
leading to major losses, the killing of 33 martyrs and
injuries to 263 persons. Snipers have been used, as
have mortar fire and medium-range ballistic missiles.
Those violations can no longer be considered individual
acts. They were surely systematic provocations by the
Houthi leaders who want to undermine the Stockholm
Agreement. The Houthi militias are not satisfied with
just hampering the withdrawal from the ports and city
of Al-Hudaydah, but over the past three weeks have
set up 109 new earthen barriers and dug 51 additional
trenches, which have made the movement of the
citizens in the city more difficult while also impeding
relief assistance.

The Yemeni Government reiterates its support
for the Chair of the RCC to fully carry out his role,
namely, to implement the Stockholm Agreement on
Al-Hudaydah, in line with the agreed upon provisions.
The redeployment concept is clear pursuant to the
Stockholm Agreement and resolution 2451 (2018). The
Yemeni Government stresses that any delays or any
extension of the timeline stipulated in the Agreement
should not be permitted as a tactic of the Houthi
militias that want to hinder the implementation of
the Agreement.

In that regard, the Yemeni Government underscores
the important and effective role of the Security Council
and the international community in implementing the
Agreement, while also monitoring the situation in the
city of Al-Hudaydah. We urge the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities and condemn the violations committed
by the Houthi militias and take the necessary measures
to punish the perpetrators of those violations.

The implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
and respect for the withdrawal and redeployment,
according to the agreed upon time frame, are absolutely
crucial. That needs to take place before a new round of
consultations is started.

His Excellency the President of the Republic of
Yemen has reiterated on numerous occasions the clear
position of Yemen regarding its support for the Special
Envoy to Yemen, the last of which was stated during
their meeting recently. He said that our country is ready
to provide all the facilities to ensure that the Special
Envoy can fully carry out his work. My country's
Government once again confirms its full commitment
to actively participate in any political consultations
convened by the United Nations, as long as the objective,
mechanism and framework are clear and in line with
the agreed upon terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, the outcome of the Yemeni National
Dialogue Conference and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, in particular resolution 2216 (2015).
We would like to reiterate in that regard that Yemen's
President is keen to mitigate the suffering of our Yemeni
people as a result of the coup carried out by the Houthi
militias. He has ordered the Government to pay the
salaries of employees in Al-Hudaydah governorate so
as to alleviate the humanitarian suffering of the people
in that province.
The Stockholm Agreement is clear and
straightforward. It cannot be reinterpreted, especially
concerning the confirmation that the responsibility
to maintain security in the ports and the city of
Al-Hudaydah rests on local security forces, in
accordance with Yemeni law. The appropriate judicial
processes therefore need to be respected. International
law, the Charter of the United Nations and Yemeni law
all recognize just one Yemeni Government, which is
the legitimate Government headed by President Hadi.
That Government is responsible for local forces, local
authority and the institutions of the Yemeni State.

However, the Houthi militias are not satisfied with
just carrying out violations, but rather they are seeking to
impede humanitarian action. On 5 January, the militias
seized 72 relief trucks of the World Food Programme
(WFP) headed for Ibb governorate. The Yemeni
Government called on the United Nations to intervene
urgently and exert pressure on the Houthi militias to
immediately release the trucks and to condemn those
barbaric acts, which have aggravated the situation in
militia-controlled areas and contributed to the suffering
of the Yemeni people. The militias also seized more
than 88 rescue and commercial ships as well as oil
tankers, preventing them from entering Al-Hudaydah
and Saleef ports in Al-Hudaydah governorate between
May 2015 and December 2018, from which 34 ships
were seized for more than six months, to the point where
their cargo had spoiled. During that same period, the
militias plundered and seized 697 relief trucks on the
road that connects the governorates of Al-Hudaydah,
Sana'a, Ibb, Taiz, Hajjah and Dhamar and in other
militia-controlled governorates.

The most recent incident involved the seizing on
29 December 2018 of a 32 ton-truck in Al-Hudaydah
port that had been headed for Sana'a governorate.
The militias contravened the agreement in relation
to permitting that truck to pass through which was
made in the presence of the Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee. In October 2018, Houthi
militias seized 51 tons of wheat provided by the WFP,
which would have fed more than 3.7 million people for
over four months.

The seizure of the last four rescue ships and oil
tankers by the Houthi militias in Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef ports occurred in September 2018. Their overall
cargo was 25,050 tons of food supplies, 25,980 tons
of diesel oil and 9,025 tons of oil. Houthi militias
also bombed a garage containing four aid trucks
transporting assistance provided by the King Salman
Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre, which had been
headed for Al-Bayda governorate. Those militias also
set fire to WFP depots, burned more than 4,000 tons of
wheat in Al-Hudaydah and attacked WFP warehouses
four times in several areas of the governorate. They
used neighbouring buildings as military barracks, as
made clear in the letter from the Executive Director of
the WFP dated 28 December 2018.

Those militias also detained an assistance convoy
sent by the Yemeni Government, in agreement with
the Houthi militias and overseen and organized by
General Cammaert, Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee, as well as in accordance
with confidence-building measures and Stockholm
Agreement. At the last minute, those militias aborted
the agreement, in total disregard for the lives of the
Yemeni people who are suffering because of the war
imposed on them by those militias.

My Government hopes that the United Nations
and the international community will play a more
decisive role in deterring those uncontrolled militias
so as to prevent them from defying the international
resolutions and the agreements they have signed. The
suffering of the Yemeni people must stop. International
efforts to reweave the fabric of Yemeni society must not
be undermined.

Lasting peace in Yemen requires an end to the illegal
coup d'etat against legality, national consensus and the
political process as a whole, during which national
institutions were taken hostage. Achieving lasting
peace depends on the agreed terms of reference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015). That resolution stipulates, inter
alia, the withdrawal of Houthi militias from all cities
and State institutions, the laying down of their arms
and preventing the Houthi militias backed by Iran from
ignoring the Council's resolutions and blackmailing the
international community with the aim of prolonging the
war and increasing the suffering of the Yemeni people.

