Mr. Begec (Turkey): We thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2016/ 189),
Special Representative Yamamoto for his briefing and
Ambassador Saikal and Ms. Samar for their statements.

At the outset, I would like to express in the strongest
possible terms our condemnation of the heinous attack
that targeted a hospital in Kabul earlier this week,
which claimed many innocent lives and maimed many
others. We offer our condolences to the brotherly
Government and the people of Afghanistan and wish
the wounded a speedy recovery. We would also like to
reiterate our heartfelt condolences to the Ambassador
of the United Arab Emirates to Kabul on the deaths
of five of his compatriots and fellow diplomats, who
lost their lives as a consequence of the terrorist attack
perpetrated in Kandahar in January. I would once again
like to emphasize that Turkey will continue its support
to the Government of Afghanistan in its fight against
terrorism and its efforts to bring peace and stability to
the country.

I would like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report,
which highlights the achievements and provides
guidelines for the future efforts and responsibilities
of both Afghanistan and the international community.
We commend the role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
standing with the Afghan people and coordinating
international stakeholders' efforts there, and we will
continue to support those activities and efforts. In
that understanding, we look forward to the Security
Council's upcoming adoption of a draft resolution
renewing UNAMA's mandate.

The achievements of the past 15 years in
Afghanistan must be sustained and enhanced. The
international community's continued support during
the transformation decade is therefore extremely
important. We were pleased to see the international
community reiterate its support to Afghanistan at the
Warsaw Summit and the Brussels Conference, and that
it is keeping up with its commitments to Afghanistan.
Turkey has maintained its previous level of development
contributions and has pledged another $150 million for
the years from 2018 to 2020. We are also providing
$60 million to help sustain the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces for the same period, in line with
the NATO Warsaw Summit decisions. We will continue
to support the Afghan Government's security and
development efforts both bilaterally and on multilateral
platforms. In that context, we will continue the support
we give through the NATO Resolute Support Mission
and through our training of Afghan women police
officers in Turkey.

Because the National Unity Government symbolizes
Afghan unity, we consider its functions important. The
international community should continue to support it
and encourage its components to work in harmony with
one another.

As the report of the Secretary-General reflects,
the deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan is
a source of serious concern. We applaud the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces for their
determined fight against terrorism. The presence of
Da'esh on Afghan soil, as mentioned in the report, is
another source of grave concern and another reason
why we must continue to support Afghanistan. Lasting
peace in the country can be achieved only through
a successful conclusion to the national peace and
reconciliation process. We hope that the agreement
between the Government and Hizb-i-Islami will serve
as a model for others. We will maintain our support to
the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace efforts.

Last but not least, we believe that enhancing
the dialogue among the countries of the region is
particularly important. In that regard, Turkey will
continue its contributions to Afghanistan within the
multilateral platforms, including through the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process.

