Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank Tribunal Presidents Meron and
Joensen, as well as Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow,
for their briefings today and their continued service. I
congratulate President Joensen on his recent election
as President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). We wish him success in his new role.

The United States commends the Tribunal Presidents,
Prosecutors and Registrars for their dedication and
extensive preparations in setting up the Residual
Mechanism. We welcome the overall downsizing by
both the ICTR and the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) as trials end and as
remaining functions are gradually transferred to the
Residual Mechanism. We also appreciate efforts by the
ICTY, the ICTR and the Residual Mechanism to share
resources and to enact cost-saving managerial and
administrative measures. Those include double-hatting
staff members, sharing common administrative support
services, embedding translators into legal support teams
and using video-teleconferencing technology. We are
aware of the challenges posed by high staff attrition,
and are grateful to the judges and staff members who
are performing multiple functions across multiple trials.

The Council must be flexible to ensure that both
Tribunals are able to administer justice expeditiously
yet fairly. When the Council adopted resolution 1966
(2010) and set 31 December 2014 as the requested
date for the completion of all remaining work by the
Tribunals, we did not have the benefit of knowing when
indicted individuals would be arrested. Today, we are
pleased that all ICTY fugitives have been apprehended,
including the re-apprehension, in January, of convicted
war criminal Radovan Stankovie. We recognize,
however, that trial and appeal schedules will be difficult
to accurately predict and that flexibility in assigning
cases is important in that regard.

Turning to the ICTY, we welcome the reported
cooperation of Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina in providing access to documents, archives
and witnesses in response to requests for assistance
from the Office of the Prosecutor. We look forward to
Serbia concluding and acting upon investigations into
who was involved in, and responsible for, sheltering
Ratko Mladic', Radovan Karadzie and other notorious
ICTY fugitives in Serbia over the course of so many
years. Such cooperation is essential to completing
ongoing trials and appeals. As the nations of the
Balkans make further progress towards European Union
accession and Euro-Atlantic integration, their record of
cooperation with the ICTY and with each other, as well
as their progress on domestic justice and accountability
initiatives, will be critical.

At the same time, the United States deplores
the statement made this week denying genocide in
Srebrenica. Genocide in Srebrenica is not a subjective
determination; it is a defined criminal act that the ICTY
has confirmed in final and binding verdicts in multiple
cases. It cannot be denied.

Turning to the ICTR, there are unfortunately still nine
ICTR fugitives at large. We call on all States Members of
the United Nations, particularly those in the Great Lakes
region, to help apprehend them. The apprehension of the
remaining ICTY fugitives demonstrates the international
community's commitment to ending impunity for
those who commit mass atrocities. Those who harbour
fugitives obstruct the administration of justice, put
themselves in danger and only delay the inevitable.

We take note ofthe recent transfers ofcases from the
ICTR to Rwanda and we welcome Rwanda's willingness
to fairly adjudicate transferred cases. That is a positive
development, since international tribunals such as the
ICTR cannot last forever. Strengthening national legal
and justice sectors will help to promote the long-term
rule of law and stability in the region.

We applaud the ICTR's efforts to create a robust
monitoring mechanism in cooperation with regional
organizations to ensure the fairness of trials at the
national level. Case transfers to competent national
jurisdictions will help fulfil the ICTR's completion
strategy. We welcome the news that the ICTR is close to
completing all trial work as projected in the November
2011 completion strategy. Indeed, the ICTR's vastly
reduced judicial workload reflects the court's strong
leadership and the dedication of its staff.

As the ICTY and ICTR draw to an end and prepare
to transition remaining functions to the Residual
Mechanism, they represent a strong legacy in the
international fight against impunity for those who
commit atrocities. The defendants convicted in tribunal
proceedings to date have been tried and found guilty
of some the most heinous crimes known to humankind,
including genocide, murder and rape, as crimes against
humanity. Thanks to the hard work of the Tribunals, the
world knows about those crimes, and perpetrators are
being held accountable for their actions. In addition,
there are now archives and public records that will be
accessible for generations to come, bringing to light
stories that would otherwise be lost or hidden in the
shadows. That information is critical to combating
the concerted efforts of those who seek to promote
an alternative historical narrative at variance with
judicially established fact. In addition to combating
impunity, the Tribunals' contributions in the areas of
local capacity-building and education will help foster
long-term peace and reconciliation.

As President Obama has said, "Preventing mass
atrocities and genocide is a core national security interest
and a core moral responsibility of the United States
of America." We are committed to working with the
international community to do so. We can and we must
improve our individual and collective efforts to protect
populations from atrocities, including with measures
to enhance early warning, prevention, response and
accountability. We will continue to focus on concrete
outcomes that make a difference on the ground and to
help United Nations actors use planning and diplomacy
to prevent atrocities, not just to respond to them.

