Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank
Mr. Gambari, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his comprehensive briefing. We were
shocked to learn this morning that Mr. Pierre Gemayel,
Minister for Industry of Lebanon, was assassinated
earlier today. We express deep regret in that
connection. We would also like to extend our
condolences to the family of Mr. Gemayel and hope
that, at this difficult moment, the Lebanese people will
stay calm and maintain domestic peace and stability.
Over the past month, the situation between
Palestine and Israel has again intensified, causing
heavy casualties among innocent civilians. China is
deeply concerned about that. We have expressed our
position on this issue on a number of occasions. China
has consistently maintained that the conflict between
Palestine and Israel should be resolved through
peaceful negotiations. We are opposed to all military
actions that cause civilian casualties. Israel must
strictly abide by international humanitarian law and
immediately put an end to military action against
Palestine. Palestine should also stop firing rockets into
Israel. We hope that both Israel and Palestine will act
with maximum restraint and reason, and put an
immediate end to the vicious circle of an eye for an eye
and a tooth for a tooth and meeting violence with
violence, so as to avoid further turmoil in that region.

The key to a resolution of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict is for both Palestine and Israel to gradually
restore mutual confidence and, through peaceful
negotiations, find a solution that is truly in the
fundamental interests of both peoples.

At the same time, the international community
should also provide favourable conditions for the
resumption of talks, as well as effective support. The
United Nations - in particular, the Security
Council- shoulders a heavy responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
ought to play its proper role in the context of the
Middle East issue. This month, both the Security
Council and the General Assembly successively
convened emergency meetings to discuss the Palestine-
Israel issue. We believe that those meetings were
timely and necessary, and that they sent a clear
message to both sides. Regrettably, the Security
Council did not adopt the draft resolution submitted by
Qatar. This brings us back to a question: In the face of
never-ending conflict between Palestine and Israel,
how can the Security Council better fulfil its
responsibilities and help both sides to end the violence
and achieve lasting peace? That is a question that we
all need to reflect upon.
Consultations are currently taking place between
the main Palestinian factions, Fatah and Hamas, on the
formation of a unity government. We hope that they
will continue their constructive consultations so as to
reach agreement on the formation of a unity
government at an early date. We also expect that such a
unity government will be able to assume the important
responsibility of leading the Palestinian people in
participating in the Middle East peace process.

We hope that both Palestine and Israel will put
aside their past grievances and start a dialogue so as to
create favourable conditions and an environment
conducive to a peaceful resolution of the conflict. We
also hope that the Quartet mechanism can play a
positive role for the resumption of the Middle East
peace process and that the Security Council will
continue to fulfil the responsibilities entrusted to it.

