Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for organizing today's
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I would also like to thank the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, John Holmes, for his briefing and
his dedication to advancing the work of the United
Nations on this issue over the past three years. It was
also a particular pleasure for us to see the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in the Security
Council.

We have seen significant progress in recent years
on the topic under consideration, such as the
establishment of an expert group on the protection of
civilians, the updating of the aide-memoire (see S/PRST/2009/Z, annex) and the appointment of a
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Nevertheless, there continues to be a gap between the
normative framework and the realities on the ground.
Progress on the protection of civilians can only be
made when Security Council members put their
protection commitments before other interests and if
issues relating to the protection of civilians are
streamlined in the Security Council's consideration
beyond this thematic debate.

Timely and unhindered access to civilians in
armed conflict is vital to providing humanitarian
assistance. Too often access is unsafe, granted too late
or not granted at all. The Council must ensure that
parties to a conflict comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law to facilitate
humanitarian access. We therefore support the
inclusion of an annex to the report of the Secretary-
General to better analyze, monitor and respond to
access restrictions. Restricting access to populations in
need contributes to the vicious cycle of war economies,
which tend to exacerbate and prolong conflicts.
Against that background, we also welcome the
announced partial lifting of the Gaza blockade as a first
step in the right direction.
Peacekeeping missions continue to suffer from a
disconnection between mandates and the conditions on
the ground. Mandates are often drafted in a vague
manner and are subject to multiple interpretations.
Future mandates should provide clear guidance, in
particular to police and force commanders. In the
meantime, we encourage the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to continue developing
operational guidance on the implementation of
mandates. In particular, the protection of civilians
requires a holistic approach beyond solely military
considerations. Mission-wide protection strategies
must synergize all available components and resources,
including the country team and the host nation.

The Council must ensure that mandates are
backed up by the resources and capacities necessary to
match reasonable expectations on the ground. To that
end, we welcome the establishment of an expert group
on the protection of civilians and commend the Council
for adopting resolution 1894 (2009) as a crucial step to
improving the drafting of mandates of peacekeeping
missions. We encourage the Council to continue to
update the aide-memoire annually, as originally
envisaged in the presidential statement of December
2002 (S/PRST/2002/41).

Efforts to uphold the authority of the core
standards of international humanitarian law must be
redoubled. The International Criminal Court (ICC) is at
the centre of the fight against impunity at the
international level, but it can only act as a court of last
resort. We fully subscribe to the principle that national
judicial authorities have the primary obligation to
investigate and prosecute violations of international
humanitarian law. However, many conflict and post-
conflict countries lack the capacity to conduct credible
judicial proceedings and require comprehensive
assistance. One conclusion of the recent stocktaking of
international criminal justice, undertaken at the ICC
Review Conference in Kampala, Uganda, was the need
to significantly step up such efforts and to support
them. We encourage all stake-holders to engage in new
concerted efforts to this end.

