Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in thanking the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and its Chair, as well as the Panel
of Experts, for their continued hard work in supporting
the Council's resolutions on Iran.

I would like to begin by echoing Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi's words and welcoming the passing
of adoption day on 18 October. That was a major
milestone on the road to the successful implementation
ofthe Joint Comprehensive Plan ofAction (JCPOA). Our
focus now must be on the swift and full implementation
of the JCPOA. We look to Iran to complete promptly the
agreed measures, giving the international community
confidence that its nuclear programme is and will remain
exclusively peaceful. We also join others in noting the
important decisions taken today by the International
Atomic Energy Agency Board of Governors.

As the Committee's report reminds us, however,
during the current transitional period the bulk of
sanctions will remain in place and will continue to
be enforced in full. These include all United Nations
sanctions and all obligations on Member States arising
from Council resolutions on the issue. The phased lifting
of sanctions should act as an incentive for Iran to meet
all obligations under the comprehensive agreement.

The report is also a reminder that Member States
must continue to raise any suspected violation of Council
provisions, in accordance with the requirements set out
in resolution 2231 (2015). There have been three issues
ofnote since we last met to discuss this (see S/PV.7522):
first, the notification from Member States informing the
Committee of the delivery of natural uranium to Iran;
secondly, the two notifications regarding the transfer
of low-enriched uranium from Iran, in accordance with
resolution 2231 (2015); and finally, the notification
regarding the successful disposal of cargo, pursuant to
resolution 1929 (2010).

Turning to the work of the Committee, I am grateful
for the continued crucial role it plays in supporting
the enforcement of the Council's relevant restrictive
measures on Iran. We note with great concern the
medium-range ballistic missile Iran launched on
10 October, which was subsequently referred to the
Committee for investigation. This was a Missile
Technology Control Regime Category I missile, capable
of delivering a nuclear weapon. As such, it was clearly
prohibited by operative paragraph 9 of resolution 1929
(2010), which remains in force. We further note that the
Panel of Experts' own independent investigation into
the incident, completed in the past week, has likewise
concluded that the launch was a violation of Council
sanctions. The United Kingdom supports immediate
Committee action to address those findings. We are
also concerned by reports of a further ballistic missile
launch by Iran. If it is confirmed, we will support a
similar appropriate reaction.

In other areas, we note the report of the Panel on
the attempted procurement of grade 5 titanium alloy
bars. As the report states, this was a violation by Iran
of its commitments under Security Council resolutions.
Although the Panel was not able to determine whether
this was a wilful violation, the incident highlights the
importance of Iran tackling illicit procurement routes.
This is particularly crucial as we move towards the
implementation of the JCPOA, wherein the attempted
procurement of sensitive goods outside official routes
could constitute a breach. We welcome the Member
States' report on the incidents that led to the Panel's
investigations and encourage others to benefit from the
Panel's assistance in that regard.

Let me close by underscoring my gratitude for
the assistance provided by the Committee and the
Panel of Experts to Member States and international
organizations and for their participation in international
meetings and conferences. Such efforts are vital to a
lasting peaceful solution to the Iran nuclear issue. That
is a goal the United Kingdom shares. The comprehensive
nuclear agreement with Iran is in all our interests.
For the international community, it is the best way of
ensuring that Iran does not develop a nuclear weapons
capability. For Iran, it would reset relationships with the
international community and help open up a country
that has been closed far too long. The United Kingdom
will continue to make every effort to implement the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action successfully. We
look to all parties involved to do the same.

