Mr. Mukerji (India): We would like to thank
our briefers in this debate and to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of June. On this day
I would also like to convey our greetings to you at the
start of the month of Ramadan.

As is evident from the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/409) on the topic before us, despite the progress
in United Nations peacekeeping initiatives and the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign, tens of millions of
children continue to be the worst affected in situations
of armed conflict. Extreme violence against susceptible
children, including shocking cases of abductions in
some parts of the world in 2014, call for greater political
will and constructive dialogue among all the relevant
stakeholders to address the worsening situation. We
believe that constructive and close engagement with
the national Governments concerned is essential and
integral to establishing durable peace, security and
development.

The impunity of non-State armed groups and newly
emerging extremist organizations that violate the rights
of the child can be overcome only through resolute action
by the Governments on whose territory such entities
operate. The international community must extend all

possible assistance to such Governments to strengthen
their national capacities to deal effectively with this
threat. We are of the view that sustained capacity-
building in national institutions and governance should
be a key focus area. It is also our firm beliefthat credible
and verifiable data for any monitoring and reporting
mechanisms can most effectively be collected by such
national institutions.

On the basis of our extensive experience, acquired
over six decades of United Nations peacekeeping, we
feel that the allocation of more resources to peace
operations and the deployment of the necessary number
of child protection advisers is a prerequisite for the
success of programmes designed to protect, reintegrate
and rehabilitate child Victims and survivors. Such
allocation should be facilitated in consultation with
both the national Governments and the peace operations
concerned.

The concept note (S/2015/402, annex) and the
Secretary-General's report refer to abductions as
trigger violations. India condemns the use of abduction,
which we view as a tactic of terror. While abductions
are to be condemned, however, we must not lose sight
of the fact that the Secretary-General's report must
not exceed the terms of Article 99 of the Charter of
the United Nations. We are concerned about reported
attempts to exert undue political pressure in the
process of compiling this report. With regard to the
list, the overriding objective should be to have listing
and delisting carried out in a transparent and judicious
manner under the close supervision of Member States.

India, for its part, has engaged constructively in
the ongoing efforts to make the work of the United
Nations more relevant and effective in addressing the
issue of children and armed conflict. We are party to
all the relevant major international instruments, which
demonstrates our commitment in that regard. We are
disappointed that, although the Secretary-General's
mandate regarding children and armed conflict is
clearly spelled out in paragraph 16 of resolution 1379
(2001), his report continues to include references to
other situations of concern, which cannot be considered
to "threaten the maintenance of international peace
and security" as set out in Article 99 of the Charter.
Any consideration of such references by the Security
Council will, we feel, only distract its attention from
issues that actually fall within its mandate.

In conclusion, we would like all States Members
of the United Nations to give explicit priority to the
prevention of destructive and grave violations against
susceptible children as we prepare to adopt an ambitious
and far-reaching post-2015 development agenda in
September.

