The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.

To begin with, I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador Apakan and
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for their useful
and comprehensive briefings.

This year marks the fourth anniversary of the
Revolution of Dignity, which was sparked by the will
of Ukrainian people to be part ofa broader community
based on democracy, the rule of law, a flourishing
civil society and a well-founded market economy. That
will and that spirit will not be broken, neither by the
illegal annexation of Crimea nor by the conflict in the
east of the country. Those who thought that it would
misunderstood not only the Ukrainian soul but also
basic rules of democracy. Ukraine and its people have
responded to brute force and direct aggression from
its neighbour with a tremendous effort to reshape and
modernize the country. I congratulate His Excellency
Minister Pavlo Klimkin, his country and his people on
making that effort.

The Ukrainian conflict is lingering, and the world
must not forget it. The aim of today's meeting is to
discuss the situation in Ukraine and possible ways to
end the protracted conflict. We believe it is vital that
Ukraine be present on the United Nations agenda, and
we should not forget the Security Council's primary
responsibility, which is to maintain international
peace and security, as stipulated in Chapter V, Article
24, of the Charter of the United Nations. That is a
responsibility of all Security Council members - both
permanent and elected.

It is civilians who are paying highest price for
the conflict in eastern Ukraine. As was stated by the
briefers, over 2,800 civilians have been killed and many
thousands wounded in the conflict so far. A number
of people have lost their homes. Over 1.5 million are
internally displaced.

Civilians should be protected in line with
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. Humanitarian actors must have access to the
entire territory of Ukraine, including the zones outside
of the Ukrainian Government's control.

We see a systematic human rights violation in
Crimea, in which non-governmental organization
activists and indigenous Crimean Tatars are especially
being targeted. There are also numerous cases of
unlawful or arbitrary detention, torture, ill-treatment
and sexual violence in the area of conflict. Our
utmost priority must be to stop those grave human
rights violations.

We believe in the United Nations role to defend the
human rights of civilians. In that regard, we commend
the work of the United Nations human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine and the role of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
in the exchange of detainees in eastern Ukraine in
December 2017. The human rights violations that
have taken place have been duly reported in the High
Commissioner's twenty-first report on the situation of
human rights in Ukraine.

At this juncture, I would like to underline that the
December 2017 General Assembly resolution on the
situation of human rights in the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sebastopol (resolution 72/190)
recognizes that there is an international armed conflict
between Ukraine and Russia, and condemns the
retroactive application of the Russian legal system in
the occupied territory and the imposition of automatic
Russian citizenship on Ukrainian citizens. The
resolution urges Russia to fully implement the order of
the International Court of Justice on interim measures
to restore the rights and freedoms of Ukrainian citizens
on the peninsula and calls on the Russian occupation
authorities to ensure the availability of education in the
Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar languages. It also calls
on Russia to allow the unimpeded entry to Crimea of
international human rights monitoring bodies.

Humanitarian aid for Ukraine is a burning issue.
Poland, along with its consistent support for Ukraine
at the political level, has been providing humanitarian
aid in the Kharkiv, Zaporizhia, Dnipropetrovsk and
Donetsk regions to internally displaced people from
the affected areas. Polish support is not limited to
immediate life-saving assistance. Our initiatives also
seek to integrate internally displaced people with their
host communities and to give them an opportunity
to function independently. I would like to express
my appreciation for the work of the European Union
Advisory Mission Ukraine. For over three years,
the Mission has assisted the Ukrainian authorities in
advancing a sustainable reform of the civilian security
sector through strategic advice and practical support.
Our goal is to make the civilian security sector efficient,
accountable and trustworthy.

International law has an important role to play
as well. During the Council's 17 May open debate
on upholding international law (see S/PV.8262), the
President of Poland, Mr. Andrzej Duda, stressedthat only
international law, its observance and enforcement can
ensure peace and security. Unfortunately, international
law is being violated in the case of Ukraine. Russia's
belligerent behaviour against a sovereign country and
its illegal annexation of Crimea are glaring examples of
flouting the basic principles and rules of international
law embedded in the Charter of the United Nations, as
well as the Helsinki Final Act, the Charter of Paris for a
New Europe and the Budapest Memorandum. Moreover,
the recognition of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
and the city of Sevastopol is in itself a violation of
international law, as it constitutes an attempt to legalize
an unlawful situation.

Another breach of international law is the
construction of the Kerch Strait Bridge, carried out by
the Russian Federation without the permission of the
Ukrainian State and contrary to the position adopted by
the General Assembly in 2014 resolution 68/262, on the
territorial integrity of Ukraine.

Despite the steps taken by the international
community so far, the military situation in eastern
Ukraine remains very tense. The Minsk agreements
require an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire and
the withdrawal of heavy military equipment in order to
create a security zone. However, the agreements have
been not honoured and have not prevented continuous
fighting and the regular use of heavy weapons that
severely disrupt the everyday life of the local population.

Russia itselfis a signatory to the Minsk agreements,
but its actions on the ground undercut the diplomatic
efforts to settle the conflict. It continues to finance,
arm and train the militants. Russia is continuously and
directly engaged in the fight - as we were reminded
again by recent news on Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-
17, shot down over the territory of eastern Ukraine in
July 2014, resulting in the deaths of almost 300 people.

On 24 May, the Joint Investigation Team revealed
that the missile launcher used to shoot down the plane
came from the fifty-third anti-aircraft missile brigade
of the Russian Armed Forces. We welcome the recent
findings of the Joint Investigation Team as highly
professional, impartial and independent. We reaffirm
our support for resolution 2166 (2014) and call on all
States to cooperate fully to meet its objectives. We also
call on Russia to accept its responsibility in the matter
and cooperate fully with the process.

We believe Russia should walk back all moves that
contravene the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity
and independence of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. Russia should use its influence over
the militants in order for them to observe the ceasefire.
It should withdraw heavy weapons, in accordance with
the Minsk agreements, and allow the international
community to provide humanitarian assistance to the
local population. Solutions to settle the conflict, such as
the Normandy format - made up of the representatives
of Russia, Ukraine, Germany and France - have not
brought about the expected outcome.

We notice the positive role and appreciate the
efforts of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), mainly through providing credible
information to the international community and
offering real assistance and services to the conflict-
affected population. The Mission is made up of more
than 700 people from 44 countries - thereby making
it the largest and the most expensive OSCE mission
ever. Poland has seconded 40 experts to the Special
Monitoring Mission and will do its utmost to support
the further strengthening of the Mission.

I would like to express my appreciation to the Chief
Monitor, Ambassador Apakan, for his dedication and
tireless efforts towards conflict resolution. The Mission
has continued to function despite the numerous cases
of intimidation and attacks it endures. At this juncture,
we urge Russia to return to the Joint Centre for Control
and Coordination, which used to be an effective tool in
increasing the security of the Mission.

What should be the role of the United Nations be
in this conflict? Given the stalemate in the political
negotiations and the prolonged suffering of the local
population, the United Nations should strive for the
deployment of a fully fledged United Nations-mandated
peacekeeping mission to the conflict zone. In that
connection, we highly value the efforts of Ambassador
Kurt Volker, United States Special Representative for
Ukraine Negotiations.
The Mission's mandate should ensure a sustainable
de-escalation of conflict and the implementation of the
Minsk agreements, facilitate the withdrawal of foreign
armed formations, as well as supervise public order
and the process of reintegration. The Mission should
be able to effectively monitor the entire internationally
recognized Russian-Ukrainian border and areas
affected by the conflict, and to safeguard a secure
environment to enable the holding of local elections.

We also call for the appointment of a United Nations
Special Envoy for Ukraine. That would be tangible proof
of United Nations engagement in conflict resolution
and would give new momentum to the peace process.
The Envoy could monitor and report on the activities of
United Nations agencies and specialized organizations
on the ground.

In conclusion, I reiterate that we believe that the
efforts and dedication of the Ukrainian Government
will allow ordinary Ukrainians to fulfil their ambitions
and aspirations. Poland will continue to support
Ukraine in order to facilitate that goal. We hope the
rest of the world will do so as well.

We believe the Security Council has a role to play in
that regard too. The ongoing violence in eastern Ukraine
and the illegal annexation of the Crimean peninsula
remain one of the greatest sources of instability in the
entire region. The Security Council should contribute
to easing the tensions on the ground and working
out a solution to the Ukrainian issue, including by
establishing a peacekeeping mission and appointing a
United Nations Special Envoy for Ukraine.

We have to remain engaged constructively and
actively and foster our efforts in order to ensure the
territorial integrity of Ukraine in its internationally
recognized borders.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Netherlands.

