Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): At the
outset, I would like to align myself with the statement
to be made shortly by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the European Union. I would also like to join
colleagues who have already spoken in thanking Ian
Martin for his assessment of the situation in Timor-
Leste, to thank him for his efforts there in recent weeks
and, incidentally, to thank him for the terrific job he
was doing in Nepal before he set off to East Timor. I
hope he gets back to Nepal quite soon. I would also
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his continuing work in Timor-
Leste.

We heard this morning from the four countries
that responded so quickly to the request from the
Government of East Timor for assistance. The
stabilization achieved by that arrangement argues very
much for supporting the status quo. The Government of
East Timor requested that assistance, and the Security
Council provided cover in a presidential statement. We
want that to continue. We look to the four countries to
coordinate with the Government of East Timor and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General so that
they have maximum impact on the ground in Timor-
Leste.

It is obvious that the United Nations needs to do
more, on a sustainable basis, in Timor-Leste. It will be
important that all parties work together to achieve the
best outcome for this fledgling country - as the
Secretary-General has put it, this child of the
international community - and to meet the challenges
of preparing for the elections in 2007.

Frankly, we must be prepared to do whatever it
takes to take us through to the logical state. That state
is one where there is stability, political progress and
development in the economy, and where security has
been attained. It is going to be a challenge to keep that
process on track, bearing in mind that elections are not
an end in themselves. What we need is for elections to
lead to a sustainable political situation. That means that
much more needs to be done now, and through the time
of the elections, in the areas of governance, the rule of
law and institutional capacity-building. That does not
happen overnight. Following this briefing, the Security
Council must consider how to respond. We should
decide carefully and quickly what we are going to do.

The United Kingdom supports a 30-day extension
for the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste. That
would allow time for further discussion. But I fear that
any further delay in establishing a follow-on mission
would risk losing the current impetus and jeopardize
the reputation of the United Nations in Timor-Leste,
and thus our collective ability to work effectively in
the country.

It seems to us that a United Nations policing and
political mission would be a solution. But, in the
meantime, the messages of calm and support should
continue. The Secretary-General's radio initiative is
very welcome. We need more of that. We also need an
urgent mission to assess exactly what is required. If it
can produce, for all of us, a list of what is needed, then
individual countries may be able to bring forward more
offers of bilateral assistance, which the United Nations
can then coordinate. I think that the example set by
Japan is one that we should all seek to emulate.

We look forward to the recommendations that the
Secretary-General will make. It seems to us that, one
way or another, the United Nations will have to be
involved in the process of investigating what exactly
caused the problems in recent months.

S/l'V.5457

 

More generally, what Timor-Leste demonstrates
is the difficulty of peacebuilding as a subject. Trying to
develop stability in a post-conflict situation is
inherently difficult. But it reminds us all of the
responsibility of the United Nations across the board to
do more to build peace in post-conflict situations, to
allow sufficient time for the involvement of the United
Nations and to make sure that we have covered enough
of the key elements so that peace can actually be
sustained. That is what the Peacebuilding Commission
is all about. But this is an exemplar to all of us of why
we have to do better.

