Ms. Migiro: Thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate. The Secretariat welcomes the
opportunity to review progress in strengthening the
rule of law in the maintenance of peace and security.
Mexico has been a steadfast friend of the rule of law
here in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly. Its leadership, in cooperation with
Liechtenstein, has been instrumental in establishing the
near-system-wide arrangements for the rule of law,
which I chair.

The rule of law is a broad and complex concept
imbedded in the history of all cultures and nations, as
well as in the longstanding efforts of States to create an
international community based on law. Accordingly,
the United Nations has a broad and ambitious agenda
in this area, which is not easily realized and is often
underestimated. A look back at the debates of 2004 and
2006 makes it clear that the Council and the
10-42676
Organization as a whole have been moving in the right
direction.

It is significant that this debate has expanded,
from a focus on the rule of law in war-torn societies, to
include strengthening the rule of law at the
international level. This evolution reflects the
Council's special responsibility to maintain
international peace and security in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law under the
United Nations Charter. It also recognizes that the
mutually reinforcing links between the rule of law at
the national and international levels are substantial and
multifaceted. And it is rooted in the fundamental
principle that the Organization must act in accordance
with fundamental standards of human rights in its own
activities, operations and practices. Adherence to the
rule of law begins at home. As the world faces new and
evolving threats to international peace and security
such as transnational organized crime, terrorism and
piracy, the Security Council should place the rule of
law at the centre of its response.

Strengthening national laws, security and justice
systems in a sustainable and nationally owned manner
is vital. Action at the international, regional and
domestic levels must be aligned and grounded in
international norms and standards. The principle that
all individuals and entities, including States, are
accountable to the law lies at the heart of the rule of
law at both the national and international levels. All
mechanisms - judicial and non-judicial - that secure
compliance with or enforce international law require
strengthening.

The International Court of Justice has a special
role to play in the peaceful settlement of disputes
before intractable conflict and post-conflict situations
arise. Strengthening the relationship between the
Council and the Court will fortify the rule of law.
When prevention fails, we need to help fill the rule-of-
law vacuum that often ensues. The Council has
developed new ways to promote compliance with
international humanitarian law and to better protect
civilians, particularly children and women caught up in
armed conflict. By establishing ad hoc and hybrid
tribunals, the Council has been at the forefront of the
campaign for individual accountability for crimes
under international law.

This month we witnessed a historic agreement on
the definition of aggression, by States parties to the
10-42676

Rome Statute. The Council has a unique role in
furthering the fight against impunity. In that realm, the
link between international and national rule of law is
clear. As a prevention tool, the United Nations should
prioritize security, access to justice and legal protection
for all in order to make it more likely that disputes
within society are resolved through legal, rather than
violent, means. Assisting the host countries of
peacekeeping operations to strengthen their justice and
security institutions in accordance with these standards
is central to sustainable peace.

In response to international crimes, the United
Nations must redouble its efforts to build national
capacities to hold alleged perpetrators accountable.
One promising initiative is the effort to create a
deployable team of rule-of-law experts to assist
national authorities in addressing sexual violence in
armed conflict, as mandated in resolution 1888 (2009).
Rule-of-law activities have also been bolstered by the
Peacebulding Commission and Fund. Still, more
strategic focus is needed, as the rule of law is both a
desired end state and a fundamental and coherent
approach to that end.

The objective is to enhance the delivery of safety
and security, legal protection, access to justice for all
and the peaceful settlement of disputes as means to
avoid the risk of relapse into conflict. Gaps persist in
the response to rule-of-law challenges, including with
respect to informal justice systems and economic and
social justice. Responses to housing, land and property
disputes for returning refugees, displaced persons and
vulnerable groups remain ad hoc. Failure to uphold the
law in response to organized crime and illicit
trafficking can fuel violence and increase regional
instability. Combating corruption is essential to
maintain and restore public confidence in the State.

Sustained attention by the Council to the rule of
law and transitional justice has helped the Organization
coalesce around a common language and guiding
principles for this work, such as the importance of
national ownership. Since 2006, the United Nations
system has enhanced its capacities. The Office of Rule
of Law and Security Institutions was established in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, bringing
together police, justice, corrections, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security sector
reform and mine action capacities. A rapidly
deployable standing police capacity will soon be
augmented by the standing justice and corrections
3
capacity. The United Nations Development
Programme's Bureau for Crisis Prevention and
Recovery is currently delivering ruie-of-law assistance
worth $202 million in more than 20 conflict and post-
conflict settings, supported by a global programme.
The deployable mediation team of the Department of
Political Affairs provides advice on rule-of-law issues
such as constitution-making.

United Nations actors are increasingly integrating
their country programming, as in Haiti and the Sudan.
Joint United Nations action should be strongly
encouraged as the way forward, as was recently
mandated in resolution 1925 (2010), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In late 2006, the Secretary-General informed the
Council of the establishment of a division of labour in
the area of the rule of law, and of the creation of the
Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group. Under
my leadership, the Group brings together the nine
United Nations departments and agencies most
engaged in rule of law activities, supported by the Rule
of Law Unit in my Office. The Group is the system-
wide focal point for coordination, coherence and
quality control of United Nations engagement in this
field.

Still, the Organization faces major challenges and
constraints. First, we need to recruit, train and retain
high-quality personnel and deploy them in a rapid,
consistent and predictable manner.

Secondly, the financial resources allocated for
strengthening the rule of law in fragile conflict and
post-conflict settings have not matched the rhetoric in
importance.

Thirdiy, the external environment, including that
of donors and providers of bilateral assistance, remains
fragmented. This crowded field spans the legal,
development, security and political disciplines, yet no
global forum exists for dialogue among stakeholders.

Fourthly, we need more consistent and
comprehensive needs and threat assessment if we are to
ensure early and strategic responses. Better, ongoing
monitoring is also required to evaluate the impact of
our efforts.

Fifthly, we must be sure to take a strategic,
system-wide approach that includes security sector
reform and equal attention to all components of the
justice system, including prisons.
Sixthly, the political nature of the exercise must
be recognized. The rule of law is linked to sovereignty,
control over the use of force and resources and other
sensitive matters. We need to do more to address the
political and institutional aspects of rule of law
development, and to bring national and international
leadership on board.

The rule of law will continue to be central in
meeting the challenges of our time. The Council's
continued engagement is essential. Together we can
support sustained, coherent and well-resourced efforts
to strengthen the rule of law at both the national and
international levels, and to ensure that it can play its
rightful role in building a better world for all.

