Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to pay tribute to the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
to the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs. I thank them for their briefings on the
humanitarian situation in my country, Syria. I would
also like to thank the presidency for issuing a press
statement (SC/11799) this morning condemning the fact
that terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
have kidnapped more than 100 Christian Assyrians
from their villages in Al-Hasakeh governorate. I would
also like to thank all the speakers who sympathized with
the humanitarian suffering being experienced by large
segments of the Syrian population as a consequence of
the persistence of the crisis. I would like to start with a
few preliminary comments.

A year ago the Security Council adopted resolution
2139 (2014), which condemns the destruction of the
cultural heritage in Iraq and Syria by ISIS and the
Al-Nusra Front. Since some Member States are not
serious about fighting ISIS and theAl-Nusra Front by
way of this resolution, ISIS terrorists demolished the
Mosul Museum today, and sold 100 pieces of cultural
heritage in London in an auction sale a few days ago.

Despite all that, we are still hearing some speakers
ignoring the errors in the policies of their Governments
towards my countries. They insist on blackmailing the
Syrian population and the international community's
opinion by repeatedly saying, as we heard only minutes
ago, that as long as President Al-Assad stays in office,
ISIS and the Al-Nusra Front will remain strong. Such
a serious assertion reveals the identity of those who
are supporting ISIS and the Al-Nusra Front in Syria,
Iraq, Egypt, Libya and Lebanon. It also shows why a
terrorist, such as ISIS and the Al-Nusra Front are still
in the region, and it illustrates the facat that they are not
truly fighting those two terrorist organizations.

I also heard a colleague say that our air force is
targeting terrorists with what she called barrel bombs.
Regardless of the fact that there is nothing called a
barrel bomb in military terminology, it is worth noting
that the air force of that colleague has been targeting
terrorists with cruise missiles, smart bombs and other
highly destructive weapons. Why is her country allowed
to target terrorists in other countries' territories while
our air force is not allowed to target the same terrorists
on our own territory? And why is it that a terrorist we
are targeting on our land becomes an innocent civilian
on whom we are dropping barrel bombs?

A year has now passed since the adoption of
resolution 2139 (2014) and it has been more than
seven months since the adoption of resolution 2165
(2014) seeking to deal with the humanitarian situation
in Syria. Nonetheless, the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate in some regions, begging the
question, "Why?" To answer this question, we need a
serious assessment of how we have been dealing with
this important humanitarian dossier. We also need to
define the standards that should govern our working
mechanisms in order to duly contribute to alleviating
the humanitarian suffering of the Syrian population. To
this end, we have to start diagnosing the root causes
of the problem. Secondly, we have to determine the
goals we seek to achieve. Thirdly, we must adopt the
legal grounds on the basis of which we will be working.
Fourthly, and finally, we must set out the mechanisms
governing our work. I would like to detail each of these
points separately.

First of all, let me address how to diagnose the root
causes. It is high time for some parties, after a long
period of denial, to recognize that the root cause of the
humanitarian crisis in several areas of Syria is the result
of the expansion of terrorism supported by foreign
forces. If we follow the humanitarian crisis objectively,
it can be seen that the crisis, including the refugee and
displaced person crises, has arisen only in the areas
controlled armed terrorist groups. The best example is
what happened in the city of Aleppo, which maintained
its stability and prosperity for more than a year and a
half after the onset of the crisis, without any problems,
until some countries decided to ask their terrorist
groups, which are multinational and trans-border in
nature, to enter that city and take civilians as human
shields.

We have to agree that any measure will fall short of
alleviating the human suffering of the Syrians in need
as long as the relevant Security Council resolutions are
not implemented, especially resolutions 2170 (2014),
2178 (2014) and 2199 (2014), in collaboration and
coordination with the Syrian Government. In other
words, we have to put an end to the practices of the
Turkish-Qatari-Israeli-Saudi terrorist alliance that is
supporting, funding and arming ISIS, the Al-Nusra
front, the Free Syrian Army and the other terrorist
groups that are embracing the ideology and practices
of Al-Qaida.

This was reaffirmed recently by the American

General Wesley Clark, the former Supreme Commander
ofNATO, when he said that ISIS was the product of the
funding of close friends and allies of the United States.
We cannot speak about improving the humanitarian
situation while weapons and training are still being
provided to terrorists under the slogan of "moderate
Opposition". The former American Ambassador to
Syria recently recognized that this so-called moderate
Opposition is collaborating with the Al-Nusra Front
and defending it.

Secondly, we must determine the goal we are
seeking to achieve. Here we need to answer the
following questions: Is the goal to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria or is it for some to
exploit the suffering of the Syrian people as a means
of pressuring the Syrian Government? If we agree that
the objective is indeed to improve the humanitarian
situation, we should do the following. First, we should
deal with the terrorist phenomenon as I explained
previously. Secondly, we need the immediate lifting
of the unilateral compulsory measures that have been
imposed against the Syrian people by some countries,
including members of the Security Council, that claim
to defend the Syrian people. I would like to note that the
European Union, for instance, has imposed sanctions
prohibiting the provision of fuel to civilian aircraft,
as well as sanctions against the Ministers for Relief,
Electricity and National Reconciliation. Thirdly, we
must refrain from politicizing humanitarian issues
in Syria, including in the reports submitted by the
Secretariat.

We have conveyed to the Council the comments of
the Syrian Government on the report currently under
discussion, but I would like to give just two examples
of such politicization. The first example has to do with
the allegations that the Syrian Government is besieging
some regions and preventing access of humanitarian
assistance to those regions. I would like to ask how
it can be said that those areas are besieged while
munitions are still finding their way to those regions
from terrorist-supporting countries? Those weapons
are then being used to launch indiscriminate missile
attacks and undertake suicide bombings in Damascus,
Aleppo, Horns, Dara'a and elsewhere, which had,
as of 22 February, claimed the lives of 17,186 Syrian
civilians, including 1,867 children.

Some report authors have come up with a new
denomination to describe the terrorist groups. They
have been calling them the "armed Syrian Opposition",
ut we all know that the opposition in any given country
cannot be anything other than a peaceful political
opposition. As for the groups carrying weapons outside
of State authority, recruiting thousands of foreign
terrorist fighters and destroying, killing and wreaking
havoc, these can only be called terrorist groups,
according to the Security Council's own definition in
this regard.

I would like to mention that there are far more than
212,000 people being besieged in Syria. The correct
figure is 23 million Syrians. Some 23 million Syrians
are being besieged by countries supporting terrorism
and imposing sanctions against the Syrian people.

The second example concerns allegations that
barrel bombs are being used and that seek to portray
the Syrian Government as evil. The Syrian army is
fighting terrorism and protecting civilians in line with
international law while taking great care to spare the
lives of civilians living in the regions under terrorist
threat. Our army is totally committed to the safety
of those civilians, which has prevented us in many
instances from uprooting those terrorists.

Thirdly, we need to define the legal grounds on
which humanitarian assistance is to be provided. Here
we need to agree that it is necessary to work according
to United Nations guidelines for the provision of
humanitarian assistance in emergencies, as per General
Assembly resolution 182/46, especially with respect to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.

Fourthly, let me turn to the mechanisms governing
our methods of work. Given the shortfalls in the provision
of humanitarian assistance, we need to undertake the
following actions in order to avoid such shortfalls in
future. We need first to reinforce the coordination and
collaboration with the Syrian Government in order to
guarantee access for humanitarian assistance for those
who truly need it, by which I mean the civilians in the
various Syrian regions without discrimination. We
must make sure that humanitarian assistance does not
fall into the hands of terrorist groups. We know that
early this month ISIS seized assistance sent by the
World Food Programme through Turkey.

Furthermore, we have to make sure that the
humanitarian assistance is provided from within Syrian
territory. While assistance was provided within Syrian
territory to some 3.4 million beneficiaries in January
2015 alone thanks to the efforts and collaboration of
the Syrian Government and thousands of volunteers
from the Red Crescent, we have witnessed the limited
number ofbeneficiaries of assistance channelled across
the borders, only 5 per cent of whom were reached.
This proves that the measures adopted by the United
Nations and implementing resolutions 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014) were not effective. Moreover, some have
insisted on dispatching humanitarian assistance across
the borders to implement a hidden agenda and achieve
their goals through so-called humanitarian corridors,
well aware that Turkey and Saudi Arabia are exploiting
those resolutions by sending weapons and terrorists
from Turkey or Jordan through the same corridors used
by the United Nations.

Thirdly, there is a serious funding shortfall. At a
time when the Syrian Government is responsible for
delivering the majority of the humanitarian assistance
being distributed in Syria, the humanitarian plan was
funded at only 48 per cent in 2014, whereas the funding
for terrorist attacks in Syria was at 100 per cent or
more, thanks to the generous contributions of Qatar,
Turkey and Saudi Arabia.

I take the opportunity offered by Mr. Guterres'
presence here today to discuss the issue of Syrian
refugees. I have already said that the crimes committed
by the armed terrorist groups have forced Syrians
to leave their homes in some regions and to become
internally displaced persons or refugees in camps
in neighbouring countries, where they are used to
leverage political pressure and justify intervention and
as pretexts for requests for financial assistance. Adding
insult to injury, some of these camps are being used
to train terrorists and recruit children who will later
be sent to Syria, as confirmed in several international
reports. If the Security Council truly wishes to help
Syrian refugees, it must first help them return to Syria,
in cooperation with the Syrian Government, which
has repeatedly reiterated its readiness to provide for
all their basic needs, including shelter, until they can
return to the homes they fled.

In conclusion, I reiterate that the Syrian crisis can
be resolved only through a peaceful, political settlement
based on the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
The settlement should also be based on intra-Syrian
dialogue, under exclusively Syrian leadership and free
from all forms of foreign interference in our internal
affairs. We thank all those who are helping to alleviate
the humanitarian suffering of our people with integrity
and without hidden political agendas or manipulation
of the grave situation.

