Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): When the Kenya delegation
supported the transformation of the United Nations
Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH) into the United
Nations Transition Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH) on 30
July 1997, we stressed that the vote was a strong gesture
in support of the Haitian people. Today, this support is
still undiminished and strong, and Kenya will once again
register its support for the Haitian people by joining in
the establishment of a United Nations police mission in
Haiti to be known as MIPONUH.

The evolution of Haiti's political transition process
requires that the Haitian National Police receives all the
assistance it can get, in order to completely
professionalize its structures and operations. This
monumental task is made even more urgent by a
worrisome proliferation of weapons and the lack of an
adequate police presence in some remote areas of the
country, thus resulting in the formation of vigilante
groups. It is, therefore, quite commendable that, despite
these difficulties, the Haitian National Police has made
some noteworthy organizational and operational progress
in at least three of the nine departments, as well as
instilling discipline in the force.

Much progress has been made, but clearly more
needs to be done. A transition process troubled by
incessant insecurity hinders a solid post-conflict peace-
building effort. Indeed, as the Secretary-General states in
paragraph 39 of his 31 October 1997 report:

 

"the National Police will need international
assistance if it is to continue to pursue its own
institutional development while meeting the
country's increasing security needs".

President Rene Preval's letter to the Secretary-General
dated 29 October 1997 noted the importance of
strengthening the Haitian National Police force. Haiti can
count on Kenya's support of this request for a suitable
follow-on civilian police mission. This would definitely
enhance the training of the police to ensure that:

"this institution, indispensable to the
establishment of a State truly under the rule of
law, can develop in a balanced way, smoothly
and quickly".

We are indeed hopeful that its establishment next
week on 1 December 1997 will achieve this result.

In our last statement on this matter my delegation
stressed that only a concerted, wholehearted attack on
poverty and a complete focus on development would
alleviate Haiti's problems. As a developing country, we
know that at the heart of the insecurity problem inside Haiti
lies the unyielding weight of poverty and relative lack of
improvement in the basic living conditions of the Haitian
people. We are therefore happy to note the continued
efforts by the international community, including the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), to formulate a
long-term development initiative known as "Haiti 2012".

A consensus by interested parties on the development
path the country should take will, hopefully, alleviate the
donor fatigue referred to in the Secretary-General's report
and enable Haiti to compete more effectively for what is
referred to as a diminishing pool of official resources. My
delegation is therefore hopeful that in the months prior to
the termination of the mandate of the United Nations
Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH) on 30
November 1998 the international community will focus
more on the development side of its relations with Haiti and
gradually disengage its security/military/civilian police links
with Haiti. We say this fully aware that development is
achievable only within a peaceful socio-political
environment, a position that in the past has driven and
continues to energize Kenya's own regional peacemaking
efforts.

Haiti's future lies in the evolution of credible, strong
institutions. Institutionalizing regular elections within its
democratic process is a major step in the right direction.
Inter-party negotiations to create a Permanent Electoral
Council in a spirit of tolerance and reconciliation, as
recently reiterated by the Secretary-General, will greatly
facilitate the transition and adequately prepare the Haitian
people for legislative and local elections by November
1998. It is also because of the necessity of establishing
credible institutions that my delegation wholeheartedly
welcomes the Secretary-General's appeal that judicial
reform be a priority, firmly entrenched in the knowledge
that the rule of law is a fundamental building block of
any democratic system.

All the above-mentioned issues are addressed
specifically or generally in the draft resolution. We also
note the proposal in the draft that MIPONUH be a one-
year operation, without extension. We support this
approach, and my delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution.

Cognizant of the fact that the ultimate responsibility
for Haiti lies in Haitian hands, my delegation warmly
commends the men and women of UNTMIH for a job
well done, and encourages the Friends of the Secretary-
General for Haiti to continue the good work as they try to
resolve Haiti's problems, with the help of Mr. Enrique ter
Horst, the Secretary-General's hard-working Special
Representative.

