Mr. Stareevic' (Serbia): First of all, I would like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, the High

Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to
thank him for his report to the Council (see S/2012/813).

At the outset, let me point out that Serbia has stable
relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina and fully respects
the Dayton Peace Agreement as the basis of stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region of the Western
Balkans. We are committed to the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
non-interference in its internal affairs. We shall support
any agreement relative to the future constitution of that
country that is reached by consensus between the two
entities and the three constitutive peoples.

Serbia welcomes all the consensus decisions
adopted by the governmental bodies and representatives
of the two entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
deems them important steps forward on that country's
road to the European Union. Likewise, concrete
encouragements from the European Union are needed
for the further stabilization of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

In the context of the European integration of the
entire Western Balkans, Serbia is ready to continue to
promote cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as exchange experiences with and render support
to that country, with the aim at reaching our common
goal ofjoining the European family of nations.

In the opinion of my country, sustainable solutions
for lasting stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina can
be achieved only through dialogue and compromise
between the two entities and three constitutive peoples.
We consider that the international community should
treat the relations between the three constitutive peoples
in Bosnia and Herzegovina with great care and respect
for their interests. Serbia is encouraging all sides in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to invest additional efforts in
reaching such solutions for all outstanding issues.

Serbia has demonstrated its full readiness to
confront the past and contribute to a better future for
and the well-being of the region, doing all that was
necessary in that respect. Therefore, we consider that
all war crimes committed on the territory of the former
Yugoslavia must be processed in order to establish
lasting stability and reconciliation in the region.

In that context, Serbia welcomed the setting
up, at the insistence of the Republika Srpska and in
agreement with Baroness Ashton, High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, of a commission to review judiciary
and prosecution practices in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which began its work last year. In November 2011, the
Commission adopted preliminary recommendations
which highlighted the lack of objectivity, transparency
and efficiency in the judiciary of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, especially with respect to the processing
of war crimes. It also recommended that the positions
of international judges and prosecutors be terminated
by the end of 2012.

Those recommendations are a good basis for
the strengthening of the institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and finalizing the process ofreconciliation.
We hope that the legitimately elected representatives
of all peoples and entities will very soon display the
ability and capacity to take over the responsibility for
managing the affairs of the State independently, which
would make the case for the maintenance of the Office
of the High Representative and the so-called Bonn
powers invalid.

Regarding the bilateral cooperation of my country
with Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly in the
economic field, let me point out that this cooperation
has registered significant results. Proceeding from
the Agreement on Special Parallel Relations, Serbia
has had successful cooperation with the Republika
Srpska, but, at the same time, has made every effort to
strengthen cooperation with the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, with considerable results.

To promote and strengthen that cooperation,
important agreements were reached during the Visit
to Sarajevo by His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacic',
Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia, on 13 and
14 September 2012. On that occasion, it was agreed,
inter alia, that the Ministries of Foreign Affairs of the
two countries would draft a list ofthe outstanding issues
to be addressed, identify the most important areas of
cooperation and take concrete steps to urgently reactivate
the Joint Commission for Economic Cooperation and
the Interstate Council for Cooperation. That process
has already been operationalized during the political
consultations held between the State Secretary of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia
and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia
and Herzegovina on 5 November 2012. A new impetus
to the strengthening of bilateral cooperation between
our two countries is expected during the visit of His
Excellency Mr. Vjekoslav Bevanda, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers ofBosnia and Herzegovina, which
is planned for the end of this year.

By actively participating in, and chairing numerous
regional initiatives, the Republic of Serbia has
confirmed its commitment to strengthening regional
cooperation. The successful cooperation with Bosnia
and Herzegovina within the Southeast European
Cooperation Process, the Central European Initiative,
the Regional Cooperation Council and the Adriatic-
Ionian Initiative, inter alia, contributes to the further
strengthening of good-neighbourly relations and to a
common European future.

I would like to point out that Serbia continues to
be fully committed to achieving just, comprehensive
and sustainable solutions to the problem of refugees.
I reiterate the importance of the International Donors'
Conference on Durable Solutions for Refugees and
Internally Displaced Persons, held in Sarajevo in April.
It was a good example ofthe successful cooperation of the
four countries of the region - Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, Montenegro and Serbia - in achieving, with
the assistance of international organizations and the
donor community, a basis for lasting housing solutions
for the refugees. If the remaining funds needed are
secured, the solution to that problem would no doubt
contribute to the promotion of good-neighbourly
relations and the achievement of lasting stability and
reconciliation in the region.

