Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are happy, Mr. Minister, to see you
presiding over the work of the Security Council today,
and we welcome your delegation's contribution to our
consideration of this item.

Consideration of the subject under discussion in
the Security Council today clearly shows that in West
Africa there is great potential for subregional and
cross-border problems that pose a threat to the peace
and security of the continent, to the integrity of its
States and to the prosperity and lives of its people. The
ongoing conflicts in the region, the activities of illegal
armed groups, the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, attempts to seize power by unconstitutional
means, trans-border crime, the use of mercenaries and
child soldiers, the issue of refugees and internally
displaced persons: those are all negative factors with
an extremely tragic impact on the situation both in
West Africa and in the continent as a whole.

Our delegation has repeatedly stressed that a
long-term solution to the complex African crisis can be
found only through a comprehensive, holistic approach
combining coordinated action by Member States,
organizations of the United Nations system,
subregional organizations, the international donor
community and bilateral and multilateral development
partners.

We have carefully studied the report of the
Secretary-General before us today (S/2005/86). Its
recommendations are comprehensive and, on the
whole, consistent with the goal of neutralizing the main
cross-border problems of West Africa through
comprehensive strategies to resolve problems in border
areas, security sector reform, programmes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR),
the conversion of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) moratorium on small arms
and light weapons into a legally binding convention,
the creation a subregional register of small arms and
light weapons and the reintegration of former
combatants and child soldiers.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
primary responsibility for carrying out these
programmes should lie with the African States
themselves. However, we cannot fail to recognize the
insufficient logistic and financial assistance that
countries of West Africa are receiving for that purpose
from the international donor community and from
financial institutions.
We are pleased to note the beginning of the
implementation of recommendations of the Secretary-
General which reflect ideas that the Russian delegation
put forward during Council missions to West Africa
and during the relevant thematic debates. The idea of
creating national commissions to resolve the problem
of child soldiers is gaining ground and national
legislation to combat impunity is beginning to be
modernized. It is important that this work be focused
and that it yield tangible practical results.

We agree with the Secretary-General regarding
the need to strengthen the borders of African States and
to create joint security mechanisms in border areas. It
is important - without prejudice to inter-State
relations to trade and economic cooperation, to
integration processes or to border contacts between
people - that specific steps be taken along the borders
to stop dangerous occurrences, such as the movement
of illegal armed groups, the spillover of conflicts and
the illegal export of natural resources.

We are pleased at the further development of
close interaction among United Nations missions in
neighbouring States of the subregion and at the
coordinating role played here by the United Nations
Office for West Africa (UNOWA). A clear example of
that cooperation was the meeting that took place in
December 2004 in Monrovia and the meeting,
organized by UNOWA, of the heads of the five
peacekeeping and political missions in West Africa,
which considered practical issues and assessed
subregional threats to the stability of the region.
However, we would like to emphasize once again that
coordinated action by United Nations forces in the
subregion should not violate either the sovereignty of
individual States or the mandates of individual
peacekeeping operations.

One of the major components of the peace
process in West Africa, without doubt, is the goal of
improving political relations and pursuing confidence-
building measures among the States of the Mano River
Union. The summit meeting held on 20 May 2004 in
Conakry among the leaders of Sierra Leone, Liberia
and Guinea, with the participation of the President of
Cote d'Ivoire, charted a course for creating effective
mechanisms for consultation and for monitoring the
resolution of trans-border problems, including in the
area of combating mercenaries. We hope that those
efforts will continue.

Russia views enhancing stability in Africa as an
intrinsic part of the endeavour to establish, under
United Nations auspices, a global system for
countering new threats and challenges. Time does not
stand still. Plans we outlined before to stabilize the
West African region and to resolve cross-border
problems are being implemented, although not at the
pace we would like to see.

Much remains to be done. Child soldiers are
resuming normal lives, but those who lured them into
fighting have not been punished. The victims of
gender-based violence are receiving assistance, but the
rapists have not been prosecuted. Gross violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law are
continuing. The flow of illegal weapons that fuels
African conflicts has not been halted. Imperfect
legislation and poorly developed democratic
institutions make unconstitutional regime changes
possible. We need to give more thought to new ideas
about how the Security Council can help West African
States to strengthen their peace processes. We believe
that work on such innovative ideas could take place in
the Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa.

