Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): On behalf of my delegation,
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for the
initiative you have taken to organize today's very
important debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and for the concept note you have circulated to
facilitate our discussions (S/2013/447, annex).

The efforts to build consensus on the subject and
the progressive development of normative frameworks
to address civilian protection challenges, including
those in resolutions 1738 (2006) and 1894 (2009), are
very encouraging developments.

We recognize the importance of the collective
efforts of the various entities of the United Nations to
ensure apposite protection for civilians from the terrors
of conflict. We are all witnesses to the impact the
United Nations and its partners have had in mitigating
human suffering in conflict zones around the globe.
The United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations have also continued to play a vital
preventive and mediation role in countries on the brink
of conflict.

Despite those notable developments, the grim
reality of today is that civilians still bear the brunt
of conflict and are direct targets of abduction, sexual
violence and the denial of humanitarian access. Recent
developments have underscored the failure to comply
with the law. We continue to encounter obstacles as we
endeavour to address the five core challenges articulated
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/376).

The assault on civilians, especially women and
children, and the denial of humanitarian assistance
in places such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and other conflict
zones, illustrate the magnitude of the task of civilian
protection. Difficult protection challenges also remain
in Syria and Somalia, and the situation in Mali may
present serious protection challenges, for which the
international community must be prepared.

As stakeholders in international peace and security,
our efforts should be directed at addressing constraints
that militate against the effective protection of civilians.
Protection for the civilian population is a basic element
of humanitarian law. Civilians and all those not party
to conflict must on no account be targeted deliberately
and must be spared and protected. The 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their 1977 Additional Protocols
contain specific rules to that effect.

In order to rededicate ourselves to the moral
undertaking to protect defenceless civilians in
conflict situations, it is imperative that we deepen our
commitment to bolster accountability for violations
of international humanitarian and human rights
law. It is time to put our words into action and adopt
standardized measures to bring persistent perpetrators
of violence against women and children to justice. In
that connection, the Council should take the lead by
adopting targeted measures against such perpetrators.
On their part, States must not hesitate to take appropriate
legal action against perpetrators of such heinous acts,
following extensive investigations.
We must ensure that the export of arms and related
weapons vis-a-vis by those perpetrators are henceforth
regulated for probity, transparency and justice to
innocent victims. The United Nations system has
done a lot in that regard. The Firearms Protocol, the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, as well as the recently adopted Arms
Trade Treaty, are veritable tools fashioned towards the
achievement of that objective. States must strengthen
their resolve to ensure the appropriate implementation
of those instruments.

As a major troop-contributing country, Nigeria
is conscious of the efficacy of peacekeeping missions
in the protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict. To further enhance their effectiveness, it
would be necessary to facilitate the implementation of
their protection mandates.

I must stress that our growing understanding of
the needs and vulnerabilities of civilians in armed
conflict must be marked by the ability and capacity to
protect. Parties to conflict, as well as non-State actors,
have a legal obligation to ensure compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law where
the protection of civilians, including and in particular
health providers, women and children, is the main focus.
Parallel and equally important is the moral obligation
we also have to prevent attacks against health-care
facilities and providers; violence against women and
children, especially sexual violence, which women
and girls are subjected to; and other various forms of
debasement that innocent civilians are subjected to in
times of armed conflict.

Finally, it is important that we consolidate and
ensure implementation of the existing normative
framework on the protection of civilians, bearing
in mind the challenges that I have enumerated. The
international community should remain vigilant and
bear its fair share of our collective responsibility to
protect all civilians in situations of conflict. If we act
purposefully and in concert we can certainly better
shield civilians from the ravages of armed conflict.

