Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first to express our gratitude to the United
Kingdom for convening this public debate during its
presidency. Our thanks also go to the Secretary-
General for the report that has been introduced. We
wish to express our appreciation to Mr. Juan Mendez,
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, for his
significant contribution. He is a distinguished Latin
American who is well known to us for his unswerving
devotion to human rights.

My delegation, Sir, sees this exercise as a part of
process in which the Security Council discusses the
post-conflict role of the United Nations in key areas so
as to ensure sustainable peace and decision-making,
especially in terms of designing mandates and exit
strategies. In this regard, the notion of the rule of law
is a fairly recent paradigm in international relations. It
is seen as a limit on the arbitrariness of the State and a
principle for regulating relationships both
internationally and within each society.

Reconciliation as such is seen as the collective
response of a society emerging from crisis, whose
social fabric has been damaged. It puts an end to the
cycle of violence and lays the foundation for a new
coexistence.

There can be no reconciliation without justice,
and we will continue to repeat this whenever necessary.

Today's meeting follows two other recent open
debates held in the Security Council. The first - on
justice and the rule of law: the role of the United
Nations - was organized by the delegation of
the United Kingdom in September of last year. The
second - on post-conflict national reconciliation and
the role of the United Nations - was held in January
under my country's presidency.

In response to specific mandates from the
Security Council after those debates were held, the
Secretary-General prepared the report on the rule of
law and transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies (S/2004/6l6), the topic now before us. In my
delegation's View, this is a very comprehensive report
of great conceptual value, which very clearly describes
the experience of the United Nations in promoting the
rule of law and human rights in conflict and post-
conflict societies, in addition to giving specific
recommendations.

My country shares the View of the Secretary-
General on the key role to be assigned to the rule of
law and the need to continue to take an integrated
approach in which transitional justice is also addressed.
My delegation would like to point out that my country
does have some recent experience in the area of
transitional justice. We also applaud the emphasis on
the establishment of effective national judicial systems,
the observance of international human rights norms,
and the need to support the International Criminal
Court.

As regards reconciliation, it seems to us that the
report may have used too restrictive an approach. The
report regards reconciliation as an extrajudicial means
of transitional justice. It seems to us that this
viewpoint, based on an instrumental interpretation of
reconciliation, does not reflect the fact that
reconciliation is a process. However, it is also an end-
result, which at times may take the form of specific
mechanisms whose real-world application may lead to
changes in interpersonal relations within a society.
Perhaps the report has failed to address
reconciliation from the perspective of the political
response that States, the United Nations and the
Security Council must provide in the post-conflict
reconstruction process, which goes beyond the merely
legal ambit.

Apart from a few specific points, we believe that
the report is positive and we endorse its
recommendations. We believe that, in the current
circumstances, we should focus on determining which
practical recommendations we should adopt in order to
give form to those ideas within the United Nations.

On this point, I would like to briefly refer to two
of the recommendations. We welcome the report's
emphasis on gender issues and promoting the full
participation of women in the whole process. This
dovetails with what the Security Council adopted in
resolution 1325 (2000), to which I will return shortly.
Then, there is the question of strengthening the
capabilities of the special representatives of the
Secretary-General and of peace operations, so that
there can be information-gathering right from the
outset of a conflict, which will then provide evidence
of serious violations and offences. This would mean
not waiting for the end of a conflict or the beginning of
the post-conflict stage to carry out this process. On
many occasions we have witnessed post-conflict
situations in which issues of human rights and justice
have arisen, but where much evidence, which initially
appeared in the form of mere information, has been
destroyed. Perhaps, with provision for the necessary
legal safeguards, the Council should look at how those
mechanisms - the special representative and
peacekeeping operations - could be used to gather
information, which could then serve as evidence. This
has nothing to do with the subsequent decision as to
whether or not persons identified as allegedly
responsible should be tried.

We trust that the ideas emerging from this debate
will help to give practical form to the role of the
United Nations in the area of the rule of law and
transitional justice in post-conflict situations. This role
should be one of facilitation and not a replacement for
national institutions.

