At the outset, I would like to thank the Russian Federation for organizing this open debate to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). On this occasion, it is important to recall the African role in placing the women and peace and security agenda on the Security Council agenda. Egypt praises all African efforts to fully implement the women and peace and security agenda in Africa. In that regard, it is worthy to highlight that the African continent was the first to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of this resolution. In its capacity as Chair of the African Union Peace and Security Council, Egypt convened a meeting early this month dedicated to commemorating that paramount resolution and reviewing its implementation. Egypt believes that adopting women and peace and security action plans is not sufficient. Adequate resources should be allocated to the implementation of those action plans. Egypt stresses the importance of lending assistance to African States, upon their request, to build capacities and implement these ambitious actions plans, especially for States suffering through or emerging from armed conflicts. The President of the Arab Republic of Egypt was one of the first leaders to join the Circle of Leadership initiative to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations operations. Raising awareness of sexual exploitation and abuse is an integral part of the comprehensive training received by the Egyptian forces prior to their deployment in peacekeeping operations. Egypt takes pride in initiating and championing the negotiations on General Assembly resolution 71/278, adopted on 20 March 2017, which advocated for a system-wide response, comprising both United Nations and non-United Nations personnel, aimed at forging a collective commitment to the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse throughout the United Nations by prioritizing prevention, promoting accountability and providing justice for victims. The Cairo International Center for Conflict Resolution, Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding and Egypt's National Council for Women continue to provide capacity-building trainings for Egyptian stakeholders, as well as relevant officials in the sisterly African countries. We also stress the importance of ensuring the effective contribution of women to peacebuilding. The global alliance of regional networks of female mediators is an appropriate platform for stronger advocacy in this area. Egypt is keen to stress the critical importance of ensuring the necessary balance for the implementation of the four pillars of the agenda - prevention, protection, participation and relief and recovery - while ensuring national ownership and taking into consideration the cultural and societal specificities of the various countries in armed conflict or emerging from it. In conclusion, Egypt calls for renewing our political and moral commitment to further supporting and empowering women during and after armed conflicts. Women are critical during the transitional period from conflict to development. Their empowerment is a must for a healthy and coherent society striving towards sustainable peace. In that regard, Egypt welcomes the Peacebuilding Commission's efforts to adopt the System-Wide Strategy on Gender Parity, as well as the Commission's allocation of a portion of the Peacebuilding Fund to women's empowerment in post- conflict countries.
