Mr. Gillerman (Israel): We would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on the convening of this very
important meeting. We would also like to commend
you for the leadership you have demonstrated during
your presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. The fight against terrorism is unquestionably
one of the most urgent issues facing the world today.
Your guidance in today's discussion will no doubt
prove invaluable.

In that context, I have noted with great interest
the news that Syria has arrested some terrorists. I have
also noted that country's very selective mode of
arresting terrorists, on the one hand, and its
wholehearted harbouring of them, on the other.

Israel would like to take this opportunity to
extend its deep and sincere condolences to the people
of the United Kingdom in the wake of the terrorist
attacks that recently struck it so brutally. Our
sympathies and prayers are with the families of the
Victims of that attack, and we wish a speedy recovery
to the survivors.

Israel itself is mourning the death of six of its
own citizens this week. They were murdered in two
terrorist attacks, both of which took place within a
week of the tragedies in London. Israel is,
unfortunately, keenly aware of the devastating effects
of terrorism, and we once again reaffirm our resolve to
work together with others to confront terrorists and
their sponsors, wherever they may be. I would also like
to express our condolences to the people of Turkey,
Egypt, Iraq and India, all of whom have experienced
the evils of terror in recent weeks. Those terrorist
attacks prove once again that terrorism knows no
boundaries and is indeed a global problem. Further,
those attacks again bring to the fore the urgent need for
the international community to reinvigorate its fight
against terrorism.

Israel believes that the unprecedented increase in
global cooperation and information-sharing that has
occurred since the attacks of 11 September 2001 is a
very important step in the fight against terrorism and a
reason for great encouragement. On a daily basis, the
global community makes advances in enhancing
security and in combating terrorism.

In that context, Israel Views the meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Al-Qaida
Committee and the 1540 Committee as important steps
in the global fight against terrorism. Israel commends
the Committees for the valuable progress they have
made in increasing the capacity of States that are
willing but unable to confront terrorism. We hope that
similar progress will be made with States that are able
but unwilling to confront terrorism.

Despite clear calls from the Security Council
detailing the responsibility of States to refrain from
supporting and to act against terrorists, there are still
States that View terrorism as a way of waging their own
wars by proxy. The same resolve we direct against the
terrorists must be directed against those States that
allow terrorists to act unencumbered and unimpeded.

There is an urgent need to address those factors
that create the atmosphere in which terrorists can hide,
recruit new members and operate. In particular, issues
of radicalization, glorification of martyrdom and
incitement require urgent and concerted attention,
especially in the light of the increasingly common
phenomena of suicide terrorism and of terrorists who
have been born and raised in the very societies in
which they commit their atrocities.

Israel is pleased to note the growing, indeed
almost universal, recognition that the fight against
terrorism cannot be held hostage to any so-called root
causes. There can be no attempt to justify or excuse the
use of terrorism. Israel commends the Secretary-
General for his forthright rejection of such attempts in
his counter-terrorism strategy.

On that subject, Israel is concerned that, although
the "Millennium + 5" draft outcome document rejects
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, it also
lists factors that may contribute to terrorism. That list
compromises the efficacy of the draft outcome
document's statements on terror.

Israel also attaches the utmost importance to
effective counter-terrorism legislation and multilateral
legal instruments. We are actively sharing our
experiences in this sphere. Israel is party to nine
counter-terrorism conventions, and we are working to
join others. We also support the goal of concluding a
comprehensive convention on terrorism during the
sixtieth session of the General Assembly. The goal of
concluding such a convention should not, however, be
seen as an end in and of itself, but rather as a means to
an effective international counter-terrorism strategy.
Accordingly, as much as we wish to see the
comprehensive convention concluded at the earliest
opportunity, it should not come at the cost of diluting
the principles that stand to make it an effective tool in
the fight against terrorism.

Israel is pleased to note that multilateral
forums - most recently the Group of Eight summit
and the meeting of the group of five European interior
ministers - continue to close the gaps in the
international counter-terrorism web. As a result of
these and similar efforts, international terrorist
networks are suffering significant setbacks.
Nevertheless, terrorist groups are quick to exploit any
gaps that might appear in international resolve and
cooperation.

One such gap is the increasing tendency to seek
contact with leaders of terrorist organizations on the
ground that they are political and/or democratically
elected leaders. Let there be no mistake about it:
terrorist organizations are cunningly adopting a new
modus operandi of political involvement in a cynical
attempt to exploit the wave of democratization that has
begun to sweep through the Middle East.
Developments in democratization should not be
confused with the democratization of terrorists
themselves. Indeed, contact with them, at any level,
signals international acceptance of their continued
militarization and encourages, rather than fights,
terrorism.

The rightful placement of terrorist groups such as
Hamas and Hizbollah on lists of outlawed international
terrorist organizations is key to ostracizing their
representatives and inhibiting their activities. Any
other approach, especially political co-option in the
naive hope that terrorists will eventually rectify their
ways, not only sends the wrong message about
international counter-terrorism efforts, but also
endangers governing authorities and the lives of
innocents around the world.

Having fought terrorism since our inception,
Israel is well aware of the dangers and transnational
ramifications that are inherent in it. We therefore
appreciate international efforts to contain and combat
terrorism. Israel has been an active supporter of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. We encourage the
Committee to cover fully the wide scope of its
mandate, including confronting the dangers of
incitement. Furthermore, Israel looks forward to
extending our support to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, and in that context
is pleased to note that an Israeli counter- terrorism
expert has been included in its work.

