Mr. Acharya (Nepal): I would like to
congratulate the Turkish presidency for organizing this
important thematic debate on peacekeeping.

It is true that peacekeeping is under increasing
strain. There is political, logistical, financial and
managerial overstretch. We are deploying missions in
increasingly complex environments, with increasingly
difficult mandates and often with the limited consent of
the State or the parties concerned. In some cases,
mandates related to the protection of civilians and the
extension of State authority encroach upon the
traditional functions of States and generate resistance
on the part of the parties concerned.

The capability of the United Nations to deploy
missions in time, when they are needed most, is under
severe stress. In many cases, missions are left without
appropriate political support or a workable exit
strategy. In others there is a gap between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. In still others both the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council
are engaged, without a proper delineation of
responsibilities.

That calls for a serious review of United Nations
peacekeeping as a tool for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as a concept for
resolving conflicts and as a strategy for filling in gaps
in failed or failing States and societies transitioning out
of conflict. It also deserves an in-depth analysis as a
complex managerial endeavour.

Current practices in developing doctrine and
mandating, budgeting, supporting and managing
peacekeeping operations, including their links to other
activities such as preventive diplomacy and
peacebuilding, need a strategic review. Although there
has not been a serious in-depth study of United Nations
peacekeeping operations since the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) of 2000, we should not forget that some
of its key principles still remain valid and are yet to be
fully implemented. On Nepal's behalf, I welcome the
various initiatives, including this one, to more broadly
review the subject. Clearly, there is a need for
convergence in the various initiatives within and
outside the Security Council and that of the New
Horizon project, initiated jointly by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Department
of Field Support (DFS). I must stress here that any
review or recommendation will have real meaning only
when it receives broad-based support from the
membership, including the members of Council, the
General Assembly and finance- and troop-contributing
countries.

As matters stand now, as a troop-contributing
country, we are at the end of the spectrum. Our troops
are called on to participate in missions in whose
mandate development and planning we are not
involved, let alone the determination of political
strategy. Our troops are tasked with implementing
complex mandates, without too much operational
flexibility, as well as with applying rules of
engagement they did not themselves develop.

We are also being stretched in the area of
deployment, in particular in terms of logistical
resources. By the end of this year, Nepal's current
strength of 3,800 military and police personnel will
have increased by one third, once our troops are
deployed to Darfur and Chad, with an additional
company to Lebanon. Our capability to deploy troops
has also been severely constrained by the increasingly
complex requirement of contingent-owned equipment,
including equipment that we do not normally operate at
home. It also involves a long procurement process that
reduces our capability to deploy in time.

There is therefore a strong case to be made for
building the capacity of willing troop contributors to
deploy swiftly and with the required contingent
equipment and professional capability for complex and
robust peacekeeping operations. That would entail
critical logistical and training support from the United
Nations and bilateral sources. Enhancement of the
United Nations strategic logistic pool of key equipment
for mission start-up or filling in the gaps experienced
by some troop-contributing countries would be part of
the solution. We should also not underestimate the
importance of having developed countries share some
of the burden of contributing troops in difficult
peacekeeping missions, so as to make peacekeeping a
truly effective global partnership.

Peacekeeping is still an evolving and dynamic
concept. In recent years, the conflict environment and
the challenges to peacekeeping have changed
dramatically, requiring new approaches and
partnerships. In order to overcome some of the key
challenges, an enhanced and institutionalized
relationship between the Security Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat is of
paramount important to reshaping the model of

partnership. That would entail the involvement of
troop-contributing countries from the time that a
mandate is formulated to key stages in the mission
planning process. That should be done through close
interaction, information-sharing and participation. The
Security Council should also focus on establishing
unambiguous and achievable mandates. Missions
should be equipped with matching resources
commensurate with the tasks in the field.

Some of the challenges to peacekeeping are
related to the environment in host nations, especially
challenges resulting from fragile peace agreements and
a lack of commitment on the part of the parties during
the implementation phase. That requires more
proactive engagement and greater political support
from the international community, especially the
Security Council. In that connection, I would hope that
the New Horizon project, being undertaken jointly by
DPKO and DFS, will rectify the problems that we are
facing today by adequately and effectively addressing
them.

We are of the view that, during the review, core
values of United Nations peacekeeping operations such
as adherence to the Charter, the consent of the parties,
non-interference in the affairs of sovereign States and
the non-use of force except in self-defence should not
be undermined. Those principles should not be
compromised, even in the context of so-called robust
peacekeeping operations.

On behalf of Nepal, I would like to pledge our
active involvement in and support of the necessary
review process of peacekeeping operations so that
current strains can be rectified in existing and future
missions.

