Ms. Wronecka (Poland) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to take this opportunity to wish the delegation of
Kuwait every success in implementing the programme
of work for this month.

(spoke in English)

Let me thank High Representative Izumi
Nakamitsu for her informative briefing. We appreciate
the ongoing work of the Technical Secretariat of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and the Fact-finding Mission. We welcome
the cooperation between the secretariat and the United
Nations Office for Project Services, which facilitated
the destruction of the two remaining chemical-weapon
production facilities. We look forward to the results of
the analysis by the Declaration Assessment Team of a
set of documents and declarations submitted by Syria.

Chemical weapons continue to pose a threat to
the people of Syria. Repeated allegations of the use
of chemical weapons in Syria, including the recent
ones, serve to underline the fact that there is still a
challenge to international peace and security, as well as
to the credibility of the Chemical Weapons Convention
regime. In that context, there is a genuine need for a
clear message that impunity for perpetrators is not
an option.

We have clearly stated in various forums that the use
of chemical weapons by anyone - State and non-State
actors alike - anywhere and under any circumstances
must be rigorously condemned and those responsible
for such acts must be held accountable. We agree that
the Security Council needs to take steps in order to
establish a credible, professional and independent
investigative mechanism. We have therefore engaged in
the discussions to find the best solution for the future
mechanism. I would like to focus on three points.

First, Poland has supported the work of the OPCW-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
and continues to support the establishment of an
independent and credible investigative mechanism
aimed at holding accountable the perpetrators of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. However, a future
mechanism will not operate in a void. The instrument
must build on the Joint Investigative Mechanism. Not
only should it build on the significant achievements
of the JIM, but its mandate must not deviate from
resolution 2235 (2015).

Secondly, the mandate of the mechanism should
be balanced. There is a need to identify not only
the individuals, entities and groups but also the
Governments responsible for any use of chemicals
as weapons.

Thirdly, one of the most important elements of
the mandate must be to ensure that the mechanism is
independent in its proceedings and conclusions and
free from the pressure of political verification of its
conclusions by the Council.

