Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. His presentation was, as ever,
extremely useful in its overview of the general situation
in the region, the accelerated changes occurring there
and the opportunities that they offer.

The situation in the Middle East is characterized
by its volatility and the serious challenges that are
threatening to destabilize the regionty. At the same time,
over recent months we have seen some encouraging
signs, and how one decision may open the door to
greater opportunities for negotiation.

Guatemala believes that diplomacy and dialogue are
the best means for achieving long-term solutions in each
of the conflicts that persist in the Middle East. Seeking
solutions by means other than those established under
the of international law not only creates dangerous
precedents, but runs counter to the very foundations
of the Organization. Each of the situations that has
drawn international attention, whether on the Council's
agenda or not, such as those in Syria, Palestine, Yemen,
Egypt and elsewhere, has its own unique roots. But in
all cases, in our view, it is important to promote open
and inclusive dialogue among all the parties concerned
and to push together to contain the violence and prevent
further clashes.

On this occasion, I will refer to only two matters:
the Middle East peace process and the conflict in Syria.

With regard to the Middle East peace process,
Guatemala views it as a positive sign that the
authorities in Israel and Palestine continue to seek a
negotiated two-State solution through dialogue. We are
aware of the immense challenges that the negotiation
process presents for both parties, at the national and
international levels alike. Paradoxically, the more we
advance in the negotiations, the pending issues seem
ever-more insurmountable. However, a viable option
for peace and security would, at the end of the day, be
of enormous benefit to both parties. In other words, this
is not a zero-sum game, but rather a win-win situation
for all.

We hope that the parties can work positively to meet
the deadlines that have been set. In the same vein, we
believe that the involvement of the Quartet and regional
actors in the process will contribute to the attainment
of a definitive solution to the conflict. We encourage
both parties to continue negotiating in good faith with
a view to achieving a mutually acceptable solution, and
the international community to support this process.

We therefore believe that both sides should refrain
from any act that may jeopardize the negotiations or
the prospects for a peaceful solution to the conflict. We
emphasize once again the need to cease the expansion
of existing settlements and the approval of new ones,
settler violence, the launching of rockets into Israel
and,in general,the use of inflammatory language
by both sides. We hope that the parties demonstrate
their commitment to the principles that unite us and
overcome the differences blocking progress towards a
peaceful solution.

Regarding the situation in Syria, our message is
short and simple - the violence must stop immediately.
All parties must cease the use ofmilitary force to achieve
their political objectives. Likewise, the international
community as a whole must stop arms transfers to any
of the warring parties in Syria.

We welcome the creation of the Joint Mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the United Nations, as well as the recent
appointment of its Special Coordinator, Ms. Sigrid
Kaag. We are encouraged that, despite the fact that it
is working in a conflict situation and carrying out a
highly dangerous task, the Mission has been able to
complete inspections of almost half of Syria's chemical
arsenal. We hope that its work will continue at the same
pace and can lead to the complete destruction of the
chemical weapons programme in Syria by mid-2014.

We also believe that it is important to have
complete and timely information on the establishment,
functioning and operations of the Joint Mission. We
understand that this Mission has no precedent and
therefore must blaze its own trail. However, it could be
argued that transparency and monitoring are therefore
even more important. We also hope that all matters
relating to the protection and safety of the personnel
of the Mission are reported on. In this context, we
also welcome the recent presidential statement issued
by the Council calling for unhindered humanitarian
access to populations in need of assistance in Syria
(S/PRST/2013/15).

At the same time, we are aware the activities of the
Joint Mission will not end the conflict. It is therefore
important for the parties to hold a dialogue and seek
definitive solutions to their differences, including the
establishment of a transitional government. We believe
that the long-delayed convening of a second conference
in Geneva, which is now being announced for late
November, could provide just such an opportunity. We
are therefore concerned at the continuing reports of
deep divisions among the Syrian opposition groups. It
is important that the leadership of the opposition work
to keep the unity of the groups belonging to it so as
to have a strong and representative interlocutor in that
conference.

We also believe that the Geneva conference should
incorporate an obligation on all parties to lay down
their weapons. Doing so will alleviate the humanitarian
catastrophe that has resulted from the conflict. It
should also be clear that the perpetrators of all crimes
committed in Syria should be punished for their
actions. Impunity must not be allowed to prevail in a
post-conflict Syria.

Finally, Guatemala reiterates that the reconciliation
of opposing positions requires holding a constructive
dialogue. That is the only way to avoid greater harm
which, should the trends continue, would eventually
undermine the stability of the entire Middle East.

