Mrs. Robinson: Again, I note the very specific
approach of each of the representatives. I would just
like to respond very briefly.

In the case of the representative of the Russian
Federation, he placed a lot of emphasis on better
coordination in the United Nations system and on a
better division of labour in order to secure more
effective prevention. Again, I think this seems to be an
initiative that the Security Council is really taking,
including in the discussions it will be having with the
Bureau of the Economic and Social Council. But I
would like to link it with the very strong case made by
the representative of Mali about the importance of
linking, in a resourcing and supportive way, with what
regional organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) are
doing. Certainly, that is our experience in the human
rights context - namely, that the subregional
framework is a very valuable framework for promoting
human rights values, sharing good practices and having
a much more effective and concerted approach. This
seems to be all the more important and all the more
worth discussing, in every sense, in the context of the
core issue of protection of civilians in armed conflict.

I very much agree with the points that he made
about the importance of the Moratorium on small arms.
I think there are not only measures that can be taken in
that context, but experiences that can then be used
elsewhere. I think the Security Council could play a
very important role by reinforcing the capacity of
regional organizations and, then, sharing their good
practices and building on that in other regions.

In relation to the contribution of the
representative of Ireland, in referring expressly to
article 3 of the four Geneva Conventions he in fact
reiterated the point I made that there are certain
indispensable standards that apply to armed groups. I
think that is a way by which it is possible to
communicate the important principles and, as has been
said, communicate them in local languages and
reinforce that they cannot be departed from in any
circumstances and that there is a rich jurisprudence in
relation to that.

The representative of Ireland referred to the
important work of Francis Deng and to the guiding
principles. I again refer to the working reality that we
are facing of the many gaps that exist in protecting the
internally displaced and the important role of the
coordinator of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee,
Dennis McNamara, in working with Francis Deng, our
Office, refugees, the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the International Organization for
Migration and all the other bodies to try to fill those
gaps; because it is our assessment that they still are not
appropriately filled.

I very much welcome the reference to the
importance of a human rights component in mandates
of the Security Council, and that that would hopefully
be a funded component. I am certainly very happy to
ensure that in any fact-finding that I personally carry
out as High Commissioner, or that is carried out by the
human rights mechanisms, perhaps more direct ways
are found of ensuring that the Security Council gets
that information as soon as possible and in the most
direct way. If there is a task force established, maybe
we could talk about methods of ensuring that that is
very automatically and immediately available.

I welcomed the emphasis of the representative of
Colombia on the need to embed a culture of protection
and the role of the Security Council in being a body
that brings neutrality and impartiality. He referred to
the fact that special envoys should offer specific
recommendations, and referred in particular to
potential forthcoming opportunities in the Great Lakes
area and in Georgia. Again, I think it is a case of a
coordinated approach, as has been emphasized by so
many contributors to this discussion. The real
prevention and embedding of a culture of protection
comes from drawing on all components including,
obviously, the human rights framework and sector.

I also agree with the emphasis on responsibility
of the private-sector actors, as I had said. We are
increasingly learning of ways to ensure that there is not
even indirect complicity in abuses of violations of
human rights. The private sector itself is very engaged
in looking at this area.

Finally, I come back again to the contribution of
the representative of Mali. The first point that was
made was about this being a very good time for stock-
taking and looking at gaps. I believe that this is one of
the challenges we face when looking at the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. What are the gaps? As I
said, we increasingly recognize those gaps in relation
to internally displaced persons; those gaps are there.
One of the gaps is reflected in the point made by the
representative of the Russian Federation in saying that
perhaps more account should be taken, in more depth,
of each situation of conflict. Sadly, we have seen that
addressing issues of conflict and making some progress
does not necessarily last, and that countries can fall
back into conflict. One of the responsibilities is to
ensure that we look deeply enough. Again, I would
point to the need not only to understand the importance
of violations of human rights as being at the root of
conflict, but also building the capacity of countries to
address issues of conflict.

If I might digress to something slightly different
that has been very much in my mind as I have listened
to this debate, in Brussels on 14 May we will hold a
special conference to focus on less developed
countries. The ability of less developed countries to
build their capacity in the administration of justice,
rule of law and protection of human rights is vital to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, because if
we look at the profile of conflicts, we see that a very
significant number of them are in less developed
countries; they have roots in poverty; and they have the
profile that is reflected in the reports of the Secretary-
General.

But from a capacity-building point of View, and
as a system as a whole, we have to recognize that in
order to combat issues of conflict and the impact of
conflict on civilians in the long term, we must be
prepared to invest in ensuring that less developed
countries have more support in building up their
administration of justice, their rule of law, their own
capacity in protecting human rights, and that this, then,
should also be reflected in better regional approaches,
as has been emphasized.

Again, I find this a very rich and very practical
debate, and I am very pleased indeed to have been able
to participate.

