Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing.
China expresses its appreciation for his more than
four years of tireless efforts aimed at facilitating the
political-settlement process of the Syrian issue.

In recent days, with the concerted efforts of the
parties concerned and the international community, the
political settlement of the Syrian issue has seen positive
new momentum. The Foreign Ministers of the three
Astana guarantors met with Special Envoy De Mistura
and issued a joint statement in which they agreed to
make efforts to facilitate the work on the establishment
of the constitutional committee, which will start early
next year. China appreciates that and hopes that all
parties will continue to work towards the same goal
and meet one another in the middle to push forward the
political process in Syria for an early result.

Years of conflict have taken a heavy toll on the
entire country of Syria. The Syrian people yearn for
peace, a return to a tranquil life and an early start to
rebuilding their homeland. Currently, the memorandum
on stabilizing the de-escalation zones in Idlib is
being implemented. The security situation in Syria
is generally stable, and a window of opportunity for
a political settlement to the Syrian issue has opened.
The international community should continue to stay
committed to diplomatic efforts and support the role of
the United Nations as the main channel of mediation.
We should focus on the following tasks moving forward.

First, it is necessary to continue to advance the
political-settlement process ofthe Syrian issue. Against
the backdrop of the new positive momentum for the
political settlement of the issue, the United Nations
should continue to strengthen communication and
coordination with the Syrian Government and work
for progress in the formation of the constitutional
committee, so as to launch a sustainable and effective
Syrian political process. The United Nations should
continue to enhance its mediation efforts. The members
of the Security Council should maintain unity and
speak with one voice in order to create conditions for a
political settlement of the Syrian issue.

Secondly, it is necessary to facilitate the
continued improvement of the security situation. The
parties concerned should continue to promote the
implementation of the ceasefire agreement reached
and maintain the effective functioning of the Idlib
demilitarized zone. The international community
should strengthen counter-terrorism cooperation,
unify standards and combat all terrorist organizations
listed by the Council as such, so as to prevent such
terrorist organizations from making a comeback
and undermining the hard-won improvement in the
security situation.

Thirdly, the parties in Syria should be urged to work
towards the same goal and meet one another halfway.
The parties concerned on the Syrian issue should
follow the spirit of resolution 2254 (2015), inter alia,
and act on the basis of respect for Syria's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity and in
accordance with the Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
principle to facilitate the efforts of the parties in Syria
to find a solution acceptable to all through an inclusive
political process.

China has always been committed to the political
solution of the Syrian issue. The Special Envoy of the
Chinese Government on the Syrian issue, Mr. Xie
Xiaoyan, recently visited United Nations Headquarters
in New York and Geneva to strengthen communication
and coordination with the United Nations and other
parties with a view to providing support for the
Syrian political process. China stands ready to work
with international community to play a positive and
constructive role in advancing a political settlement of
the Syrian issue.

