Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to start by
expressing its sincere thanks to both our briefers, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Mark Lowcock, for their very clear and comprehensive
briefings. I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome Mr. Griffiths to the Security Council and to
reiterate our full support for his efforts.

Today I would like to focus on three aspects: the
peace process, the enduring humanitarian crisis and the
need to address Yemen's economic challenges.

First, with regard to the political process, 2018
could be a crucial year. The appointment of a new
envoy brings with it opportunities for renewed
dialogue - dialogue that is so desperately needed as
we move into the conflict's fourth year. It is up to all
parties to the conflict to seize these opportunities and
do so without preconditions.

We condemn the continued launching of ballistic
missiles by the Houthis and call on all parties to the
conflict to refrain from taking steps that would lead
to further escalation. We welcome the Special Envoy's
extensive and inclusive outreach in his first weeks in
office, during which he spoke to Yemenis from all
sides of the conflict, as well as countries in the region.
I would particularly like to welcome what the Special
Envoy said about including women in that outreach. We
strongly support that inclusive approach and call on all
parties to allow full access to the Special Envoy.

In absence of a ceasefire, the impact of hostilities
on civilians remains of great concern. Human rights
violations and violations of international humanitarian
law are being reported too often. We once again
urgently call for full compliance with international
humanitarian law by all parties to the conflict. As the
war drags on, the need for accountability becomes
ever more prominent. Without it, a negotiated political
settlement has little chance of sustaining itself.

Secondly, in the absence of a political settlement,
we call the Council's attention to the humanitarian
crisis. The pledging of $2 billion at the humanitarian
conference in Geneva is a positive step. We welcome
the quick disbursement of the generous pledge of almost
$1 billion by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates. We call on all Member States to
follow this example and disburse their pledges as soon
as possible.

At the same time, pledges mean little if access is
not ensured. We call for the full implementation of the
presidential statement of 15 March (S/PRST/2018/5),
particularly the Council's clear call for the full and
sustained opening of all Yemen's ports for both
humanitarian and commercial goods. It is deeply
worrying that commercial food imports are still not at the
level that they were before the blockade was imposed in
November 2017. At the start of 2018, 8.4 million people
were severely food insecure and at risk of starvation,
which represents a 24 per cent increase since 2017.

The United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen (UNVIM) has a crucial role to
play in restoring the confidence of commercial shippers
that have stayed away since the start of the blockade.
UNVIM. has our full support, and we welcome the recent
steps taken to address this issue. It is equally important
that goods that have entered Yemen reach the people
who need them the most. Unimpeded access throughout
Yemen is essential, and unnecessary bureaucratic
impediments should be removed by all parties.

My third point is about the economy. Yemen cannot
survive on humanitarian aid alone. Due to inflation
and loss of income for many Yemenis, access to
commercially available supplies is rapidly decreasing.
It is essential that public sector salaries be paid across
Yemen - not only to provide income to millions of
Yemenis in need but also to enable the resumption of
essential public services, especially in the health and
sanitation sectors. With summer approaching, the
threat of a renewed cholera outbreak makes this issue
even more pressing.

In conclusion, the following steps need to be
taken by all parties to the conflict. Further escalation
must be prevented. Parties must engage with the
new Special Envoy without preconditions. Full and
sustained humanitarian and commercial access into
and throughout Yemen must be allowed. Urgent steps
must be taken to resume the payment of salaries and
restore public services. After more than three years of
conflict, the Yemeni people deserve nothing less than
our maximum efforts.

