Mr. Insanally (Guyana): Let me say first of all,
Mr. President, how pleased we are to see you in the
Chair - despite the very long day you have had today. I
also say a word of welcome to our new Deputy Secretary-
General, who has joined the Security Council for these
deliberations, and a word of appreciation to the delegation
of Gambia for its stewardship of the Council last month.

As a country which has always had close relations
with sister States in Africa, Guyana felt compelled to
participate in the Council's debate on the report which
has been presented by the Secretary-General for
consideration by the relevant organs and agencies of the
United Nations. Our participation, I hasten to add, was
not prompted by a belief that we have any advice to offer
Africa on how it should manage its affairs, but rather by
the sense of solidarity which we feel with its people.
Coming as we do from a similar colonial past, we share
many of their limitations and problems as well as their
hopes and aspirations for a better life. These historical
bonds led us over the years to our active role in the
struggle for African independence. Now, with the
liberation of the entire continent, we would wish to see
this political freedom not only preserved but fully
matched by economic independence.

The report is to be welcomed as an attempt to
highlight those issues that are critical to Africa's future
development. Written as it is in the first person, it reflects
the personal commitment of the Secretary-General,
himself an African, to the cause of that continent's
development. Equally reflective of his perceptions of the
Africa dialectic were the remarks he offered on the
launching of the report. He was careful to remind his
audience that not all of Africa was in difficult throes and
that conflict situations were fairly well defined. And
indeed, it may be observed that several African countries
now show encouraging prospects for economic
development. The Secretary-General also publicly
recognized Africa's capacity for dealing with most of its
own problems, making it clear that the recommendations
contained in the report were not intended to supplant, but
rather, as he said, to complement, the continent's own
efforts. We cannot but applaud these observations, since
we believe that Africa's failure in the past to achieve
progress has been due in large measure to the imposition
of external perceptions and prescriptions which did not
take account of the particularities of the continent's needs.

To its credit, this latest report of the Secretary-
General does not pretend to offer facile solutions to the
problems of African countries. Instead, it limits itself to
a broad survey of today's realities and to a brief
indication of those areas in which cooperation among
Governments of the region, the international community
and the United Nations can prove beneficial.
Consequently, the report may thus be better seen as a
framework for action rather than as an exhaustive
compendium of definitive proposals.

 
To turn now to specific parts of the report, beginning
with what may be called the political chapter, we find that
the analysis of conflict situations and their causes is both
comprehensive and perceptive. Some conflicts, particularly
those in recent years, do indeed have their roots in age-old
controversies and in ethnic divisions and rivalries. However,
external factors have also undoubtedly contributed to the
eruption of conflict in many places. Certainly, the major
arms-producing countries have been responsible for the
growing supply of weapons to fuel wars. In addition, as the
Secretary-General said, early-warning systems and adequate
peacekeeping and peace-building machinery are essential to
reduce the threat and consequences of conflict. We agree
with him entirely that greater emphasis must now be placed
on preventive diplomacy.

Our own experience in the Latin American and
Caribbean region has amply demonstrated that while the
United Nations must retain primary responsibility for
international peace and security, there are, as the Secretary-
General suggests, benefits to be derived from cooperation
between organizations within the ambit of their respective
constitutions. I recall the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity saying to this body that, for
want of a nail, the horse in Rwanda died. I think that
thereafter we learned the lesson of closer cooperation
among our respective organizations. Stronger regional
bodies that are closer to the local situation and are therefore
better able to understand and respond to them can help
stem the tide of conflict through the early initiation the
procedures for peaceful settlement set out in Article 33 of
the Charter.

However, while no one can deny the negative
consequences which conflicts hold for African countries, it
is fair to say, I believe, that the primary causes of political
and social instability in the region lie in the weak economic
and physical infrastructure which exists in most countries.
The ravages left by colonialism are not easily remedied. To
understand the phenomenon of African underdevelopment
today, one has to read the classic analysis by Walter
Rodney, a distinguished scholar and compatriot of mine, in
his seminal work, How Europe Underdeveloped Africa.
This book is indispensable to a full comprehension of the
difficulties in which some African countries find themselves
today.

Admittedly, it is not too helpful to dwell on the past
when one's energies can be better applied to shaping the
future. Very often, however, unless there is a true
appreciation of the fundamental issues involved, there can
be no guarantee of finding definitive and durable solutions
to outstanding problems. For the seeds of democracy,
good governance and human rights to germinate and grow
in Africa, one must remove the detritus of colonialism
and lay down structures that will be conducive to a new
culture.

Compounding the disadvantage of a weak physical
infrastructure is the serious debt overhang to which many
have referred and which now plagues most African
countries. The total debt, we are told, now stands at an
astronomical $338 billion. How can we truly speak of
development with that kind of burden? At the same time,
official development assistance remains extremely limited,
and with extremely low gross national product, more than
half of the continent's population lives in conditions of
dismal poverty. The eradication of poverty has therefore
to be a primary focus of international efforts in support of
Africa's development.

In such straitened circumstances one can understand
that some African countries are hardly in a position to
attract foreign investment, which, as we all know, flows
mainly to countries deemed to be safe havens. As a
consequence, many of these countries cannot take
advantage of arrangements to provide them with
preferential market access for their commodities, which
are, in any case, in the process of disappearing. Not
surprisingly, therefore, although Africa has almost 22 per
cent of the world's population, the continent accounts for
only 2 per cent of world trade. That, I think, is a very
telling figure. It is to be hoped, as the Secretary-General
says, that the special initiative already taken by the United
Nations to promote African development, as well as the
United Nations New Agenda for the Development of
Africa in the 19905 (UN-NADAF), will assist Africa, if
implemented properly, to make some progress in the next
decade. Of further encouragement, I should mention, are
the steps taken by your own Government, Mr. President,
the Government of Japan, and by the Government of the
United States to offer incentives for the expansion of
Africa's productive capacity. Such special programmes
could conceivably offer African countries the opportunity
for economic take-off.

In conclusion, let me echo the view that the report
goes beyond Africa and may apply, mutatis mutandis, to
other stricken regions of the world. Indeed, many of the
diagnoses and recommendations which it proffers can be
directed elsewhere. Developing countries everywhere,
therefore, will watch with interest to see how this report
will be implemented and we will do all in our power to
ensure that its promises are fulfilled. For the success or

 

failure of the measures which it presents will not be that of
Africa alone. The failure or success will be that of us all.
