Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, my country, the Syrian Arab
Republic, rejects and denounces the systematic
practices, as seen on the part of the permanent
delegations of the United States of America, France
and the United Kingdom. Those practices exploit the
Chamber provided by the Security Council in order to
denigrate the Syrian Government. Those delegations
have no legal, or indeed moral, legitimacy to call for
the holding of a meeting that focuses on humanitarian
issues in my country, Syria, because to date those
Governments have been involved in the direct
military aggression visited upon my country. Those
Governments have harboured armed terrorist groups,
killed thousands of Syrians, destroyed their property,
abducted, displaced them and stripped them of their
homes and property. Those Governments have also
imposed unilateral coercive economic measures on the
Syrian people.
Those Governments have the responsibility to
ensure the maintenance of international peace and
security. However, they have not really shown an
interest in human rights, the well-being of people
or the sovereignty of countries. For centuries those
Governments have behaved immorally. They have
distorted noble humanitarian goals for their own
agendas. They have manipulated the principles and
provisions of international humanitarian law and the
Charter of the United Nations to implement an ongoing,
hostile colonial agenda that legitimizes foreign
interference and seeks to topple legitimate regimes by
force, thereby destabilizing countries along sectarian
and religious lines. The list of examples of such conduct
is long and one of which all members are aware.

My Government does not oppose in principle
the convening of meetings on the situation in Syria,
including all aspects, when the sole purpose of such
meetings is to exchange points of view and opinions
in a transparent, professional and sincere way in order
to assist my country and to find genuine solutions that
will restore security and stability, as well as prosperity,
for all Syrian citizens without exception. Those citizens
have been worn down and are exhausted by the terrorist
war imposed on them for nine years now.

I call on the Security Council to seriously consider
what has been spent by the Governments of the United
States of America, the United Kingdom and France,
along with other countries in the region, in terms of
budget, efforts and weapons to ultimately harm Syria,
its land, its people and its Government and to settle new
and old scores with that Government. In so doing, they
are risking the lives, wealth and civilization of Syria
and its people. We are deeply concerned that those
Governments continue to impose their positions and
policies in many areas of the work of the United Nation
and on some of its civil servants so as to ultimately
sow a campaign of disinformation and to distort the
truth about what is taking place in Syria. They work
on the basis of dubious information and they use sly
and cunning terms in their reports and statements in
order to mislead international opinion and conceal
the suffering of civilians and the misdeeds of armed
terrorist groups. For the past nine years, those groups
have used civilians as human shields in the regions that
they control. They have attacked hospitals and schools
and turned them into military facilities and detention
centres for abductees. Those terrorist groups have
bombarded civilian areas with indiscriminate bombs
of hatred.
The Security Council remains unable to find
the means to really make it possible to tackle the
primary cause of the suffering of the Syrian people,
namely, terrorism and those who support it, owing to
the hostile positions adopted by many Governments
towards my country, Syria, including by the leadership
of the Governments of the United States of America,
the United Kingdom and France. Those Governments
refuse to combat terrorism, which plagues many
regions of Syria, in particular the north-western part
of the country, in order to protect the Al-Nusra Front
terrorist group. Those very Governments supported
armed terrorist groups that exfiltrated abductees
from Aleppo and rural Latakia to Turkey. Their fate
is still unknown. Those terrorist groups also abducted
thousands of civilians and put them in Al-Tawba prison,
in eastern Ghouta. Representatives will remember
the video recordings that were disseminated by the
terrorists when they controlled that region. The video
recordings showed the cruelty of those groups when
they handcuffed women and children and threw them
into cages and out into the street in heart-breaking and
horrific scenes, which recalled the very worst of the
darkest times of slavery.

To deliberately ignore referring to the fate of
thousands of missing persons and detainees at the
hands of terrorist groups and the suffering of their
families affirms once again the policy of double
standard that we see being adopted by a number of
United Nations mechanisms and countries in dealing
with humanitarian issues. The information that has
been gathered following the freeing of eastern Ghouta
and the eastern sections of Aleppo, as well as many
other regions of Syria, shows that terrorist groups had
assassinated thousands of Syrians and buried them in
mass graves. Every village town and region in Syria
that has been the victim of terrorism has its own tale of
the scandalous acts perpetrated by those Governments
that have supported religious and extremist terrorists,
financed and armed terrorists. and afforded them
political and media coverage while characterizing them
as "the moderate Syrian opposition", when what we are
actually talking about is terrorist groups that include
thousands of foreign terrorist fighters.

Some people are determined to exhaust the Council
by weighing down its agenda with meetings. At the same
time, the Government of my country is dealing with the
issue of detainees and missing persons from a purely
humanitarian perspective, setting aside any political
manipulation of humanitarian issues. The working
group on the release of detainees/abductees, handover
ofbodies and identification ofmissing persons has been
established as part of the Astana process. The working
group is responsible for dealing with the issues of
missing persons - in terms of providing clarification
around their fate - and of the release of detainees. It
is also responsible for dealing with prisoner swaps. My
Government is approaching the issue constructively
and believes that the working group is also functioning
constructively. Practical measures have been put in
place, the most recent of which was was an exchange
of prisoners last week, with the participation of the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria. We commend this work. This humanitarian
issue is being exploited for improper purposes, which
casts a shadow on the work and endeavours of this
mechanism, just as it casts a shadow over the positive
measures that have been put in place.

We would also say that the initiatives for national
reconciliation and the efforts of the Syrian Red Crescent
have borne fruit and made it possible to develop
significant measures on this issue. We affirm that
relevant legal authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic
are exercising their privileges and competencies in
addressing this issue, pursuant to the Constitution
and the substantive rules and procedures provided
for in civil and criminal law, including the code of
criminal procedure.

My country is participating in serious and
determined efforts undertaken with the Iranian
and Russian guarantors of the Astana process and
cooperating with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General's work in order to achieve a Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led political process, without foreign
interference of any kind. In Syria, we are committed to
finding a national political Syrian solution that is lasting
in nature. We are committed to destroying hotbeds of
terrorism in our country. We are also committed to
removing all occupying foreign forces, whose presence
is an attack on the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria. We will not accept the
blackmail practiced by some parties in the Security
Council or on Syrian territory.

In conclusion, over the past eight years the Security
Council has heard many provocative statements against
the Government of my country. Many of these statements
lack all credibility and are based, in the majority of
cases, on absolutely unreliable information. What we
are seeing is an attempt to provide disinformation. We
hope that, now that these eight years have elapsed, the
Council will be able to adopt an objective approach by
listening to the testimony of families whose members
have been subject to the worst forms of torture at the
hands of those whom the countries that have called for
the convening of this meeting call the "armed moderate
opposition" - a moderate opposition that has gone so
far as to throw abductees alive into ovens. We do not
want to see parties invited to these meetings that are
close to the intelligence services of Governments that
have supported and financed the terrorism responsible
for the worst possible crimes against the Syrian people.

