Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Argentina wishes to explain its position in
the voting that has just taken place on the draft resolution
in document S/1999/328, submitted by the delegations of
Belarus and the Russian Federation and co-sponsored by
the delegation of India.

In this connection, we wish to state that Argentina's
negative vote was based on the vital need to contribute to
putting an end to the extremely grave violations of human
rights that are taking place in the province of Kosovo,
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. These violations are
clearly documented in many reports of the Secretary-
General and inspire the many principles that lie at the
core of Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998) and 1203 (1998).

Argentina also wishes to stress that the fulfilment of
the legal norms of international humanitarian law and
human rights is a response to universally recognized and
accepted values and commitments. The obligation to
protect and ensure respect for these rights falls to
everyone and cannot and must not be debated. That
obligation is all the more urgent given that it has been
alleged, witnessed and proven that, in that region,
extremely serious international crimes have been

 

committed, including acts of genocide, some of which are
being tried in a special tribune established by this Council.

Since 1992, Argentina has been and remains involved
in the Balkans through peacekeeping operations. The
position we are taking here is based on our own direct
experience, acquired in the field. Ultimately, this position,
based on fundamental legal principles and on practical
experience, cannot come as a surprise. We cannot accept a
draft resolution that fails to mention earlier resolutions of
the Security Council on the question of Kosovo, disregards
the extremely grave humanitarian context and does not take
into account the background and precedents of that region.
Any document, statement or - as in this case - draft
resolution that does not recognize reality lacks balance. It
cannot contribute to a peaceful settlement of the problem
and encourages the most negative elements at work in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

For all these reasons, we once again respectfully urge
all of those with the capacity to exert influence in the
region, in particular the Russian Federation, to pursue their
valuable and recognized efforts to put an end to this
extremely grave crisis and to arrive at a comprehensive and
definitive agreement to restore lasting peace.

We sincerely sympathize with the victims of this
situation and we are prepared to do all within our capacity
to alleviate their suffering, particularly that of the refugees
and displaced persons, many of whom have forever lost
their homes.

