Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to welcome Mr. Jalil Abbas Jilani, Foreign
Secretary of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. Guatemala
thanks Pakistan for his excellent preparation for today's
open debate and for the concept note prepared for the
occasion (S/2013/4, annex). The concept note seeks
to open the discussion on the topic of peacekeeping
operations, one of the most important issues in the
work carried out by the Organization. We believe that,
after more than 10 years since the Security Council's
adoption of its last resolution on this specific topic,
it is appropriate to analyse and discuss the subject in
the light of recent developments and the status of such
missions.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing, and we note that Guatemala endorses the
statement that will be made by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Guatemala is a country that has benefitted from
United Nations peacekeeping, especially in the areas
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
after the signing of our peace accords in late 1996.
Subsequently, we begin to participate actively in
peacekeeping operations as a troop-contributing
country. In other words, our particular interest in the
topic arises from our dual status as a beneficiary of and
contributor to peacekeeping operations.

Since that time, we have seen the adaptation of
peacekeeping operations to each of the changing and
unique challenges emerging in the field. In that regard,
multidimensional mandates have been adopted to allow
many of those operations to implement key elements for
achieving sustainable peace during their lifespan. We
endorse that approach, as we believe that peacekeeping
operations must in some cases be complemented by
activities that contribute to achieving real improvements
in the living conditions of the affected populations.

As a corollary, we believe that one of the fundamental
issues for the proper execution of multidimensional
operations is that they must have clear, achievable and
verifiable mandates that are adapted to the particular

situation of each case. For that reason, we consider it
important that, in establishing and reviewing mandates,
the Security Council take into account all the tools at
its disposal, according to the needs of each case and
situation. We also believe that in order to successfully
implement the mandates, one must address the issue
of the gaps that still exist in terms of capabilities,
resources and training through greater coordination
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries. Additionally, we believe
that any periodic evaluation by the Secretariat of any
peacekeeping operation must be shared with troop-
contributing countries.

In all peacekeeping operations, each country brings
a unique contribution. The particular contributions that
each troop-contributing country can provide must be
recognized and encouraged. Similarly, it is important
to further improve the triangular cooperation between
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-
contributing countries in the decision-making process
and during the implementation of mandates. That would
include consultations on all aspects and in every stage
of peacekeeping operations, particularly when it comes
to adjusting mandates, periodic mission assessments
and changes in the number of troops.

In our View, peacekeeping operations should not
be seen as an outsourcing exercise whereby developed
countries employ the troops of developing countries to
carry out this difficult and dangerous task based on an
estimate of cost per person. Among other things, that
is offensive to all troop-contributing countries and for
all those people who risk their lives for the purposes of
the Organization. For Guatemala, these operations do
not represent a paid service, but rather the fulfillment
of an ideal - to participate under the banner of the
United Nations in order to maintain international peace
and security. Therefore, what motivates my country
to participate in peacekeeping operations is the pride
and professionalism of our armed forces, as well as a
sense of commitment to the highest ideals of the United
Nations. For those reasons, Guatemala will continue to
provide peacekeeping operations with personnel with
the highest standards of efficiency, competence and
integrity.

Finally, we want to emphasize once again the
importance and key role of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations as the only forum with
the mandate to thoroughly review the entire question
of United Nations peacekeeping operations in all its
aspects. While we consider it appropriate and useful to
discuss the topic of peacekeeping operations within the
Security Council, we believe that the Council should
not stumble into an exercise in micromanagement of
specific aspects of those missions.

