Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to thank the Secretary-General
for his latest report on the situation in Somalia. We also
take this opportunity to welcome his decision to
appoint Mr. Winston Tubman as his new
Representative for Somalia. We wish Mr. Tubman
every success in his efforts. We also wish to welcome
Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia and wish him success in his efforts.

Allow me here to highlight some specific points
that are of importance to Egypt. First, in its presidential
statement of 31 October 2001 (S/PRST/2001/30), the
Security Council reiterated its support for the outcome
of the Arta conference and the establishment of the
Transitional National Government. We therefore expect
that the efforts the Council will be focused on the
completion of the Arta process and the promotion of
the national reconciliation process based on it. That
should be done by encouraging and urging all Somali
factions and groups to join the efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
in this framework, which we hope will be crowned
with success at the reconciliation conference to be held
at Nairobi next month. We also hope that the Council
will invite all States that have influence on those
factions to exercise that influence in a constructive
manner so as to guarantee the participation of all
Somali parties in the conference and ensure that it is a
success.

Secondly, at a time when the efforts aimed at
achieving national reconciliation are continuing and
when the Transitional National Government is
attempting to include as many of the factions as
possible in the institutions established by the Arta
process, those efforts are still being held hostage by the
warlords to their personal interests, as well as by the
armed hostilities that periodically erupt in different
parts of the country. If the international community is
unable to take concrete steps to disarm and demobilize
the militia elements whose intransigence obstructs the
peace process - especially those in Mogadishu -
then we expect the Council, at the very least, to take
the initiative to implement its own resolutions by
enforcing the arms embargo imposed by resolution 733
(1992) and by establishing a specific mechanism to
monitor compliance with the embargo and to guarantee
its enforcement. There is no excuse for the embargo
imposed on Somalia to be the sole exception that elicits
no interest, when we find the Council so eager to
shoulder its responsibilities in enforcing the sanctions
regimes it previously imposed on the Taliban in
Afghanistan, the Revolutionary United Front in Sierra
Leone, UNITA in Angola and others.

Thirdly, the delegation of Egypt takes note of the
comments of the Secretary-General's report on
launching a peace-building mission in Somalia. While
we appreciate the reasons and justifications that led the
Secretary-General not to recommend deploying the
mission to the country at this stage, we affirm that the
United Nations must be ready to face the challenges
and dangers it may confront in Somalia as it does
elsewhere in the regions and countries where United
Nations personnel are present. We cannot afford to wait
for optimal security conditions to proceed with the
deployment of the mission, especially as such
reasoning would only lead us into a vicious circle
dissipating any real hope of providing security, peace
and welfare for the Somali people, who have known
nothing but war and poverty for the last decade.

Fourthly, the delegation of Egypt welcomes the
approach suggested by the Secretary-General of
establishing a committee of friends for Somalia based
in Nairobi, with a parallel committee here in New
York. While this initiative represents a step in the right
direction, it should not be seen as in end in itself.
Rather, it should be seen as a point of departure not
only for coordinating and harmonizing the various
approaches adopted by the relevant States and
organizations but also for regaining the central role that
the United Nations must play in pushing the peace
process in Somalia, promoting national reconciliation
and responding to the immediate and long-term needs
of Somalia as it attempts to regain its normal place in
the international community.

