Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for being with the Security Council once
again and for convening today's important debate. I
also thank Secretary of State Pompeo for taking the
time to join the Council today, and I welcome State
Secretary Michaelis.

Last year we commemorated the centenary of the
end of the First World War - a war that did much to
shape the modern Middle East. Many of the conflicts
in the region have their origins in the First World War
and the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire. The end of
the First World War also led to the establishment of the
League of Nations. That, in turn, laid the foundation
for the United Nations. Many of the conflicts that have
wrought so much destruction in the region - from
Syria to Yemen and from Libya to Gaza - continue
to feature prominently on the Council's agenda. The
region's current trajectory is troubling and fraught
with the risk of still further conflagration and conflict.
Ms. Viotti mentioned the difficulty of managing
escalation in today's world. And while our efforts at
multilateral solutions have not always worked out as
well as we might have hoped, the alternative looks
decidedly worse.

Experience tells us that, however imperfect,
de-escalation and dialogue, political processes and
support for the rules-based international system are the
best means to address tensions that risk undermining
our collective interests in security, stability and
prosperity. We know that is true around the world, and
it is quite true of the situation in the Middle East today.
That is why the United Kingdom remains a steadfast
supporter of the United Nations and the Council's
efforts to resolve international conflict.

Secretary of State Pompeo and State Secretary
Michaelis mentioned the importance of regional
efforts. In recent weeks, a number of members of the
Council - most recently our Russian colleagues - have
also mentioned the importance of finding a way to
collectively address some of the underlying challenges.
That may well be an idea whose time is yet to come, not
least because the region itselfneeds to be ready for such
work. But we believe it is important that we look in an
exploratory way at what might be possible and where
we might start. One option might be to start with the
most recent trouble spot ~ the Strait of Hormuz - and
begin serious, inclusive dialogue between regional and
international actors, as the State Secretary of Germany
set out.

Secretary Pompeo touched today on Iran's role in
the region. My country has great respect for the Iranian
people. We respect Iran's culture. It is an ancient culture
and one that features alongside the great developments
in classical history in Europe. We accept that Iran has
a legitimate role in the Middle East. And we accept
that, like all of us, it has a right to self-defense. But
we cannot ignore the fact that the way it pursues its
national interests contributes to several of the regional
problems we are discussing today.

When I addressed the Council in the resolution
2231 (2015) format in June, I reiterated that the priority
of United Kingdom policy towards Iran was to prevent
Iran achieving a nuclear capability that would threaten
the stability and security of the Middle East region
and beyond. As the representative of Germany set
out, we continue to judge that this objective is best
served by efforts to preserve the nuclear deal, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We urge Iran
to return to full compliance with the deal. It is in none
of our interests to see the deal unravel. It is an essential
part of the global non-proliferation architecture. And it
is critical for our national security and for the shared
security of our partners and allies. There is no better
solution. There is no alternative.

The United Kingdom, with France and Germany,
has been consistently clear that we will work to support
the deal. We remain fully committed to the delivery
of the INSTEX mechanism, thereby ensuring that
legitimate trade with Iran can continue. We continue to
participate in core projects within the deal, including
taking on the role of co-chair of the Arak modernization
project. We also welcome President Macron's efforts to
find a way through to dialogue in close coordination
with the three European signatories.

The JCPOA is not a licence for Iran to roam
free across the conflicts in the Middle East. Iran
continues to support proxies across the region that
undermine regional security and violate Security
Council resolutions, whether resolution 1559 (2004),
on Lebanon, or 2216 (2015), and the arms embargo on
Yemen. We regret that, rather than backing a political
solution in Syria in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
Iran has instead chosen to support Al-Assad in pursuing
a military solution, including through organizing and
sending sectarian militias to Syria, which has helped
fuel that conflict. This pattern of Iranian behaviour
poses a serious danger to peace and stability.

Secretary Pompeo mentioned that on 19 July a
British-flag tanker, Stena Impero, was boarded by
Iranian forces while transiting through the Strait of
Hormuz inside Omani territorial waters. The Stena
Impero remains seized. As the Chef de Cabinet noted, it
is imperative that we defend the freedom of navigation
in the Strait of Hormuz to reassure the global shipping
industry and to deter further attacks. This is not just
the British aim; it is in every nation's interests, and it
requires the coming together of international nations to
support maritime security in the Gulf.

I will not touch much today on Syria, because the
Council has very many meetings on that sad conflict.
But I will simply note that there can be no reconstruction
without a sustainable, United Nations-led political
process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015).

With regard to the Iranian vessel Grace 1, we
have welcomed Gibraltar's recent actions and legal
proceedings to implement European Union (EU)
sanctions, which are in place to pressure the AI-Assad
regime towards negotiations. We understand that
Iran has provided assurances to the Government of
Gibraltar that the vessel and its cargo will not go to an
EU-sanctioned entity such as Syria. Iran needs to abide
by those assurances.

We urgently need a cease fire in Idlib to prevent
further suffering. We need answers as to why and how
international humanitarian law is being so flagrantly
violated by the regime and its allies. I want to recall, if
I may, that such crimes confer individual and personal
responsibility on the perpetrators. The violations also
continue to create space for radicalization and further
extremism, and Da'esh continues to pose a serious
threat across the region.

We cannot take for granted the progress that has
been made in Iraq in providing security and stability
for the Iraqi people. The United Kingdom, alongside
the international community, will continue to support
the Government of Iraq to ensure that the conditions
that gave rise to Da'esh are tackled.

The situation in Libya is in danger of deteriorating
still further. Over the past four months, it has become
clear neither side can win a military victory. The only
winners in the current conflict are the terrorist and
extremist groups that look to exploit the chaos and
instability for their own ends. As others have said,
the way forward is for the parties to comply with their
obligations under international law and commit to
political dialogue and a lasting ceasefire.

Likewise, a political solution is urgently needed in
Yemen - not only to end the conflict but to alleviate the
immense humanitarian suffering. We urge the parties
to agree the latest United Nations proposals to allow
for wider political discussions. The events of concern
in Aden serve to highlight the need for an inclusive
political process. We welcome the initiative taken by
His Majesty King Salman to resolve the situation.

In the context of heightened tensions in the region,
it is more important than ever that the Lebanese
Government and all Lebanese parties implement
Lebanon's policy of disassociation from regional
conflicts. We call on all parties to implement the
relevant resolutions in full, particularly resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1701 (2006). For our part, we will continue
to help build the strength and capacity of the Lebanese
State to resist encroachment by Hizbullah. We will help
Lebanon achieve economic stability, while making
swift progress on implementing the commitments
made at the Conference for Economic Development and
Reform through Enterprise.

I want to take this opportunity to commend the role
played by the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) in maintaining calm and stability along the
Blue Line. But I stress at the same time the importance
of enabling UNIFIL to deliver its mandate unimpeded.
It is unacceptable that UNIFIL is still unable to access
HizbulIah tunnel sites in southern Lebanon. Other
speakers have addressed the question of a sustainable
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. As the Chef
de Cabinet said, it is the longest-running international
peace and security issue here. For the United Kingdom,
our position on the two-State solution remains
unchanged. We urge the United States Administration
to bring forward its detailed proposals for viable peace
agreement that addresses the legitimate concerns of
both parties.

Efforts by the United States to support the
development of the Palestinian economy are very
welcome. It is essential that political progress be
made in order to unlock economic opportunities. But,
as we have said in the Council before, until there is
political progress, steps need to be taken to address the
constraints imposed on the Palestinian economy by the
Israeli occupation. We want to see increasing external
trade opportunities for the Palestinians. We want to see
the financial sustainability of the Palestinian Authority
realized. Only a safe and secure Israel living alongside
a viable and sovereign Palestinian State, based on the
1967 borders, with Jerusalem as a shared capital ofboth
States, can bring about a lasting solution.

I have concentrated today on the geopolitical
and international peace and security aspects as
the most immediate challenges facing us. But you,
Mr. President, and a number of other speakers, rightly
drew attention to the vital importance of economic and
social development, notably for women. I agree on the
importance of this area. But I want to make clear that
it is, however, not an excuse for certain Governments
to divert funds that could be better spent at home on
the very real things that help build the State towards
violence, persecution and adventurism. You, Sir, spoke
about good governance, education and youth. I want to
stress our new Prime Minister's interest in advancing
girls' education in particular. But it is also true that
investment, equality before the law and the rule of law
are also fundamental, and Secretary Pompeo set out
how the Warsaw process includes economic and public
policy factors.

To go back to where I started, we cannot see
the countries of the Middle East exploit fully the
opportunity to modernize their economies when we see
the sort ofpush-back on women's rights that the Chef de
Cabinet mentioned. The current tensions and instability
in the Middle East serve no one. I want to call again
for de-escalation, for full respect for international rules
and for engagement in dialogue through which the
region can discuss its problems transparently and in
the interests of the populations there who have suffered
so much.

