Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic of
Korea welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2166 (2014), on the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-l7 in eastern Ukraine. On behalf of the people and
the Government of the Republic of Korea, I once again
extend my most heartfelt condolences to all the affected
countries and bereaved families. We share their sorrow
during this difficult time.

We would like to welcome the Foreign Ministers of
Australia, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, to whom
we offer our solidarity.

We believe that the resolution we adopted today
is a firm and united response by the international
community to the heinous act of downing a civilian
aircraft. The most urgent task before us at this moment
is to establish the solid facts ofwhat caused this tragedy
to occur and who is responsible for it, through a full,
thorough and independent international investigation.
We recognize in particular the role of the International
Civil Aviation Organization and the Ukrainian
Government in conducting such an international
investigation. We have full confidence in the supporting
role of the United Nations in that regard.

In order to shed full light on the tragedy, no less
pressing is the need to preserve the integrity ofthe crash
site and to secure immediate, safe and unrestricted
access to it by competent international investigators. It
is also vital that the bodies of the victims be recovered
without delay and treated in a dignified and respectful
manner. We very much hope that the resolution will
be instrumental in ensuring a credible international
investigation through its full implementation by all
parties concerned, particularly the separatist armed
groups.

The Security Council should remain vigilant as to
developments on the ground and respond further if what
is required by the resolution does not fully materialize.
We once again stress that the perpetrators of the incident,
ifit turns out to be the result ofa deliberate attack, must
be brought to justice as promptly as possible.

