Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Sidikou and Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for
their briefings.

The political process in the Democratic Republic
of Congo is at a critical junction. President Kabila
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of
Congo are committed to advancing national dialogue,
safeguarding State stability and promoting economic
and social development, which China welcomes.

In the meantime, the security situation in the country
remains quite fragile. The achievement of lasting
peace, prosperity and development is an arduous task
and has a long way to go. It therefore needs continued
support from the international community. The Council
visited the Democratic Republic of Congo and Angola
in early November, which reflects the importance
that the Security Council attaches to the issue of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. China would like to
make the following observations on this issue.

First, we resolutely promote the political process in
the Democratic Republic of Congo. The Government
of the Democratic Republic of Congo and the relevant
opposition parties have signed a political agreement
tht covers the election schedule, the establishment of a
political transition and the appointment of a new Prime
Minister. China welcomes those developments. We call
on the opposition parties that are not yet part of the
national dialogue to sign onto the the political agreement
as soon as possible, resolve their differences through
dialogue and dedicate themselves to the peace, stability
and development of the country. The international
community should respect the development path
independently chosen by the Democratic Republic of
Congo and, on the basis of respecting the sovereignty of
the Democratic Republic of Congo, provide constructive
assistance to the political process.

Secondly, we vigorously promote security and
stability in the country. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the Democratic Republic of
Congo governing forces have made positive headway
in their fight against armed groups. Countries in the
Great Lakes region are interdependent; their security
is closely connected. China encourages countries
in the region to continue with the implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Region.
Furthermore, it calls on them to make more progress
in the implementation of the Nairobi Declaration and
in their response to the threat posed by armed groups.

Thirdly, the roles of regional and subregional
organizations should have full play. The African Union
(AU) has played an important role in facilitating national
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) held a high-level meeting on the topic and
issued a communique, which demonstrates the support
of countries in the region for a political settlement
of the problem. The United Nations should give full
play to the comparative advantages of regional and
subregional organizations, such as the AU and ICGLR,
thereby strengthening coordination and cooperation
with each other with a view to creating synergy. China
appreciates and supports the positive role ofMONUSCO
in promoting peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and advancing the political process,
including disarmament and demobilization.

The Chinese Government has always supported
the peace process of the Democratic Republic of
Congo and, over the years, has provided assistance to
its nation-building efforts within its capacity. We have
also sent peacekeepers to MONUSCO. Along with the
broader international community, China stands ready
to continue our constructive role in the realization of
peace, stability and development in the Democratic
Republic of Congo.

