Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I am making these
remarks in my dual capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1521 (2003) concerning Liberia - the Liberia sanctions
Committee - and Chair of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations.

The Liberia sanctions Committee was established
almost 10 years ago. Pakistan chaired it in 2003 and
2004. At that time, Liberia was taking initial steps away
from a debilitating civil war. Since then, Liberia has
come a long way in its quest to restore peace, security
and stability. With the support of the United Nations,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States, the country has made substantial
progress.

The role of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) has been instrumental in achieving these
gains. Pakistani peacekeepers have remained an integral
part ofUNMIL since its inception. We take pride in our
association with Liberia as a troop contributor and as
Chair of the Liberia sanctions Committee twice during
the past decade, which has seen Liberia's transition
from civil war to stability.

Over the past two years, the Committee has held
six informal consultations in the light of reports
submitted by the Panel of Experts, and taken several
follow-up actions. My predecesssor, in his capacity as
Chair of the Committee, Visited Liberia in May 2012.
His interaction with the Liberian stakeholders on the
ground helped us to fine-tune the general directions of
the sanctions regime.

The Panel's reports have identified both progress
and shortcomings. In its most recent report, the Panel
has concluded that a majority of the individuals and
entities listed for assets freezes and travel bans do not
pose a threat to peace and stability in Liberia and the
subregion. There are some cases of concern among
the listed entities and individuals. The Panel does not
find any evidence that revenues from the diamond
and alluvial-gold sectors are providing financing for
weapons and arm smuggling.

The Panel has, however, identified huge institutional
capacity deficits in the Liberian Government and
security forces in the following areas: diamond
trafficking and gold mining, the marking of arms, the
legal framework to prevent trafficking in illicit arms,
conflict related to palm-oil production, accountability
and oversight in the forestry sector, land-tenure issues,
threats posed by the cross-border military activities of
Liberian mercenaries and Ivorian militias, and security
concerns along the Liberia-Sierra Leone border. The
panelists have confirmed that Liberia's inability to
pass a firearms-control act to ensure the marking of
arms and ammunition and to interdict armed groups
in the interior boils down to capacity issues. This is a
prime factor in slowing down the full implementation
of sanctions.

The fundamental questions before the Council
today are how to consolidate the achievements made
so far, how to maintain the momentum towards peace
and stability, and how to decide on the nature and
role of sanctions in the future. The decision to lift the
sanctions should be based on the Council's collective
politicaljudgement. As I relinquish my responsibilities,
the Council is inclined towards scaling down the
sanctions gradually, in consultation with the Liberian
Government. Liberia still faces many challenges. These
include a frail State security apparatus, land-rights
issues and ineffectual natural-resources management.
Transnational organized crime and illicit drug
trafficking are becoming major problems.

The Council wants to use sanctions most efficiently
and effectively. There is a time for imposing them and
a time for winding them down. No country would like
to remain under sanctions indefinitely. I would say, in
my personal capacity, that we should scale back but not
disengage or lower our guard. It should be a measured,
calibrated response from the Council.

Before rendering this report, I held meetings with
the Permanent Representative of Liberia and members
of the Panel. They concur that the situation in Liberia
remains fragile and fraught with danger. As UNMIL
moves towards drawdown, the nature of the United
Nations engagement with the Liberian authorities
should be modulated to help the Liberian Government
build its capacities, including its civilian capacities.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission, regional
and subregional organizations and the international
financial institutions remains crucial in this context.
Our efforts should be in sync with the Government's
priorities for institution-building. Liberia's security
cooperation with Guinea, Sierra Leone and Cote
D'Ivoire should be bolstered to build a broader strategic
approach to establishing regional stability.

Finally, I acknowledge with deep appreciation the
cooperation and support of all Committee members. I
also thank Committee Secretary Kelvin Ong, Political
Affairs Officer Anne Viken and Assistant Maria
Carmela Javier-Bobby for their support to the work of
the Committee. I also commend the comprehensive,
solid and substantive work done by the members of the
Panel - Christian Dietrich, Caspar Fithen and Lansana
Gberie - over the past two years. They are thorough
and very hard-working.

I now turn to the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, which I have chaired in 2013. Ambassador
Mohammed Louliehki of Morocco ably carried out that
responsibility in 2012. For Pakistan, it was a unique
honour to be a top troop contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping and to lead the Working Group. We
started off in 2013 with the adoption of resolution 2086
(2013) in January, under Pakistan's presidency. That
comprehensive resolution on peacekeeping, the first of
its kind in over a decade, focused on multidimensional
missions based on a comprehensive approach to
addressing complex crises involving security, political,
humanitarian and development aspects.

The spotlight and new momentum on peacekeeping
generated by resolution 2086 (2013) were sustained
in the activities of the Working Group, which, in
accordance with its mandate, considered a number of
mission-specific and crosscutting thematic issues. In
February, in the run-up to the renewal of the mandate
of the African Union Mission in Somalia, the Working
Group brought together the representatives of the
African Union, the troop-contributing countries, and
senior leadership from the Secretariat to discuss and
address the challenges in Somalia. The discussion on
safety and security underscored the need for elaborate
force-protection measures, emergency evacuation
plans, the deployment of critical enablers and clear and
achievable mandates backed by adequate resources.

The Working Group also took up the use of modern
technologies in United Nations peacekeeping operations
in the wake of the authorization for deployment of
unarmed, unmanned aerial systems in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The exchange of views in the
related legal, operational, political and administrative
aspects was rich. The Group underlined the need for
fuller discussion of the issue in the relevant United
Nations forums. The deliberations of the Working
Group on transition and drawdown were timely, given
that several multidimensional missions were and are at
various stages of these processes.

In another meeting, the Working Group held
discussions on a capability-driven approach, which
is vital to enhancing the effectiveness of missions
in view of their evolving nature and complex and
challenging mandates. The discussion brought forth
the importance of planning and training, the provision
of adequate military resources - particularly critical
enablers such as aviation and engineering assets - and
the efficient utilization of resources in mission areas.
The important and evolving role of United Nations
policing in peacekeeping and the related challenges
and opportunities were discussed in November in the
first-ever meeting of the Working Group dedicated to
United Nations police. At its final substantive meeting,
scheduled for 20 December, the Working Group will
look into issues related to force generation and mission
start-up.

Before concluding, I should like to make some
personal observations.

First, the Working Group is one of the most
important subsidiary bodies because of the centrality of
peacekeeping to the Council's work. The Working Group
has a lot of space and opportunity to be proactive and
support the Council's deliberations on peacekeeping.
We try to do just that. I am pleased to report that the
Working Group had a substantive and dynamic agenda,
and it was responsive to current peacekeeping issues.

Secondly, we planned early and developed a good
understanding among members on a range of indicative
topics and issues, and covered many of them in great
detail.

Thirdly, from the procedural point of view, it was
all along a smooth affair. All credit goes to the members
of the Working Group who extended full cooperation
to the Chair. The Secretariat supported us ably. We
consulted them extensively and benefitted from their
engagement and briefings at the highest levels. I would
like to convey our deepest gratitude to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and his peacekeeping team,
led by Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous and
Under-Secretary-General Ameerah Haq, and all their
colleagues for their availability, advice and contribution
to our work. I convey my appreciation to Mr. Movses
Abelian and his team, in particular Mr. Nikolai Galkin
and his predecessor, for facilitating our work. I am also
happy to inform the Council that there will be a website
for the Working Group in the coming days.

Fourthly, one of the objectives we set at the very
beginning was to strengthen the synergy among the
Security Council, the troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat. Although we could
not hold an exclusive meeting on the subject, we
promoted such cooperation in practice by creating an
environment for full engagement and participation
by them in all our meetings. That open interaction
enriched our discussions and enhanced transparency
and inclusiveness in our work

