Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As
this is this first time that I take the floor under your
presidency, Sir, on behalf of my delegation, I would
like to express my sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
I also wish to welcome the presence of Mr. Benjamin
William Mkapa, East African Community Facilitator
of the inter-Burundi dialogue and former President of
Tanzania, to whom we renew our trust and full support.
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his first report (S/2017/l65) on the situation in Burundi,
even though my delegation is not in agreement with
some of its assertions and shortcomings.

Among other things, the report refers to what he
called the intention of the current President to seek
a so-called fourth term of office, thereby forgetting
that constitutional matters fall exclusively under
the sovereignty of States Members and that of their
peoples. My delegation would like to recall that the
current President is exercising his second term of office
in accordance with the judgment of the Constitutional
Court of the Republic of Burundi delivered on
4 May 2015 and that of the Court of the East African
Community delivered on 19 July 2015, which both
confirmed the legality of the candidacy of President
Pierre Nkurunziza in 2015. Moreover, my delegation
believes that referring to a fourth term of office that the
President has not announced is indicative of the double
standards of which Burundi has been a victim since
2005, because no such concern has ever been raised by
another United Nations authority with regard to cases of
fourth, fifth, sixth or even seventh terms of office that
have been seen almost everywhere else in the world.

In paragraph 20, the report also recklessly uses
the word "militia" to characterize the youth group
affiliated with the ruling party. The choice of that word
is inappropriate because it is falls outside the lexicon
that has already been agreed in the Security Council.
Dating from resolution 2248 (2015), and extending to
resolutions 2303 (2016) and 2279 (2016), the Council
has never used that heavily charged word, preferring on
each occasion to use careful and balanced language to
designate young people affiliated with political parties
without singling out a specific group of young people
according to certain criteria.

Furthermore, the report refers to cases of forced
disappearances in Burundi. It should be recalled here
that that phenomenon is a global threat from which
no nation, unfortunately, is spared. The statistic of
more than 200 cases in connection with that allegation
was cited without supporting evidence or serious
investigations, and did not take into account the cases
of young people who have fled the country to undergo
paramilitary training in a neighbouring country and
who have been intentionally declared missing. Of
the more than 150 young people handed over by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Government
of Burundi, some of them were on the list of missing
persons. Caution, therefore, must be exercised before
levelling such an allegation.
I will not go into the details of the report, as the
time allotted to me is too short. Everyone has received
a comprehensive document that contains our comments
and observations in connection with the report. I will
now quickly skip to the political, security and human
rights situation in Burundi.

On the political level, the Commission nationale
de dialogue interburundais continues as normal both at
home and abroad. At the external level, we commend
the outstanding work of the Facilitator of inter-Burundi
dialogue, His Excellency Mr. Benjamin William Mkapa,
who just organized the fourth dialogue session in
Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, which took place
from 16 to 19 February. We reiterate our confidence
in, and support for, his work. The Government of
Burundi remains committed in a spirit of good faith to
that process in an inclusive manner, with the exception,
of course, of the coup leaders of 13 May 2015, who
today are on the run and under the protection of certain
United Nations States Members.

From the security perspective, while we recognize
the several challenges that continue to require our
attention, the situation on the ground is apparent,
which no one can deny. The overall security situation
throughout the country is good.

With regard to human rights and imprisonments,
several hundred prisoners have been released since
2015. In 2017, 2,500 prisoners benefited from a
presidential pardon granted at the end of 2016. Among
those, 2,246 have already rejoined their families.

With regard to freedom of expression, 20 public
and private local radio stations, 4 community radio
stations, 7 radio stations broadcasting on the territory
of Burundi, 2 local news agencies, 24 public and
private periodicals, 17 Internet sites and 12 associations
and professional bodies of the press are operational. In
addition to these private radio stations, international
radio stations include Radio France Internationale, the
Voice of America and Deutsche Welle.

As regards the freedoms of assembly, opinion,
association and religion, the Government has already
approved more than 6,500 non-profit associations, of
which more than 100 have been approved since January
2016. Fifteen non-profit organizations that had been
under investigation since the failed coup d'etat of May
13 2015 were authorized to reopen.

With regard to cooperation between the United
Nations and Burundi, my Government's great concern
is to strengthen and perpetuate our relations with the
United Nations. In order to ensure the presence of the
United Nations in the field of human rights, a draft
cooperation agreement with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights is under discussion
between the two parties. The Office of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General is also functioning.
We eagerly await the appointment of another United
Nations official to lead the Burundi dossier and expedite
the signature of the framework for cooperation between
Burundi and the Office.

We commend the fruitful cooperation with
the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, led by the Ambassador of Switzerland,
my colleague Jiirg Lauber.

