Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I also wish to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for her valuable briefing.

The Middle East continues to suffer from crises
that negatively affect the political, economic and social
situations of the countries and peoples of the region.
The situation requires tireless efforts to find solutions to
the root causes of conflict in the Middle East, the most
prominent of which is the ongoing Israeli occupation
of the Palestinian territories. That occupation is a
source of conflict and violence that will continue to
grow if the Palestinians do not enjoy their legitimate
right to freedom and statehood, with East Jerusalem as
their capital.

Jordan is continuing its efforts to protect Jerusalem
and its Islamic and Christian holy sites by continuing
its custodianship. His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn
Al Hussein is devoting all of the Kingdom's available
resources to preserving the Christian, Islamic and
Arab identity of holy sites and their historical and legal
status quo. We recall here that Jerusalem is the basis
for peace. Compromising Jerusalem and its holy sites
therefore constitutes a threat to international peace and
security. We condemn the opening by the occupying
Israeli authorities of the so-called Pilgrims Road in the
village of Silwan, which leads to the holy sanctuary of
Al-Aqsa Mosque.

We caution against those irresponsible and illegal
measures that are increasing tension. We express our
categorical rejection of all Israeli attempts to change
the identity of the Old City of Jerusalem, in particular
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and its adjacent sites. Such Israeli
practices constitute a flagrant violation of international
law and international humanitarian law and are in
continued violation of UNESCO's resolutions calling
for the cessation of all illegal Israeli excavations in the
Old City of Jerusalem which are in clear contradiction
of international norms.

The issue of Palestinian refugees is one of
the final-status issues to be dealt with within the
framework of a comprehensive solution, in accordance
with the Arab Peace Initiative and resolutions of
international legitimacy, the most prominent of which
is General Assembly resolution 194 (III), and in a
manner that guarantees refugees the right to return and
receive reparations.

Until such action is taken, it is essential that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) continue to
provide basic services to more than 5 million Palestinian
refugees in order to guarantee them a decent standard
of living. In that context, I would like to extend my
sincere thanks to all of the countries that participated
in UNRWA's pledging conference, held last month, for
their continued political and financial support for the
Agency. That support sends the message to millions of
Palestinian refugees that the international community
will continue to fight for them until a just and fair
solution is reached.

The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) reflected
the international community's condemnation of all
Israeli settlement activities. We condemn yesterday's
demolition by Israeli authorities of dozens of
Palestinian residential units in the Sur Baher area of
East Jerusalem. We express our categorical rejection
of settlement policies in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, which include
the construction of settlements and the expansion of
existing settlements, the policy of land confiscation
and demolition, the expulsion of residents and the
construction of surrounding roads, as well as other
policies and measures aimed at forcibly displacing
residents. That represents a flagrant violation of
international law and Security Council resolutions. We
call on the Israeli authorities to immediately cease those
practices, which deepen despair, increase tension and
have a fundamental impact on the two-State solution.

The Syrian crisis has now entered its ninth year.
We reiterate our firm and clear position, which has
remained unchanged since the beginning of the crisis,
namely, that only a political solution can end the
suffering in Syria. We also reiterate our full support
for the efforts of the United Nations, particularly
those of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen, who has called
for a solution based on resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), which
would preserve the territorial integrity of Syria and
its sovereignty, while achieving stability and national
reconciliation and creating the conditions necessary for
development, reconstruction and the return of displaced
persons and refugees.

In conclusion, we reiterate our firm position that
the solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can
be achieved only by ending the Israeli occupation
through the establishment of an independent and viable
Palestinian State on the borders of 4 June 1967, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, based on international
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and relevant
United Nations resolutions.

