Mr. Matjila (South Africa): My delegation would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting on peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
with its focus on strengthening partnerships for
successful nationally owned transitions.

We thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres,
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
representatives of the World Bank and the African
Development Bank for their valuable briefings. We also
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti and
the Minister Legal Reforms and Parliamentary Affairs
of Timor-Leste.

South Africa appreciates the work done by the
Secretary-General and the progress made in addressing
existing gaps in the United Nations system to assist
countries in their efforts towards peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. While we recognize that it is the
primary responsibility of national Governments and
authorities to identify, drive and direct priorities,
strategies and activities for peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, the international community has an
obligation to ensure that it assists in the maintenance
of peace and security, which includes partnership
for development to ensure the implementation of
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals, which are necessary
for addressing the root causes of conflict.

In that regard, South Africa continues to support
the ongoing work of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) to promote national ownership in political and
peace and security processes in the pursuit of peaceful
and resilient societies. Such societies will be realized
only when the root causes and underlying currents of
conflicts are addressed. We believe that any support for
post-conflict reconstruction and development activities
should be tailor-made to suit country-specific needs. For
that to be sustainable local ownership and leadership
are required, with the meaningful participation of
women and the involvement of youth.

It is also our considered view that effective
peacebuilding during transition periods must involve
the entire United Nations system, focusing on enhancing
United Nations cross-pillar coordination, including
development, peace and security and human rights.
We therefore reaffirm our support for strengthened
cooperation between the PBC and the Security Council,
particularly when the Council is considering the review
and drawdown of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. However, the Security Council must
ensure from the outset that peace operation mandates
for peacekeeping and political missions are realistic,
tailored and flexible so that the mission can achieve its
desired outcomes in terms of peacekeeping and creating
an enabling environment for peacebuilding processes.

Consultations on sustaining peace between the
Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the host country during the periodic assessment
and review of peace operation mandates as well
as the eventual withdrawal of the mission are also
important. This approach will guarantee the active
involvement of all stakeholders, particularly the host
country, in outlining the expectations of the mission,
including milestones and time frames. It would not
only ensure the success of the peace mission but also
lay the foundational groundwork for the continuation of
peacebuilding processes in future.

We also see merit in enhancing partnerships
between the United Nations peacekeeping architecture
and the regional and subregional post-conflict
reconstruction and development architecture, such as
that of the African Union (AU). The Peacebuilding
Commission should engage strategically with the AU
post-conflict reconstruction and development policy,
which is centred on peacebuilding activities in post-
conflict situations in Africa. All efforts must be brought
together to ensure development and the good sharing
of practices in peacebuilding and secure resources
that will enhance sustainable development. Although
we recognize the usefulness of pragmatic funding for
peacebuilding activities during transitions in order to
prevent gaps after the mission's withdrawal, we reiterate
the need for practical, sustained and predictable
funding for peacebuilding activities through assessed
contributions. It is through this funding that peace
activities can be sustained in the long term.

In conclusion, when the Security Council considers
mission drawdowns in future, we must be cognizant
of the fact that our responsibility does not end when
the last phase of the peacekeeping mission ends. The
Charter of the United Nations places the responsibility
of the maintenance of international peace and security
squarely on the shoulders of the Council. We must
therefore ensure that we continue to remain engaged
as countries make the transition from conflict to post-
conflict situations. Our recent work in Haiti and the
Council's experience with the transition in Liberia are
good examples of not neglecting countries once the
peacekeepers have left. We are currently faced with
situations on our agenda in which we are considering
missions' drawdowns. By necessity, this consideration
must also include planning and resources in order to
ensure that the countries are able to sustainably make
the transition towards peace.

