Mr. Theron (Namibia): My delegation is grateful
to you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. Like others, we also welcome the presence of
Senator Biden and thank him for sharing his
Government's views on the two scales of assessment. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
providing us with his comprehensive report on the
S/PVAZAS

 

activities of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and Mr. Jacques Paul Klein,
Special Representative, for his timely briefing.

Namibia continues to support the implementation
ofthe peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this
regard, we note with appreciation that all UNMIBH
units have participated energetically in the
development of a comprehensive Mandate
Implementation Plan, which provides a clear focus for
the fulfilment of the core mandate by the end of 2002.
We indeed understand that this Plan provides a road
map for the implementation process rather than
establishing fixed targets.

Today, we are encouraged to learn from the
Special Representative that much has been achieved in
the rebuilding of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also
note, however, that many challenges remain.

My delegation has been following with keen
interest the core programmes, in particular police
reform and police restructuring, as well as the
cooperation between the police and the criminal justice
system. Although we understand the problems
involved, the slow pace ofjudicial reform has been of
concern to us. I refer, for example, to the absence of a
mechanism to protect judges and witnesses in an
environment where organized crime and corruption
undermine the rule of law. All these problems require
the continued presence and assistance of the
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation's appreciation to the personnel of UNMIBH,
the International Police Task Force (IPTF) and other
international institutions for their hard work and
dedication to the cause of building a multiracial and
democratic Bosnia and Herzegovina.

