Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting. I also thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his participation and valuable briefing. We
very much hope that today's discussion will raise our
awareness of the link between natural resources and
conflict. The concept note (S/2018/901, annex) sheds
light on the close link between them, which the Security
Council has discussed on two previous occasions (see S/PV.5705 and S/PV.6982). Nevertheless, we have
seldom met to discuss that issue and to reach the
necessary understanding and solutions, which shows
that the Council does not see how dangerous it is and
the threat that it poses to those experiencing its impact.

Conflicts caused by disputes over natural resources
are no longer only among sovereign States, as was the
case before and during the Cold War. Over the past three
decades, we have witnessed many civil wars, primarily
in developing countries. Such conflicts seem to be
political in nature but the root causes are economic and
social. The consequences have been catastrophic, and
the Security Council has worked to settle such conflicts
for many years, although some of them persist.

Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) and
presidential statement S/PRST/2007/22 on this topic,
the Security Council has been able to shed light on
several basic factors that supposedly help to limit
and address that phenomenon. I will mention the
most prominent of them: first, strengthening the role
of peacekeeping troops by implementing adequate
mandates to enable peacekeeping operations to help
the Governments concerned prevent natural resources
from being exploited illicitly; secondly, supporting
regional initiatives to limit the dangers related to the
exploitation of natural resources, such as the Protocol
against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources
in the Great Lakes region, the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative and the 2000 Kimberley
Process, relating to blood diamonds, which has been
a paradigm of cooperation; and thirdly, strengthening
sanctions regimes by the Council, which must adopt
explicit mandates with specific terms of reference
for its panels of experts and monitoring teams so as
to prevent the trafficking and illegal exploitation of
natural resources. Nevertheless, preventive diplomacy
based on dialogue and mediation, as well as arbitration,
remains the best means to prevent conflicts, including
those linked to claims pertaining to natural resources.

My country has been blessed with natural resources,
and we know well that they can be linked to conflict. We
experienced first-hand the catastrophic consequences
of the disastrous occupation in 1990 on Kuwait and
the countries of the world. Natural resources are not
by themselves the only reason for conflicts and civil
wars. The appropriate exploitation of natural resources
could be the most important means for societies and
countries to recover in the post-conflict period, leading
to reconstruction and development.

History is full of examples of armed conflicts
and civil wars resulting from the legal and illegal
exploitation of natural resources, which fuelled them
and were a reason for prolonging them. It is often the
case that the exploitation of natural resources is the
main reason for such conflicts and wars breaking out
again. Natural resources are a divine blessing to be
preserved but they can be used as weapons of war with
serious consequences for the environment, the economy
and public health at both local and regional level.

We have learned lessons from the environmental
catastrophe that resulted from the Iraqi occupying
forces setting fire to more than 1,000 Kuwaiti oil wells.
That is an example of the misuse of natural resources
and the environment during armed conflict. The
State of Kuwait believes that such resources and the
environment must not be used during armed conflict.
For that reason, we proposed a draft resolution, which
was subsequently adopted by the General Assembly
(resolution 56/4), for the annual observance of
6 November as the International Day for Preventing
the Exploitation of the Environment in War and Armed
Conflict. Kuwait will also call for an Arria Formula
meeting on 7 November in order to address preventing
the use of the environment in armed conflict, as well
as strengthening the international legal framework in
that regard.

Poverty, hunger, inequality and the absence of
good governance are among the most important reasons
for the outbreak of conflicts, as mentioned by United
Nations reports. We must look into the common factors
that lead to tensions and cause the outbreak of conflicts.
There are three economic indicators that we should
consider: first, per capita income levels; secondly, the
rate of economic growth; and thirdly, the structure of
the economy.

There are fundamentals for building a stable State. It
is important to implement the Sustainable Development
Goals in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We must strengthen our national
capacities and manage our economies effectively, using
comprehensive strategies to fight corruption, build
institutions, strengthen the rule of law and diversify
the economy. The United Nations can assist States and
establish partnerships with them in that regard.

Finally, we want to emphasize that every State has
the sovereign and genuine right to control and to exploit
its own natural resources according to the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. Clearly, natural
resources, if used well, can be a basic factor for long-
term economic growth and sustainable development.
The State of Kuwait believes that natural resources are
a divine blessing for many States. They must be the
driver of sustainable development, the prosperity of
countries and the well-being of their people. Managing
natural resources in a legal, transparent and sustainable
way at the national level is a priority for Kuwait. We
preserve our natural resources and exploit them in
the right way, while maintaining the security of our
State and its national economy in accordance with
the Constitution.

