Mr. Satoh (Japan): First of all, I would like to
commend you, Mr. President, for your strong leadership
and thoughtful guidance in convening this meeting. This
meeting, stimulated by the strong appeal made this morning
by Mr. Otunnu and featuring the participation of many non-
members of the Security Council, will no doubt help
demonstrate that the international community is strongly
committed to making headway in resolving what is plainly
a serious problem: the victimization and abuse of children
in armed conflicts.

Given the continuing tragedy of children victimized or
abused in armed conflicts, it is evident that concerted
international efforts to protect children from the damaging
impact of armed conflicts are more pressing than ever. In
this context, the Government of Japan welcomes the
humanitarian missions and advocacy vigorously and
effectively carried out to date by Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict. Most importantly, his missions have
gained specific commitments to protect children from
conflicting parties in the Sudan, Burundi, Rwanda and
Colombia. This is a highly commendable and reassuring
achievement, although the obtained commitments must be
put into action by all the parties concerned.

It must also be noted that Mr. Otunnu's activities
have shed light not only on the plight of children, but also
on the brutality of armed conflicts themselves. This lends
the cause of conflict prevention yet another forcefully
persuasive voice.

With all of this in mind, we, the Government of
Japan, will continue to support the work of the Special
Representative as he tackles the most humanitarian yet
most daunting task of protecting children from the
savagery of armed conflicts.

Mr. Otunnu rightly suggests in his report that

"the most important and pressing challenge today is
how to translate existing standards and commitments
into action that can make a tangible difference to the
fate of children exposed to danger on the ground."
(A/53/482, para. 140)
In order to meet this challenge, we still need a great
deal of advocacy and robust efforts to make the
Governments and peoples concerned, let alone the
conflicting parties involved, recognize the utmost
importance of protecting children from the danger of
armed conflicts, and, in the final analysis, the importance
of preventing the occurrence and recurrence of armed
conflicts.

We therefore welcome this opportunity. I believe
that the Security Council's focus on this issue will help
greatly to enhance the level of concern of the
international community about this most taxing problem
of today's world.

For its part, Japan hosted a symposium last
November entitled "Children and Armed Conflict", with
the cooperation of the office of the Special
Representative, the United Nations University and the
Japan Committee for the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF). Senior officials from Governments, United
Nations agencies and non-govemmental organizations, and
leaders of civil society from the Asia-Pacific and other
regions, gathered in Tokyo for that symposium, called for
urgent, concerted action to protect children from being
victimized in conflicts.

Landmines and small arms are two issues which we
regard it imperative to tackle from the viewpoint of
protecting children from the impact of armed conflicts.
Japan advocates the "Zero Victims" programme with
respect to the question of land mines, and for this purpose

 

has pledged financial support of approximately 10 billion
yen for mine clearance and victim assistance for the five-
year period starting last year. With regard to the question
of small arms, we are encouraged by the recent submission
to the Secretary-General of the report of the Group of
Governmental Experts on Small Arms.

Obviously, the most effective way of protecting
children from conflicts is to prevent the occurrence and
recurrence of conflicts. While conflict prevention is one of
the most pressing and difficult issues in many parts of the
world, a better understanding of the plight of children who
are victimized or abused during the course of conflicts
would hopefully work to make all concerned more seriously
committed to the cause of conflict prevention, as well as to
the efforts to eliminate the dangers of landmines and small
arms. This makes the issue we address today doubly
important.

The Japanese Government, under the leadership of
Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi, considers it important to
cope with the issues the world faces today and in the future
with a primary focus on human security: the protection of
the dignity, basic rights and well-being of human beings.
The protection of children from all kinds of danger and
maltreatment is at the heart of human security
considerations.

I therefore want to emphasize again the Japanese
Government's commitment to the cause of protecting
children from conflicts.

