Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic ofKorea): Iwould
like to thank the Russian presidency for convening this
timely and important debate.

The recent developments in the Middle East and
North Africa region are worrisome, even terrifying.
Violent extremism spreads, feeding on long-standing
frustration and grievances. More often than not,
repeated calls for a political solution sound hollow, as
they are not met by unified action on the part of the
international community. In the face of the triple crises
arising from violent extremism, deadlocked political
transitions and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, all
stakeholders, including the United Nations, should take
more responsibility to overcome those complex and
intertwined problems. Against that backdrop, I wish to
make three points.

First, we need to clarify our common strategy and
priorities. Few would challenge the idea that the threat
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) should
be high on our agenda. The unprecedented exodus of
Syrian refugees clearly shows that the humanitarian
crisis has already gone beyond the critical point. It is
time to move beyond our differences and conclude the
debate on the best strategy to counter the ISIL threat.

Secondly, political transitions in Yemen and Libya
should be inclusive and sustainable. We support the
United Nations-backed political process. Assuring
conflicting parties that they will have their appropriate
places down the road could help expedite the process.
We welcome the Iranian nuclear deal, agreed in July,
and hope that Iran will play a constructive role in the
region. Peaceful coexistence, backed by political will
and inclusivity, should be the key for early stabilization.

Thirdly, the Israeli-Palestinian issue should not be
put on the back burner. The two-State solution is the
only viable option. We have consistently been against
any unilateral action that could undermine that solution.
We also take note that the international community
has been providing more support to the Palestinian
people with a view to encouraging them to take more
responsibility.

On a final note, in tackling the threat of violent
extremism, it is important to understand the exact
nature of the challenges before us. Essentially, violent
extremism is an ideology. It is a distorted and dangerous
way of seeing the world. Ideas cannot be defeated on the
battlefield, nor can Governments stop the flow of ideas.
To ultimately defeat violent extremism, we must be able
to prove that our ideas and values such as peace,
freedom and democracy - are better than those of our
opponents. We must convince our younger generation
that it is our free and diverse societies - not the hatred,
division or violence preached by extremists - that
will afford the right path to human dignity, hope and
happiness.

 

As a way to reach a fundamental and long-term
solution, I would like to emphasize the importance
of global citizenship education to teach our future
generation the value of tolerance, mutual respect and
understanding. Our best weapon in fighting terrorism
should be our commitment to human rights, freedom
and the rule of law, as was also declared in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) adopted a few days ago, in
particular in Goal 16 of the Sustainable Development
Goals. The Republic of Korea firmly believes that it is
only through the primacy of these core principles and
values that we can ultimately prevail and triumph over
violent extremism.

Finally, in addressing the dire situation of women
and adolescent girls in particular, the President of the
Republic of Korea, Ms. Park Geun-Hye, announced (see A/70/PV.7) an initiative called "Better Life for Girls"
at the United Nations Summit for the adoption of the
post-2015 development agenda held a few days ago. The
Republic of Korea will contribute $200 million in the
next five years to assist adolescent girls in developing
countries in the areas of health and education.

The Republic of Korea will continue to engage
constructively in the political, economic and
humanitarian situation in this region.

