Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): We are
profoundly disquieted and concerned to see Israel using
provocation and military escalation while many peace-
loving international parties are trying to rebuild
following the serious damage inflicted on many
Palestinian reoccupied towns by the Israeli military
action.

This is a clear attempt to demolish what remains
of the infrastructure of the Palestinian Authority and its
institutions and clear evidence of Israel's insistence on
committing further crimes against the defenceless
Palestinian people. It is clear that Israel is stubbornly
and intransigently persisting in impeding peace efforts
intended to defuse tension and to create conditions
conducive to a resumption of the political dialogue and
to a return to negotiations.

Notwithstanding all of the efforts made by the
Palestinian side to show good faith and good intentions
and to reform its institutions in keeping with the vision
and the requirements of influential international
parties, and despite the calm we had seen in the past six
weeks, Israel has continued to perpetrate barbaric
military actions against innocent Palestinian civilians.

Israel has not stopped its harassment of the
legitimate President of Palestine, President Arafat. It
has imposed a humiliating state of siege on him and
has destroyed his headquarters. The Israeli Government
has turned its back on all peace initiatives, including
the Arab peace initiative that was adopted and
endorsed at the Beirut Summit, whereas the Palestinian
and all Arab countries remain committed to peace as a
strategic choice.

Tunisia condemns Israel's persistence in
imposing a state of siege on the legitimate President of
Palestine, President Arafat. It condemns Israel's
continued implementation of a calculated and
systematic policy against defenceless Palestinian
civilians in order to starve them and to oust them from
their lands, in flagrant violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and of relevant international instruments,
mores and ethics.

We condemn this persistence and call on the
international community to urge Israel immediately to
comply in full and without conditions with Security
Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002);
immediately to withdraw from all reoccupied
Palestinian towns; to return to the status quo of before
20 September 2000; and to put an end to its futile
policy, which is fed by a short-term political vision that
merely broadens the scope of the violence and fuels
resentment and a thirst for vengeance.

Secretary-General Kofi Annan said that a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution will be
impossible as long as the security imperative continues
to be considered paramount. We need to work in
parallel in all other areas, including the political and
economic fields, so as to deal immediately with the
humanitarian situation, which continues to deteriorate
in the Palestinian towns and villages that have been
reoccupied, in order thus to give rise to some hope and
to avoid a deadlock.

The brutality and daily acts of aggression
suffered by Palestinian civilians at the hands of the
Israeli occupying forces impel us today to reaffirm the
proposal made at the Cairo Summit by President Ben
Ali of Tunisia to establish a mechanism to protect the
Palestinian people from Israeli practices and violations.

We are profoundly convinced that the delicate
international situation today requires the international
community to step up its efforts to facilitate a return by
both parties to the negotiating table in order to enshrine
the vision of two States, Palestine and Israel, living
side by side within secure and recognized borders. The
international community should also redouble its
efforts to make Israel withdraw from the occupied Arab
territories, to observe international law in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions, including
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), and to base its actions on the Madrid terms of
reference and the principle of land for peace.

(spoke in French)

In calling for this meeting of the Security
Council, the Arab Group wanted the international
community to be seized of the inadmissible behaviour
of the State and the army of Israel. A legitimate
complaint by the Palestinian Authority has been placed
before the Council and it calls for the minimum
minimorum. That entails an immediate halt to the
punitive operations organized by a Member of the
United Nations in disregard of the Charter itself;
respect for the symbol of the Palestinian national
struggle - President Arafat, whose life is being
threatened; withdrawal by the occupying forces to the
positions held prior to September 2000; and accelerated
peace efforts by all international actors. None of that is
cause for reservations. As we have in recent times
constantly referred to the need for unity in the Council,
let us demonstrate the solidarity of the international
community even if we know that, unfortunately, Israel
will ignore this admonition with total impunity.

What disgusts the Arab world, and indeed the
Muslim world, is the policy of double standards to
which it is subjected daily. All peoples of common
sense in the world have strongly condemned the crimes
of 11 September 2001. But when it comes to the ills
that beset our region, people are silent. This is what
Robert Fisk wrote in The Independent on 11 September
2002:

(spoke in English)

"Today, 11 September, our newspapers and our
television screens are filled with the baleful
images of those two towers and their biblical
descent. We will remember and honour the
thousands who died. But in just five days' time,
Palestinians will remember their September
massacre of 1982. Will a single candle be lit for
them in the West? Will there be a single memorial
service? Will a single newspaper dare to recall
this atrocity? Will a single newspaper
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of these
mass killings of 1,700 innocents? Do I even need
to give the answer?"

(spoke in French)

Rest assured that we are realistic people and that
we know that it is pointless to seek condemnation of
Israel by the Security Council. The draft resolution
before the Council expresses the hope that the Council
will request Israel to behave like a civilized country. Its
people are intelligent enough to understand that their
soldiers and their Prime Minister have gone too far and
that that is not in the interests of a country that will one
day have to live in peace and harmony with its Arab
neighbours. The Arab Summit held in Beirut made
Israel a historic offer. Tel Aviv should seize that
opportunity, sooner rather than later, to finally resolve
the painful Israeli-Arab conflict.

As far as the members of the Security Council are
concerned, their adoption of this draft resolution today
would mean that they were helping both parties in a
decisive manner. Indeed, the necessary conditions must
be created for a resumption of peace talks. In that
context, the situation of President Arafat must be
resolved as a matter of urgency. His freedom of
movement and action must be restored to him.

