Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I welcome the
President of the Security Council back to New York.
We congratulate Uruguay on organizing today's debate.
I also want to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Christine Beerli of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and Ms. Eveline Rooijmans of Oxfam for
their briefings.

As others have said, the grim context for our
discussions today is a world in which civilians in
conflict are at greater risk now than at any time in the
Organization's history. Today's meeting is a chance to
talk frankly about the challenge of protecting civilians
as well as how the Security Council is meeting
that challenge. The protection of civilians has been
included as a separate thematic item on the Council's
agenda since 1999. We recognize the normative value
of this process and the significant effort invested in
carrying the discussion forward. But after more than
15 years of reports, debates, thematic resolutions and
presidential statements, we have to acknowledge that
the on-the-ground conditions that bear on the real life
circumstances of civilians in conflict zones are still
dreadful.

In New Zealand's view, the Council's focus on the
protection of civilians must shift from words to actions
towards making a meaningful improvement in the
protection of real people in real life situations. I want
to highlight three areas in which we consider that the
Council needs to translate its rhetoric into reality.

As we often say in the Chamber, preventing conflict
is far preferable to dealing with its consequences. Yet
this reality is recognized fitfully at best by the Council,
which regularly resists taking action before real trouble
starts, even when the warning signs are apparent. For
over six months, New Zealand has been calling on
the Council to address the growing risk of conflict in
Burundi. We are pleased that agreement has at last been
reached and that a Council mission is departing for
Bujumbura tomorrow. It is important that the Council
listen as well as speak to the Burundian parties. We need
the Government and opposition to commit to reversing
the current slide into conflict and to undertake inclusive
and meaningful reconciliation efforts.

We believe the Council can do much better in
developing nimble and pragmatic responses to emerging
and re-emerging conflict risks, in cooperation with
regional partners. A clear case in point is the Democratic
Republic of Congo, where elections are scheduled later
this year. We know that violence has accompanied past
elections. We know the uncertainties around the coming
elections and the tensions to which they are giving rise.
The Council, in consultation with the African Union,
needs to start thinking now about how to engage the
Democratic Republic to address these risks and how to
respond if the situation goes awry.

In the area of peace operations, countless lives are
saved by the presence and actions of United Nations
peacekeepers, and we pay tribute to the skill and
courage of United Nations personnel in carrying out
this vital role. But, as others have noted, we can do
more to ensure that protection-of-civilians mandates
are implemented more effectively.

Mandates need to be clear, realistic and adequately
resourced. They need to be crafted and adjusted to
changing circumstances. They need to take into account
the views of troop- and police-contributing countries.
Over the past year, New Zealand has promoted more
meaningful engagement among the Council, the
Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing countries
on mandate formation and renewal, prefiguring the
triangular consultations called for in the report (see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations. In our view, such consultations
should be a more consistent feature in Council
practice. Their value was recognized in the December
presidential statement adopted upon the initiative of
Chad (S/PRST/2015/26).

Last March, the Council adopted New Zealand's
proposal for regular informal Secretariat briefings to
keep the Council informed of key developments in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That was a
positive step that could usefully be applied to other high-
risk situations on the Council's agenda, particularly
those involving protection mandates.
Current decision-making lacks the situational
awareness that comes from real-time, high-
quality information on emerging risks and ongoing
implementation challenges. While the Council is
not the body to make operational decisions about the
disposition ofpeacekeeping forces, we do need a better
appreciation ofthe risks and threats facing peacekeepers
and the civilians they are seeking to protect. This is an
obvious area for improvement and one in which we will
continue to press for greater openness.

Effective protection means ensuring civilians have
access to essential humanitarian assistance as required
by international humanitarian law. This has been the
focus of efforts led first by Australia, Luxembourg
and Jordan, and then New Zealand, Jordan and Spain,
to try to improve humanitarian access to civilians in
Syria, particularly in besieged and hard-to-access
areas. Resolution 2258 (2015), adopted unanimously
last month, gave particular attention to this question.

Regular reports from Madaya, Fu'ah and Kefraya
have graphically shown the failures of the Syrian
Government and armed opposition groups with
respect to their people and their responsibilities under
international law. We are encouraged that desperately
needed access and aid have at last gotten through to
these towns over the past week. It is imperative that
they be allowed to continue and that similar unimpeded
access is allowed to the 14 other Madayas across Syria.

We are deeply disturbed by the reports of brutality
on the part ofthe Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in
Deir ez-Zor, and would welcome further information on
this episode from the Secretariat. In addition to access
difficulties, as the Secretary-General has highlighted,
attacks on health-care personnel, health-care facilities
and medical vehicles are also occurring in many of the
conflicts on the Council's agenda. These are further
contraventions of international humanitarian law that
demand attention. New Zealand and Spain, together
with Egypt, Uruguay and others, intend to take forward
an initiative aimed at increasing practical protection for
health care in situations of armed conflict.

It is axiomatic that United Nations personnel
cannot be a threat to the civilians they are mandated
to protect. Yet we continue to hear reports of sexual
abuse and exploitation against populations traumatized
already by appalling conflict situations.

We acknowledge the Secretary-General's zero-
tolerance approach to sexual exploitation and abuse, and
we commend him for making good on his undertaking
to require the removal of contingents that continue to
transgress and whose Governments fail to take effective
enforcement and remedial action. The Council must
be kept informed of the steps taken, both to prosecute
alleged offenders and to require contributing countries
to account for the performance of their personnel.

Finally, I thank the Secretary- General for his annual
report on the protection of civilians. New Zealand looks
forward to discussing with Council members the next
annual report later this year and how we can ensure that
it is considered in a structured and timely manner and
that we respond appropriately.

