Mr. Kawah (Liberia): Kindly accept my
congratulations, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. I should like to take this opportunity to thank you
for extending an invitation to me to make a few
comments on the report of the Security Council
mission to West Africa, contained in document
S/2004/525. Let me also express Liberia's appreciation
to those Council members who made the trip and to
those members of the Secretariat who accompanied the
mission. Special recognition is given to Ambassador
Jones Parry of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, who headed the mission.

I have read the report of the mission and find it
wholesome in its general observations and relevant
when it comes to the Liberian situation. The mission's
visit to the West African region can only expand the
Council's view and understanding of the complex
problems confronting the subregion, some of which are
reflected in the report before the Council.

The Council, over the past year, has taken
decisions and actions which, for the Liberian people,
have created a new sense of realism, renewal and
reform. The events of the past several months have led
to renewed hope for Liberia and to a new chance for a
bright future. The international community has
committed significant resources to put Liberia back on
the road to recovery after more than two decades of
strife and open conflict. According to the report, the
new Transitional Government has pledged to break
with the habits of the past and to make a new effort to
move as quickly as possible into a stable and growth-
oriented relationship with the international community.

Let me observe, however, that the efforts of the
Security Council will come to fruition only if Liberians
are empowered to manage their own affairs.
Understandably, Liberia remains a hybrid State in the
international arena. The Transitional Government does
not have complete control over its territory and is
unable to guarantee an acceptable level of security for
its people. In those areas there is a partnership between
the United Nations and the Liberian Government.

That partnership must be nurtured so that, within
a specified time period, the responsibility of
governance will devolve to the Liberian people. In this,
the question of lifting United Nations sanctions on
timber and diamonds is urgent, especially if Liberia is
to generate the resources necessary for the country's
reconstruction. The requirements for doing this are to
be found in Security Council resolution 1521 (2003). To
meet those requirements, the assistance of the
international community and the understanding of the
Security Council are urgent and critical. Meeting the
high standards in the management of public funds will
not materialize if there are no funds to manage. We are
prepared to work with the Council to reach this
objective, but we cannot do it alone. Here, we join in
the appeal to the donor community to deliver on the
pledges made at the United Nations on 5 February
2004. The appeal in paragraph 28 of the report is
realistic and urgent.

Within the West African region, and especially
within the Mano River Union, we have suffered
tremendously. We destroyed the architecture of our
heritage and had nothing with which to replace it. We
had been one people living in harmony. We have
destroyed the simple trust which existed. It is my
ardent hope that we have learned something about
ourselves and that we are prepared to change, to
coexist and to build. We must now, with the Council's
help, summon the resolve to elevate our performance to
a plateau of functional excellence, for, as the writer
Kahlil Gibran said, "when you have reached the
mountain top, then you shall begin to climb".

