Ms. Lee (Singapore): We thank the Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
briefing us on the latest situation in his country, and we
also thank the Secretary-General for his ninth report on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We view the completion of phase II of MONUC's
operations as a job well done under difficult conditions
and we also extend congratulations to the MONUC
team. However, we are concerned - and this point has
also been expressed by other colleagues around this
table - over the continued instability in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Therefore, the
main point that we would like to stress today is that it
is important to establish a United Nations presence in
the trouble areas in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As such, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that MONUC move to establish a
presence in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
under phase III. However, before doing so, MONUC
must be given the means and be ensured as far as
possible that the conditions are conducive for it to
achieve its objectives there. Failure would undermine
MONUC's credibility and would make MONUC's
work more difficult.

On the human rights situation, we feel that, even
as MONUC moves forward with its deployment plans,
it must not neglect its humanitarian and human rights
responsibilities in areas where it has already
established a presence. Success in these areas will
provide tangible and persuasive evidence of the
benefits of MONUC's presence and will help
MONUC's confidence-building efforts and dialogue
with the armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Should MONUC be seen as making little
or no difference by its presence in existing areas, we
think it would be difficult for MONUC to win the
confidence of the population in new areas, let alone
that of the combatants it hopes to disarm.

Finally, we call on countries in the region to
cooperate fully with MONUC on the repatriation of ex-
combatants who are their nationals. It is already very
apparent to all of us that the security problems of these
countries are closely interlinked. For the DDRRR effort
to succeed, there must close cooperation and
coordination among these countries and MONUC.
Perhaps MONUC can consider setting up a
coordination committee with the participation of these
countries to ensure such close coordination, as well as
the transparency of the DDRRR exercise.

