Mr. Laher (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to thank Judge Fausto Pocar, President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), and Judge Dennis Byron, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
for their statements introducing the respective reports
of their Tribunals. We are also grateful to the
respective Prosecutors of the ad hoc Tribunals for their
informative statements on the steps they are taking to
implement the completion strategies. This being the
first report of Mr. Serge Brammertz as Prosecutor of
the ICTY, we wish to convey our warm welcome to
him and wish him well in his new capacity.

My delegation is pleased with the steps that the
Tribunals are taking to ensure that they achieve the
completion strategies.

We applaud the efforts of the ICTR Prosecutor to
transfer files and refer cases to competent national
jurisdictions. We are cognizant of the fact that, after an
indictment has been confirmed, only the Chamber is
authorized to make a decision to refer the indictment to
a national jurisdiction. We welcome the request of the
ICTR Prosecutor to the Chamber to transfer five cases,
including the case of one fugitive, to Rwanda. In that
regard, we have noted the decision of the Chamber not
to allow referral of the cases to Rwanda, and we
respect that decision.

We wish to highlight that it is important that there
should be capacity-building in national justice systems
in order to ensure that they are able to absorb the cases
to be referred to them and for the Courts to have the
confidence that judicial systems, such as that of
Rwanda, will be able adequately to dispense justice.
We welcome the recent steps that have been taken by
the Government of Rwanda to improve its criminal
justice system and encourage it to continue upon that
path. We note that the matter of referrals is an
important factor in the ability of the Tribunals to meet
their completion strategies.

With regard to the ICTY, we remain concerned
that, since the Prosecutor's last report, none of the
fugitives has been arrested. Some of those fugitives are
high-level accused who deserve to be prosecuted. We
call upon all States to fulfil their responsibilities under
the Charter of the United Nations and effect the arrest
warrants of the Tribunals.

We are particularly concerned that the ICTY
Prosecutor indicates that cooperation is unsatisfactory
in respect of the willingness to arrest Ratko Mladic,
Radovan Karadzic, Stojan Zupljanin and Goran
Hadzic. The States of the former Yugoslavia where the
individuals accused by the ICTY are suspected to be
hiding have a particular responsibility to cooperate
fully with the ICTY.

It is gratifying that the decisions we have taken in
the past to alleviate the pressure of the workload of the
Tribunals by extending the service of ad litem judges,
in the case of the ICTR, and by increasing their
number, in the case of the ICTY, have had the desired
effect. My delegation wishes to assure the senior
officials of the Tribunals of our continued support
towards achieving their mandate.

