Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): Ijoin previous speakers in
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate.

The declaration adopted by the Security Council
summit reaffirms at the highest level a comprehensive
set of goals and commitments. As many speakers have
remarked before me, some progress in specific areas
has been achieved in the implementation of the goals of
the summit. Nevertheless, we are still faced with the
need to work to translate some of its commitments into
real and effective action.

Let me start with a general comment. In theory
we all have a fairly good idea of what would be
necessary to increase the effectiveness of the United
Nations activities in the field of peace and security.
The short answer to this question is that the Security
Council must be able to prevent conflicts, it must be
able to react promptly to conflicts that erupt, and it
must have the necessary capacity to help in the efforts
of post-conflict peace-building.

But why are we so far away from that ideal
scenario? Is it because the members of the Council are
lacking a common perception for action? Is it because
the instruments available are inadequate to deal with
the complexities of contemporary conflicts? Is it a
political problem? Is it because the Secretariat suffers
from chronic insufficiency of resources? Do we have a
technical or a bureaucratic problem? Or is it an
intellectual problem? Are we missing ideas on how to
act? I am sorry for adding questions to the Council's
questions, especially because I do not have a clear
answer to my questions.

But perhaps the answer is a combination of these
factors, and that is why the issue remains so elusive,
requiring a renewed determination on our part to tackle
these challenges. This is even more so in view of the
ever-growing gap between the demands placed on the
Organization and the material resources available.

Let me go to a few specific points now. The first
one is the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
The Brahimi report made many useful
recommendations, and we are glad that some of them
have already been approved. Its consideration by the
Security Council and the General Assembly was
perhaps complicated by a possible misperception. In
our view, the recommendations of the report were not
intended to assert a degree of autonomy for the
Secretariat in the planning of peacekeeping operations,
but rather to increase its capacity to better serve the
Organization and fulfil its responsibilities. An
increased capacity does not necessarily mean enhanced
autonomy, if the mandates approved by the Security
Council are clear and achievable, with a visible sense
of political direction.

But we all know that even the best-crafted
decision of the Council will not yield the expected
results if there is no adequate means for its
implementation. There must be a genuine commitment
to peacekeeping. The permanent members of the
Council should be the first ones to ensure troops and
financial resources for the peacekeeping missions they
mandate. They must take full responsibility for their
own decisions and must be prepared to assume the
costs implied.

The second point is conflict prevention. It is said
that successful prevention does not win votes, but
failed intervention loses buckets of them. We all
recognize the importance of conflict prevention and the
urgent need to enhance the United Nations instruments
in this area. But conflict prevention is perhaps the most
daunting task of all, given the high complexity and
singular nature of each conflict situation. Therefore,
there is no uniform recipe for conflict prevention, and
each situation requires a distinct approach. In certain
cases prevention means highly visible actions. In other
instances, discreet efforts are the key to incremental
gains. Moreover, conflict prevention in many cases is a
continuous undertaking. Kosovo and Angola are in this
respect emblematic of the challenges involved. Another
difficulty stems from the fact that the acceptance of
preventive action by the United Nations often entails a
certain dilemma for the authorities of a country torn by
conflict.

The third point is peace-building. The Secretary-
General rightly reminded us that peace-building is
about the resumption of economic activity, the
rejuvenation of institutions, the restoration of basic
services, the reconstruction of clinics and schools, the
revamping of public administration and the resolution
of differences through dialogue, not violence.

This is an enormous task, one that we all
recognize is well beyond the responsibilities of the
Security Council alone. It requires strong political will
and commitment on the part of both the recipient
country and the donor community. Coordination is
absolutely a key element.

As in many other questions, here the record of
our efforts is also mixed. We were able to achieve
much in Mozambique for instance, and good efforts are
under way in Guinea-Bissau. But the system has yet to
deliver in Haiti despite the continuous efforts of the
United Nations, the Organization of American States,
the World Bank, the Inter-American Development
Bank, the United Nations Development Programme
and bilateral donors.

Peace-building efforts are necessary to ensure
that institutional mechanisms are in place to deal with
political differences and to quell potential conflicts that
would otherwise re-emerge in the context of poverty,
inequality and the absence of the rule of law. We
continue to hold that putting in place the mechanisms
to allow a smooth transition from peacekeeping to
peace-building requires the necessary involvement of
the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly.

Another important point to stress is the urgent
need for Security Council reform. There is a deep
frustration within the entire membership with the fact
that the Working Group of the General Assembly has
been discussing this issue for almost eight years now,
without concrete results.

We cannot underestimate the negative impact of
this situation. The Council cannot continue to be
perceived as an anachronistic body, both in its methods
of work and composition. This is detrimental to the
Council's authority, which we must always preserve.

The effectiveness of the Council's role hinges
largely on the assumption that it represents all
members of the United Nations. We must therefore
redouble our efforts to reach agreement on all pending
aspects of reform so as to ensure that the Council is
more transparent, democratic, representative and
accountable. It is therefore disappointing to note that
the issue of the composition and reform of the Security
Council failed to appear in the declaration approved by
Council's summit in September.

