Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I would like at the
outset to thank the delegation of Spain for organizing
today's debate and providing an opportunity for my
Government to present its views on this subject, which
is of particular importance to all of us. I would like to
express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, in your
capacity as the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), for a very informative briefing on
the activities of the Committee and for sharing with us
your plans for future work.

The issue of combating terrorism remains a top
priority on the agenda of the international community
and of this Organization. As the major threat to
international peace and security requires sustained,
long-term and global action, the Security Council
continues to play the central role in facilitating
cooperation between Governments to fight terrorism.

The Council has set up the necessary framework
for a global response to international terrorism and the
strengthening of the potential of the international anti-
terrorism coalition. It is now important that the
capacity of each nation's legislation and executive
machinery be improved so as to achieve tangible
results in fighting this scourge. Every Government has
the responsibility of analysing anti-terrorism
capabilities and identifying areas for improvement.
Every State must ensure full and consistent
implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions and international treaties.

The CTC has established a constructive dialogue
with Member States in the sphere of developing their
national legislation and combating terrorist financing.
The delegation of Ukraine greatly appreciates the
efforts of the Committee to achieve maximum
efficiency, transparency and cooperation with all
Member States, including through the communication
by the Committee of regular information on its
activities. In our view, it would also be worthwhile to
consider the CTC's conducting, with the participation
of its highly qualified experts, a meeting with Member
States to discuss the difficulties or problems most often
encountered in the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), as reflected in the national reports submitted to
the Committee.

Among the achievements of the Committee
outlined by its Chairman, I would like to underline its
endeavours to provide all possible assistance to the
multinational antiterrorist coalition by strengthening
the capacities of regional organizations and groups.
The Council's meeting on 6 March with representatives
of such organizations demonstrated the great potential
that exists in this sphere. We welcome the idea of
holding yet another meeting this October at the
headquarters of the Organization of American States. A
regular exchange of opinions and information between
representatives of organizations at different forums will
definitely benefit the global anti-terrorist struggle.

Terrorists are using new and sophisticated means
to commit their hideous acts. One can imagine the
consequences if they were to get hold of weapons of
mass destruction - whether nuclear, chemical or
biological. Ukraine agrees with the several delegations
that have mentioned that the problem of the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
related technologies requires special priority. I
therefore welcome the efforts of the Committee to
address this concern by holding a meeting on 15 May
with the representatives of specialized agencies dealing
with those specific issues.

In fact, we have to deprive terrorists of all the
means necessary to carry out their activities. In that
connection, I would like to bring another issue to the
Council's attention, namely, the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons, which has already been
mentioned by the representative of Mexico. Much has
been done on the global level to combat such illegal
activity, which is directly linked to drug trafficking,
transnational organized crime and terrorism. At the
same time, as is clearly shown in the report of the
Monitoring Group established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1363 (2001),

"al-Qa'idah, the Taliban and their associated
terrorist groups are still able to acquire adequate

quantities of weapons and explosives where and
when they need them." (S/2003/669, para. 89)

The international community should therefore be more
active in preventing the transfer of those weapons to
criminals and terrorists and to ensure that they are not
diverted to illicit commerce.

Ukraine has consistently supported the concerted
efforts by the United Nations to eradicate the scourge
of terrorism. My country has established a
comprehensive national system to combat money
laundering and the financing of terrorism. Most
recently, in March, the Verkhovna Rada, the Ukrainian
parliament, adopted a law on combating terrorism.

As a party to all 12 anti-terrorist international
instruments of universal character, Ukraine is also
strengthening cooperation to combat terrorism at the
regional level. In October 2002, Ukraine's Cabinet of
Ministers approved an agreement on cooperation
between the GUUAM. Participating States -
Azerbaijan, Georgia, Republic of Moldova, Uzbekistan
and Ukraine - taking part in the fight against
terrorism, organized crime and other dangerous types
of crimes. Firm positions on the issues of combating
terrorism and other challenges to international security
were reiterated by the Participating States at the recent
GUUAM. summit, in July at Yalta, Ukraine.
Let me stress that winning the fight against
terrorism will involve a long-term commitment. In that
regard, I would like to pay tribute to you, Mr.
President, as the Chairman of the CTC, as well as to
the members of the Committee, for your tireless efforts
and commendable achievements. The work of the CTC
represents a great contribution to our common efforts.

