Mr. Arias Cerdenas (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela firmly and
categorically condemns terrorism, repudiates all
terrorist activity and has reiterated its commitment to
fighting against that problem actively in all
international forums. A fundamental expression of that
policy has been the strengthening at the domestic and
international levels of the legal norms aimed at
preventing terrorist acts and the adoption of measures
to intensify regional and global cooperation
frameworks for the fight against that scourge. Those
measures and norms are reflected in the various reports
we have presented to the respective Security Council
Committees as part of our consistent and responsible
commitment to this struggle.

In that context, my delegation would like to
remind this Council once again of the extradition
request that the Venezuelan Government has presented
to the Government of the United States concerning the
renowned international terrorist Luis Posada Carriles.

Since the 1970s, that terrorist has been involved
in numerous plots to track down, torture and
assassinate men and women throughout the length and
breadth of our continent. His most notorious crimes
were the bombing of a Cuban plane in Barbados, the
torture and murder of social leaders in Venezuela, his
support for terrorist operations in Central America
against Nicaragua and El Salvador, and the murder by
bombing of tourists in Cuba, among other crimes for
which he is responsible.

The United States Government had various legal
options for detaining him by declaring him a terrorist,
as it should have if it had acted in accordance with the
principles established by international law, as required
under terrorism-related resolutions adopted here.
Nevertheless, the United States Government acted as it
always does when it suits it to do so. It chose to free
him.

Although the United States delegation has stated
several times in this Council that its Government is
considering the extradition request submitted by our
country, the liberation of Luis Posada Carriles ignores
the request made by the Venezuelan Government
almost two years ago, having fulfilled all the pertinent
requirements. On 3 May 2007, the Secretary General of
the Organization of American States, Mr. Jose Miguel
Insulza, stated with regard to the extradition request
presented by the Venezuelan Government:

"The extradition of Luis Posada Carriles
should be permitted... so that he can be judged in
the country [Venezuela] where he launched his
career of crime" [Posada Carriles]
"perpetrated a very serious act of terrorism and
we are working well in the Americas in the fight
against terrorism. There can be no excuse for not
delivering such a person to justice."

However, the voices of qualified men and women
throughout the world, including those of Nobel Prize
laureates, were not heard; nor were the requests and
pain of the families of victims of terrorist acts. Also
ignored was the Declaration of the Coordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement reiterating
support for Venezuela's extradition request to bring
Luis Posada Carriles to justice and demanding that all
States refrain from extending political, diplomatic,
moral or material support for terrorism, and in that
context, urging all States, consistent with the United
Nations Charter and in fulfilment of their obligations
under international law, to ensure that the perpetrators,
organizers or facilitators of terrorist acts not use their
refugee status or other legal status abusively, and that
their claims of political motivation not be recognized
as grounds for refusing extradition. Also ignored was
the call of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, which
unanimously supported the request for the extradition
of this terrorist.

The Government of the United States is bound by
the provisions of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings, which entered into
force on 23 May 2001, and of the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Civil Aviation, which entered into force on 26 January
1973. As a State party to those conventions, the
Government of the United States is obliged to extradite
Luis Posada Carriles or, failing that, to submit the case
to its relevant authorities for prosecution, without
exception, and irrespective of whether or not the crime
had been perpetrated in its territory.

The Venezuelan request is also based on the
bilateral extradition treaty signed by the United States
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in 1922. It
would appear that failure to comply with this treaty
could be seen as a message of confidence to a special
type of terrorist - those who act as the secret partner
of the imperial Power. The released terrorist could have
been kept in detention for immigration offences, or he
could have been arrested for extradition in keeping
with the request submitted by our country and in
accordance with the aforementioned agreement. But in
this case procedures were all ignored, indicating
manifest complicity on the part of those who act
immorally in their public actions.

It must be recalled that resolution 1373 (2001), in
both paragraphs 2 (c) and 3 (g), prevents States from
giving safe haven to those who commit terrorist acts
and prohibits recognition of claims of political
motivation as grounds for refusing requests for the
extradition of terrorists. The release of Luis Posada
Carriles is a decision that reveals and confirms the
double standard of a Government which states that it is
combating terrorism while, in its actions, endorsing
terrorist methods. Unfortunately, terrorism will not be
defeated if a selective approach with double standards
continues, as is being practiced by the present United
States Government.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
once more the request for the extradition of the
terrorist Luis Posada Carriles, a fugitive from
Venezuelan justice. We hope that the United States
authorities will meet their obligations in conformity
with the aforementioned international legal
instruments.

Mr. President, as a colleague in this Organization
and with greatest respect for your professional career
in the service of your country, we ask you to demand
that your Government fulfil the laws of its own country
and international law. I know your position in this
matter is a delicate one, but this ought to be a matter of
dignity and self-respect and respect for the great people
of the United States. It is hard to explain how cities can
be bombed to destroy terrorists while a terrorist is
being protected within the very territory of the United
States.

Demand, Mr. President, that my country's
extradition request be honoured, so that we can see
each other as brothers without thinking that your
Government misleads and lies under the presumption
that power gives the right to violate the law. The
Council cannot remain impassive in the face of the
attitude of the current Government of the United
States, which is provocative, disrespectful to the
international community and to this forum, a mockery
of the dignity of peoples and a clear violation of
resolution 1373 (2001).

Finally, Venezuela reiterates its firm commitment
to combating terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including State terrorism.

