The Secretary-General: I thank Chile and you,
Madam President, for organizing today's debate on
a subject that is central to the mission of the United
Nations, namely, how inclusive development can
promote peace and security.

Since this is my first time participating in the
Security Council this year, I would like to wish all
Council members and others participating today a
happy new year.

I also take this opportunity to welcome the new
members: Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and
Venezuela. I count on their leadership and commitment
in addressing world peace and security. I would also
like to thank the outgoing members - Argentina,
Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and
Rwanda - for their contributions.

I thank President Bachelet Jeria again for leading
the Council in this debate, and for her commitment
and drive as the first head of UN-Women, where she
successfully raised the profile of women's rights around
the world. And I thank Nobel Peace Laureate Leymah
Gbowee for her contribution to today's debate.

Our Organization is built around three pillars: peace
and security, development and human rights. In dealing
with the enormous and complex challenges of each, we
sometimes pay little attention to their interdependence.
But the founders of the United Nations well understood
that, if we ignored one pillar, we imperilled the other
two. We must break out of our silos and work together
on all three areas simultaneously. That is why I very
much welcome the Security Council's focus today on
inclusive development.

The year 2015 is a year of action on sustainable
development. We are striving to complete the work of
the Millennium Development Goals, to launch a new
post-2015 sustainable development agenda and to reach
an agreement on climate change.
I am encouraged to note that in their deliberations
so far Member States have paid considerable
attention to peace and security and to human rights.
In the General Assembly's Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals, Member States have
stressed the importance of inclusive growth and decent
work in building a better future. They have called for
reducing inequality and ensuring universal access to
basic services, including health care and education.
Significantly, they have explicitly linked peace with
social inclusion and access to justice for all, and called
for inclusive, representative decision-making.

My own contribution to this debate underscores
the importance of justice to build peaceful and
inclusive societies by promoting strong and responsive
institutions, as reflected in the synthesis report
(A/69/700) that I presented to the General Assembly
last month. With the full membership of the United
Nations beginning its negotiations later this morning,
we now have an important opportunity to broaden the
development agenda and highlight the fundamental
importance of inclusive societies in building a more
peaceful world.

All countries and all societies can benefit from
sustainable and inclusive development, whether they
are rich or poor, developed or developing, in conflict
or at peace. There is a growing consensus that the high
levels of inequality we have seen in recent decades are
socially, politically and environmentally damaging.
Development that excludes part of the population can be
socially corrosive. It can contribute to crime and create
a sense of hopelessness and alienation - conditions
that can breed extremism. Inequality can lead to
the concentration of power in the hands of the few,
undermining democracy. And it can lead to the
unregulated exploitation of natural resources, further
degrading the environment.

Despite that consensus, exclusion and inequality
persist. In many countries, the poor, migrants, people
living with disabilities, indigenous groups and older
people have little or no access to basic services and
cannot participate in political dialogue.

Discrimination against women and girls is a blatant
injustice, denying them opportunities for education,
health and other services, jobs and leadership positions
and hindering their own development and that of their
communities and societies.

Social security provision is desperately inadequate
around the world. More than half the world's people
lack any social protection at all - no pensions, no
safety net in times of illness or unemployment.
Post-conflict societies in particular must prioritize
social, economic and political inclusion if they are to
have any hope of rebuilding trust between communities.
Gender equality and women's empowerment are a key
condition if women are to contribute to reconciliation
and reconstruction.

Even in countries at peace, inclusive development
will not happen by accident. Governments, the
private sector and civil society. must demonstrate
their commitment to education, health, job creation
and other key steps. The institutions of governance
and political representation are some of the most
crucial determinants of inclusive development. People
need effective, responsive channels for voicing their
Views and addressing their grievances and concerns.
The United Nations system stands ready to increase
its support for countries in promoting inclusive
development. The Peacebuilding Commission provides
coordinated international support targeted at countries
emerging from conflict. The current review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture should help
to make that support more robust and flexible.

The post-2015 sustainable development agenda is an
important opportunity to reinforce the interdependence
of development, peace and security, and human rights.
I urge all members of the Security Council to play their
part in making sure that this message is heard in the
continuing negotiations and in the final agreement.

