The President: I shall now make a statement on
behalf of the Indonesian delegation.

The situation on the ground in eastern Zaire
continues to deteriorate. The plight of over 1 million
refugees who have already suffered from atrocities,
hunger, thirst and miserable conditions demands the
immediate action of the international community. In this
context, Indonesia highly commends the speedy action
taken by the leaders of the region, as manifested in the
communique of the Nairobi Summit of 5 November 1996.
The Security Council must take action today in order to
avoid a humanitarian catastrophe that may have serious
repercussions on the stability and security of the whole
Great Lakes region.

It is imperative that a ceasefire be established in
order to end the violence and thereby facilitate a
negotiated solution to the conflict. We also call upon the
various Governments concerned in those territories to
allow access for humanitarian relief organizations to
enable them to distribute food and medical care to the
scattered refugees and the internally displaced persons. It
is in this context that my delegation, pursuant to
paragraph 8 of resolution 1078 (1996), supports the

 

establishment of a multinational force to carry out the tasks
and to facilitate the voluntary, orderly repatriation of
refugees and displaced persons, as clearly reflected in
paragraph 3 of the present draft resolution. Indonesia pays
tribute to Canada for its commendable decision to take the
initiative to establish the multinational force and to lead the
operation.

There has been much debate on the mandate, sources
and scope of such an operation. Past experience has taught
the international community to be wary of involvement in
a conflict, albeit with humanitarian intentions in mind,
without a clear vision. The present role of the multinational
force, as it is being defined, appears to be addressing this
concern by establishing a targeted and realistic mandate.
Such a force must have the means to defend and protect
itself as well as the international relief personnel. The time-
frame of four months may suffice to overcome the
emergency phase of the crisis. Further dimensions of the
conflict need to be addressed as well if a lasting solution is
to be found. However, they should be considered in the
next phase of operations.

In the context of finding a durable and comprehensive
solution for the conflicts in the region, the convening of an
international conference on peace, security and development
in the Great Lakes region can no longer be postponed. It
must be held with the participation of all the Governments
concerned under the joint auspices of the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity (OAU), as called for
in Security Council resolution 1078 (1996).

In the light of these considerations, Indonesia is ready
to vote in favour of the draft resolution and support the
deployment of a temporary multinational force to eastern
Zaire until 31 March 1997. We wish to emphasize,
however, that the principles of the sovereignty and

 

territorial integrity of Zaire must be upheld throughout the
operation of the multinational force.

In conclusion, we would like to extend our
appreciation to the Special Envoy, Ambassador Raymond
Chretien, for his tireless efforts and positive contributions
in finding a solution to the current crisis in the Great
Lakes region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1996/943.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Botswana, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1080 (1996).

I have just received a letter dated 15 November 1996
from the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations which reads as follows:

"With reference to the discussion on the
situation of eastern Zaire, I have the honour of
informing you that it had been the intention of
Brazil to be a co-sponsor of the draft resolution
contained in document S/ 1996/943."

That letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/ 1996/949.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration

of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 7.35 pm.

