Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking our friend Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing today and for
the work he is doing with the Mission. I would also like
to thank Minister Kuburovic' and Ambassador Citaku

for their statements to the Council today.

Sweden has long stood with the people of Kosovo
in their efforts to leave behind the legacy of war and
to build a peaceful and prosperous society. Sweden's
Foreign Minister, Margot Wallstrom, visited Kosovo
only two weeks ago to reiterate our firm support of
Kosovo's European perspective. She also stressed
the need for continuing reforms and normalization
of Pristina's relationship with Belgrade as part of the
process. We stand ready to help and will continue to
support Kosovo's reform efforts through our bilateral
development cooperation.

Delivering on Kosovo's European perspective and
that of the wider western Balkans region remains a top
priority of the European Union. Regional cooperation
and good neighbourly relations are prerequisites for a
stable, peaceful and prosperous western Balkans. We are
therefore concerned about the hardened rhetoric in the
region in recent months, as exemplified by the Special
Representative today. We call on both sides to redouble
their efforts for peace by refraining from rhetoric or
actions that risk undermining trust and instead working
actively to build confidence and mutual understanding
across the region.

It is clear that the future of both Serbia and Kosovo
lies within the European Union. For that reason too,
normalization of relations is essential. The European
Union-facilitated Kosovo-Serbia dialogue provides
an important framework for finding pragmatic and
mutually acceptable solutions to the concerns of both
sides. It is an irreversible process that requires a
firm commitment.

We expect Pristina and Belgrade to engage
constructively in the dialogue and to implement their
respective parts of the agreement. That includes, most
notably, the dismantling of parallel structures in Serb-
majority areas and the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities. In
addition, it is essential that the status issue not hinder
Kosovo's European perspective or membership in
international organizations.

To achieve the aspirations of the Kosovar people,
national leaders must find ways to work together
so as not to undermine efforts to achieve the crucial
reforms needed to benefit all of the people living
in Kosovo. It is regrettable that the current political
impasse has hindered concrete and meaningful reform
efforts. We hope that the forthcoming elections will
lead to strengthening the democratic institutions
and continued reforms, especially on rule of law and
socioeconomic development.

The United Nations and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) have
made invaluable contributions to achieving the level of
peace and security that we see in Kosovo today. Kosovo
will continue to need the support of the international
community. However, the present challenges faced by
the country must be dealt with, primarily within the
framework of the European Union integration process,
including through the work of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. In light of that, we
would be interested to receive the views of the Special
Representative and the Secretary-General on the
possibility of further downsizing UNMIK's structure,
size and tasks, as well as on adjusting the reporting and
briefing period from three to six months.

The frameworks are in place to realize the vision
of a stable and prosperous Kosovo with a normalized
relationship with Serbia. However, to fully realize that
vision, a more consistent and sustained effort by both
Pristina and Belgrade is needed. Doing so Will have
positive effects across the Western Balkans region.

