Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and in particular for your initiative in convening this
public meeting on the role of the United Nations in the
promotion of justice and the rule of law. I am also
grateful to the Secretary-General for his report on this
important topic.

The rule of law at the national level translates
into a State based on the rule of law. At the
international level, it is the multilateralism we find in
the Charter of the United Nations. It promotes stability
and predictability in the international system and is a
key factor in the maintenance of international peace
and security and respect for human rights. Ultimately,
we cannot promote the rule of law if the Charter of the
United Nations is not respected.

The international community, fortunately, has
expressed its recognition of the importance of the rule
of law and the need to combat impunity through the
creation of the International Criminal Court. I would
like to reaffirm here my country's commitment fully to
support the Court.

Empirical experience has shown that justice and
the rule of law are not easy to achieve. They cannot be
brought about overnight, least of all in societies that
have never practiced democracy, where institutions are
weak, and where the values espoused by particular
groups prevail over the law or a national social
contract.

In many cases, the establishment of the rule of
law represents a serious cultural problem - perhaps
more cultural than political - for it touches on the
self-respect of a people. It is therefore a very complex,
lengthy and sometimes historic endeavour that requires
the resolute support of the international community -
which we are providing - but also it requires a
commitment on the part of a society itself, particularly
in the case of civil conflicts.

Cultural changes are therefore required that lead
to profound transformations in the legal, judicial,
police and penal-law spheres, and, above all, the
dissemination of a culture of respect for human rights
and tolerance among the people who wish to carry out
such reforms.
That is why the challenge is so great. It involves
promoting tolerance and establishing the rule of law in
societies where social marginalization has been
widespread, where there has been no social contract to
speak of, or, if one existed, it has been destroyed as a
result of political, ethnic or religious conflicts.

That is why Peru believes that any proposal
aimed at re-establishing the rule of law must take into
account the situation of each conflict-fractured society,
because not all are the same. As the Secretary-General
has said, we cannot import solutions from other
realities, as they do not necessarily produce good
results.

In the case of my country, the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission was created in June 2001
to assign responsibility for the massive violations of
human rights that took place from 1980 to 2000. The
Commission has submitted a comprehensive plan for
reparations, and the Government has begun to
implement it formally through a collective plan for
peace and development for the years 2004-2006. In
parallel, victims are seeking justice on an individual
basis before the competent national courts.

At any rate, in re-establishing justice and the rule
of law, it is extremely important for the United Nations
to elaborate preliminary proposals that take account of
the national realities of the country that has lived
through the conflict. The proposals should be based on
wide-ranging consultations in which all national actors
can participate. All of these inputs should be
considered in crafting a strategy.

Such a methodology, based on broad-ranging
consultations, should also be used later on, during the
implementation phase and during the ongoing
assessment of the goals laid down in the strategy. Only
thus can we systematically bring about the re-
establishment of the rule of law in societies that have
disintegrated as a result of civil conflict.

We hope that the Council will adopt the
recommendations set out in the report of the Secretary-
General, which emphasize the non-imposition of
external models and the need for prior assessment of
national needs on the basis of a broad process of
consultations at the national level.

Peru welcomes the Secretary-General's intention
to ask the Executive Committee on Peace and Security
to propose concrete measures on justice and the rule of
law in post-conflict societies. We hope that such
measures will be submitted for consideration by all
States Members of the Organization.

Finally, I would like to say that, in almost all
strategy studies undertaken nowadays, social
marginalization is considered to be one of the main
causes of civil war. Social marginalization means that
political, ethnic and religious differences evolve into
extreme rivalries and hatred, leading to crimes against
humanity, which is what we here are trying to prevent.

That is why the social marginalization dimension
must be taken into account in the context of any
comprehensive approach to the restoration of the rule
of law and justice in societies that have undergone
serious civil conflicts.

