Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
express my gratitude to Mr. Fedotov for his enlightening
briefing on drug trafficking in West Africa and the
work ofthe United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC). I also wish to thank Cote d'Ivoire through
you, Mr. President, for having put this topic on the
Council's agenda. Like you, Sir, France also considers
this to be a particularly important topic and welcomes
the opportunity to discuss the matter today.

Iwill begin with some remarks on the obstacles and
perils that the production, trafficking and consumption
of drugs pose to the region's security and prospects for
development.

As Mr. Fedotov pointed out in his briefing, West
Africa faces multiple threats related to transnational
organized crime in all its forms and is affected by
the issue of drugs in several aspects. The region is
an important transit area for trafficking in cocaine,
heroin and synthetic drugs, as well as a zone for the
production of cannabis and synthetic drugs. The use
of drugs is also an increasingly significant issue. The
issue of drugs, including its security, economic, social
and health consequences, aggravates the structural
weaknesses of the region and seriously jeopardizes its
development.

Drug trafficking also has a negative impact on
the political dynamics of the region. In northern
Mali, for example, a significant proportion of armed
groups depend financially and logistically on the
financial flows generated by the illegal economy and
drug trafficking. That situation diverts certain key
actors from implementing the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali by generating violence
and hindering and hampering the realization of
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process. The widespread corruption that is linked to
drug trafficking also undermines people's confidence
in the rule of law, particularly the justice system, and
can encourage a reflex of community protection and
even prompt membership to terrorist groups.

Finally, in a region characterized by both drug
trafficking and the presence of a number of terrorist
organizations, the issue of the link between organized
crime and the financing of terrorism has arisen.
While there is evidence of collusion between drug
traffickers and terrorist fighters, such cooperation
is more opportunistic - for protection rather than
for payment - than systematic. The proceeds from
trafficking do not seem to be the main source of
terrorist financing but could contribute either directly
or indirectly.

As to my second point, we should reflect together
about our response at the national, regional and
international levels. At the national level, it is very
important that West African States make the fight
against drugs a real political priority and promote a
balanced approach that acts both to combat the drug
supply and to reduce the demand through prevention,
care, support for users and harm reduction measures.
It is essential that the States of the region strengthen
the capacities of the concerned institutions, with the
support of donors and international stakeholders.

Thoseactionsmustaiminparticularatstrengthening
the entire criminal justice system, particularly the
judicial system and asset seizure mechanisms, but also
take into account the preventive and social and health
care dimensions. The care of dependent persons, which
remains underdeveloped, must become a priority area
of action. France has therefore fully supported the
creation of the first specialized centre for drug users
in West Africa in Dakar in 2014, the Centre de Prise
en Charge Integree des Addictions de Dakar and is
currently supporting the creation of a similar centre in
Cote d'Ivoire. Those efforts must be encouraged and
supported in other countries in the region.

At the regional level, it is critical to strengthen
cooperation in order to effectively fight trafficking
and corruption. The response must be based on joint
action on the security and development aspects. That
is the impetus of the approach deployed by the Group
of Five for the Sahel countries in the framework of the
Joint Force and the Priority Investment Programme.
France fully supports those efforts, in conjunction
with its partners. For example, the Alliance for the
Sahel, by financing quick-impact development projects
in vulnerable areas, helps to provide viable economic
prospects for local populations and prevent them from
joining networks from the illegal economy.

There are myriad challenges, but the States of
the region are not alone in meeting them. Indeed,
international organizations, and the United Nations
in particular, also have an important role to play in
addressing the drug problem.

First, they have the primary responsibility of
considering the whole dimension of the issue in the
quest for sustainable political solutions to conflicts.
Therefore, to continue with the example of Mali,
which I mentioned earlier, the fight against drug
trafficking in the region is also a means of supporting
the implementation of the peace agreement. Sanctions
are one of the tools at our disposal to act in that regard,
since the participation in trafficking activities is among
the designation criteria set up under the sanctions
regime for Mali. We must make full use of them.

Secondly, the United Nations must support West
African States, at theirrequest, withtechnical assistance
and capacity-building. I would like to acknowledge the
outstanding work done by the UNODC in that area,
particularly by its regional office based in Dakar.

Finally, the United Nations is also the guarantor
of a comprehensive and balanced approach that allows
not only West Africa but also other affected regions to
act together to address the drug problem, based on the
principle of common and shared responsibility. In that
regard, the outcome document agreed to at the 2016
special session of the General Assembly on the world
drug problem (resolution S-30/ 1) remains our common
road map. The ministerial debate of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, to be held in Vienna in March 2019,
will be another opportunity to reaffirm our shared
commitment to combating drug abuse in West Africa
and beyond.

