Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia reiterates its firm
condemnation of the conduct of nuclear tests and the
launching of ballistic missiles by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, and we urge it to abandon
its nuclear and ballistic-missile programme fully,
verifiably and irreversibly.

Bolivia voted in favour of resolution 2371 (2017)
today based on its peaceful ideals. We do not believe
in war as a way of solving the global problems facing
the international community. However, we would also
like to make it clear that for the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, sanctions should not be an end in themselves.
In the situation under discussion, they should help the
parties involved to come to the table for dialogue. We
also believe that the sanctions we have adopted today
should have the smallest possible impact on the civilian
population and should not affect the humanitarian
situation in North Korea.

We urge all the parties involved to avoid escalating
rhetoric or action that could increase tensions and
put international peace and security in jeopardy on
the Korean peninsula. We welcome and reiterate our
support for China's dual-action initiative designed to
enable a simultaneous halt to both the ballistic-missile
launches and nuclear tests and to the military exercises
on the Korean peninsula. We also welcome the fact that
today's unanimous resolution supports that and also
requests that the Six-Party talks be resumed. We urge
all the parties involved to abandon any kind of military
solution and to resume dialogue with a view to reaching
a peaceful diplomatic and political solution.

In our capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we
would like to point out that the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004) are aimed at establishing a platform of
assistance and cooperation among States in order to
prevent non-State actors from having access to weapons
of mass destruction. We are completely against using
it as a way of coercing or directing sanctions against
States Members of the United Nations. Lastly, we
categorically reject the imposition of unilateral
sanctions, which constitute a flagrant violation of
international law as illegal measures that extend one
State's internal jurisdiction over another, in violation of
the principle of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States.

