Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for his briefing.

China is deeply concerned about the humanitarian
crises that continue to inflict some African countries.
China believes that the humanitarian crises in Africa
have different root causes and complex backgrounds.
They include both large-scale armed conflicts that have
led to numerous civilian casualties and displacement,
as in the current situation in Somalia, and traditional
ethnic, tribal and religious conflicts that give rise to
local political crises that exacerbate the humanitarian
situation, as in the case of the Lord's Resistance Army
in northern Uganda and in Darfur in the Sudan.
Moreover, long periods of economic underdevelopment
have led to widespread poverty and its concomitant
human tragedies.

Since the causes differ, the responses should also
vary. Efforts should be made to halt and prevent
regional conflicts and to stop large-scale humanitarian
disasters from arising and spreading. Efforts should
also be made to avoid political approaches that
exacerbate such situations and to promote political
reconciliation, harmony and unity in the countries
concerned. Africa should be assisted in good faith to
develop its economies, shake off poverty and improve
its standards of living. In general, it is imperative to
take a targeted approach to address both the root causes
and the symptoms, to prioritize practical deeds over
empty words, to avoid talking about humanitarian
crises in abstract and isolated ways, and, above all, to
avoid politicizing humanitarian issues.

The international community is duty-bound to
help Africa alleviate its humanitarian crises. We
appreciate the tireless efforts of the United Nations and
other international humanitarian relief organizations.
We appeal to the international parties to continue to use
their respective advantages and to pool their collective
wisdom and efforts with a view to integrating the
management of such crises. The donors concerned
should honour their pledges in true earnest, increase
their funding for humanitarian assistance in Africa, and
address the shortfall in funding for humanitarian efforts
as a matter of urgency.

The Chinese Government has always attached
great importance to helping the countries of Africa to
improve their humanitarian situation. Over the years,
the Chinese Government has actively participated, to
the best of its abilities and in various ways, in
international humanitarian relief efforts in Africa. In
the future, we will continue to join in such efforts of
the international community.

