Mr. Monteiro: I would like to congratulate you
and your country, Mr. President, on your assumption of
your difficult functions for this month. I wish you
every success in your role.

As the Council is aware, the mandate of the High
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
elections in Cote d'Ivoire envisaged the holding of
open, free, fair and transparent presidential elections
on 30 October, as a solution to the crisis in the country.
But my first observation during my exploratory
mission to the country, from 8 to 18 August, was that
there was a total absence of any real progress in the
implementation of the agreements reached. Inevitable
delays in the implementation of the electoral timetable
cast reasonable doubts on the possibility of holding a
credible presidential ballot on 30 October, given the
sequence of events of which the Council is aware.

But during that exploratory mission, my very first
task was to try to remove the objections raised by the
opposition concerning the presidential decisions of
15 July regarding the new Independent Electoral
Commission and the questions of identification and
naturalization. After I asked President Thabo Mbeki,
the African Union's Mediator, to intervene with
President Gbagbo, new presidential decrees were
issued on 29 August confirming the key role of the
Commission in conducting the electoral process and
clarifying questions regarding nationality,
identification and naturalization - issues that
constitute a fundamental aspect of the Ivorian crisis.
On the same day, the Secretary General of the Forces
nouvelles appointed their six representatives to the new
Independent Electoral Commission, thereby ending the
opposition's refusal to participate that had persisted up
until then.

My second task was to ask for the completion of
nominations for members to the new Commission to
assist with the Constitutional Council.

By giving all Ivorian political actors the

assurance of impartiality and objectivity - the
fundamental basis for the creation of the post of High
Representative as an exceptional measure - I have

always underlined to my interlocutors that it was
necessary for them to commit truthfully to the electoral
process. Elections must be conducted by the Ivorians
themselves, respecting the laws of the country, adjusted
to the agreements already signed.

After the composition of the independent
electoral commission was finalized, additional time
was needed to allow for the application of all legal
formalities and to resolve an issue of multiple
nominations by one party. On 29 September, the
President of the Republic signed a decree establishing
the new Independent Electoral Commission, which will
also fill a gap, serving as the basis for regular dialogue
among all political forces.

Today, I have just received a letter from the
Minister for Territorial Administration, informing me
that next Monday, there will be an official swearing-in
ceremony for the members of the Independent
Electoral Commission and that the first meeting, which
will be devoted to the election of its bureau, is to be
held on 19 October.

It is my intention to participate actively in the
work of the Independent Electoral Commission by
providing advice and guidance to prevent and resolve
any difficulty that might jeopardize the holding of
open, free, fair and transparent elections. It is also my
proposal to signal any violations.

I also plan to work closely with the Constitutional
Council, whose powers include verification of the
legitimacy of candidates for the presidential and
legislative elections, the resolution of disputes relating
to the election of the President of the Republic and the
members of the National Assembly, and the
announcement of the final results of the presidential
elections.

In preparing for the elections, I have already
requested UNOCI, together with my Office, to
establish contacts with the Institut National de
Statistiques, the Office Nationale d'Identification and
the Commission Nationale de Supervision de
l'Identification (CNSI). All of these are agencies that
are working to prepare the elections. All the work
already undertaken will be discussed later with the
Electoral Commission.

The Electoral Division of UNOCI is already
deploying the expected 120 United Nations Volunteers,
who will serve as electoral advisers throughout Cote
d'Ivoire. They are establishing initial contacts with
local authorities.

Thus, the path is open for the organization of
elections. The main objective is now for the new
Independent Electoral Commission to define a road
map with precise benchmarks that must be adhered to
in good faith. This would make it easier to identify
possible deadlocks or any attempt to manipulate the
process.

From all the tasks of the Commission, the most
delicate will be the identification question and the
criteria for voter eligibility. It will be necessary to
make the legislation as simple and as clear as possible
in order to allow to all those participating in the
preparation of the register of voters to act in an
impartial, standard and objective manner.

I have been exploring with political leaders the
idea that the voters' cards to be used in these elections,
which must have a photograph and a fingerprint, could
serve as the basic legal document to facilitate the
process of obtaining additional identity papers and the
new identification card.

The electoral work can proceed effectively only
in an environment with adequate security throughout
the country. Freedom of movement and freedom of
thought are indispensable to guarantee truly democratic
elections accepted by all. This is the responsibility of
the armed forces that control the two parts of the
divided country and the effective monitoring of the
impartial forces of UNOCI and Operation Licorne.
Naturally, the ideal is to complete, as Mr. Schori just
underlined, the entire process of disarmament and
dismantling of the militias.

To conclude, one point: the proposal made by the
African Union to the Security Council for a period not
exceeding 12 months is largely sufficient for the
preparing and holding free and fair elections.

