Mr. Satoh (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for providing us with
this opportunity to present our views on the situation in
Tajikistan at this special moment when the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) has
successfully completed its mandate.

Japan fully agrees with the Secretary-General's
assessment that with the completion of UNMOT's
mandate, the democratization process in Tajikistan has to
move on to a new stage. There is no doubt that continued
United Nations involvement is indispensable in the
coming years in order to consolidate the achievement
made so far. Japan therefore supports the establishment of
a post-conflict peace-building office in Tajikistan.

I would like to pay high tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ivo Petrov,
as well as to the former Special Representative, Mr. Jan
Kubis, for their tireless efforts, which have greatly
contributed to the progress to date in the democratization
of Tajikistan.

At the same time, let us not forget the invaluable
contributions made by all the UNMOT staff members,
particularly those who have given their lives for peace
and democracy in Tajikistan. In all, eight United Nations
staff members lost their lives during UNMOT's
deployment. The victims include Professor Yutaka Akino,
a renowned Japanese scholar of Central Asia, who was

 

brutally murdered in July 1998 while serving as a political
officer of UNMOT. His devotion to the cause of peace in
Tajikistan has become a legend among the people of Japan.

That Tajikistan's first democratic parliamentary
elections were held in a relatively peaceful atmosphere with
multi-party participation was no doubt an important step
towards the realization of democracy. Having extended
approximately $150,000 in financial assistance to the
electoral observer mission deployed by the United Nations
and the UNMOT voter education project, and also having
sent a mission to monitor the election held in February,
Japan shares a sense of achievement with the Government
and the people of Tajikistan and indeed with all those
concerned with UNMOT.

But we have to acknowledge the fact that certain
shortcomings still remain in the electoral system, as pointed
out in the Secretary-General's report. These include a lack
of transparency in the voter registration process and
ambiguities pertaining to the independence of the election
administration. We would like to urge the Tajik
Government to learn lessons from recent experiences and
to improve the electoral system.

It is evident that the Government and the people of
Tajikistan will have to solve many problems in order to
make further advances in their political, economic and
social development. The demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration into society of former soldiers is particularly
important for the stability of Tajikistan, whose democracy
is still fragile.

We believe that, in solving these problems, Tajikistan
needs greater attention and support from the international
community. For its part, Japan has been extending
cooperation to the country's efforts - for example, by
hosting a seminar on democracy and good governance in
1999, receiving T ajik trainees and contributing to the
United Nations Development Programme rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development programme. I want to
assure the Council that Japan will continue to help
Tajikistan in its nation-building efforts.

Let me conclude by appealing to both the Government
of Tajikistan and the international community to renew their
determination at this important juncture to work together to
further advance democratization, national reconciliation and
economic development in Tajikistan.

