Mr. Eler (Turkey): Allow me to thank the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Mahmoud Saikal, for his statement, and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, for his briefing.

We welcome the comprehensive report (S/2015/942)
ofthe Secretary-General. Overall, we share the contents
of the report, as well as the Secretary-General's
observations.

The achievements of the past 14 years in
Afghanistan, including in the areas of security,
democracy, governance, economic development and
human rights, deserve to be applauded. Nevertheless,
those achievements are not at a point of no return;
many challenges remain. In order to maintain the
achievements and to be able to build upon them, the
international community's continuing support to
Afghanistan during the transformation decade is of the
utmost importance.

We appreciate the role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
coordinating the efforts of the international community
in Afghanistan. Turkey will continue to support the
work carried out by UNAMA. Turkey will also continue
its bilateral and multilateral efforts with a view to
assisting Afghanistan in overcoming the challenges it
faces. We attach importance to the efforts exerted by
the Afghan National Unity Government. There may
be some areas where the desirable level of success
has not been achieved, and which might therefore be
subject of criticism by the legitimate opposition. We
also believe that such criticism should be expressed
with a constructive spirit with a view to strengthening
the confidence of the Afghan people, especially in the
face of the National Unity Government's fight against
terrorism and efforts towards a peace process.

Maintaining security and stability in Afghanistan
should remain a key priority. The stability of
Afghanistan, and subsequently that of the region,
will depend upon improved security. The Secretary-
General's report points out to a considerable increase
of 26 per cent in civilian casualties as compared to the
same period in 2014. Nevertheless, that figure should not
be perceived as an indicator to the overall performance
of the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF). While
in 2014 the ANSF had the support of the International
Security Assistance Force, 2015 has been the first year
for them to operate under full security responsibility.
The ANSF gained considerable experience in the past
fighting season. We are confident that that experience
will lead to an enhanced performance in 2016.

The Taliban's temporary seizure of Kunduz
constituted a major setback. Nevertheless, on the
other side of the coin, the retaking of Kunduz could
be seen as a success of the ANSF. We believe that, as
the shortcomings of the security forces in terms of
equipment, training and operational capabilities are
addressed, the ANSF's victories against the Taliban and
other armed groups will increase. The success stories
of the Afghan National Security Forces would further
increase the confidence and hopes ofthe Afghan people.

Many of the problems faced by the countries of
the region - such as terrorism, organized crime and
the illegal narcotics trade - are of trans-boundary
nature. Close cooperation among the countries of the
region is crucial in tackling those challenges. In thiat
regard, the Istanbul Process continues to serve as an
effective cooperation model that is capable of bringing
about practical solutions to the current challenges in the
Heart of Asia region.

We welcome the recent initiatives to overcome the
stagnation in the relationship between Afghanistan and
Pakistan. The talks that took place between President
Ghani and Prime Minister Sharif on 30 November and
9 December in Paris and Islamabad, respectively, were
important. President Ghani's statements following
those meetings - that the two countries had agreed
to eliminate the terrorist groups who insisted on
continuing violence and that the following round of talks
within the peace process would likely start within a few
weeks - were encouraging. The successful outcome of
the peace and reconciliation process is a sine qua non
for lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan and the
region.

Turkey will continue its support to the Afghan
Government in its endeavours towards bringing peace,
stability and prosperity to Afghanistan, as long as our
help is needed. Turkey's assistance to the Afghan people
is the most comprehensive development aid programme
directed to a single country throughout its history.
Within this aid programme, Turkey has completed
more than 800 projects since 2004. The programme
will continue in the years ahead with a commitment
of $150 million for the period 2015-2017. As a display
of our commitment to the security of Afghanistan,
Turkey is one of the four framework nations of the
Resolute Support Mission. Turkey will continue its
capacity-building programmes, both within the NATO
framework and on a bilateral basis with regard to the
Afghan National Army and police.

The meeting rose at1.35p.m.
