Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Portugal's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
wish you success in your duties. We are grateful to you
for scheduling the subject of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict for discussion in this open debate.

The Security Council frequently acts selectively
when it comes to choosing which civilians merit
protection and which do not. While dealing with this
issue it is not unusual for a double standard to be
applied. Some members of the Security Council, while
promoting resolutions supposedly in order to protect
civilians, are actually seeking a position of political
and economic hegemony for themselves over
developing countries. This deplorable practice distorts
the principles established in the Charter of the United
Nations and degrades the noble goal of protecting
civilians. It is immoral to use the noble concept of the
protection of civilians in order to overthrow
Governments in developing countries, to despicably
interfere with the internal affairs of sovereign States,
and to benefit transnational corporations that profit
cynically from countries' destruction and
reconstruction. Some imperialist Powers have

interpreted the protection of civilians in self-serving
ways, thereby worsening national conflicts and
compromising the reliability and impartiality of the
United Nations.

It is therefore commendable and noteworthy that
in today's Council debate, several countries have
condemned the unscrupulous use of Security Council
resolutions, such as resolution 1970 (2011), for
furthering petty political and economical interests.
Those countries have spoken out on behalf of the
peoples of the world who are calling for peace, justice
and coexistence in solidarity among nations. The
protection of civilians in armed conflict should be
carried out by peaceful means. Diplomacy and
dialogue are the most appropriate ways to protect
civilians and the best guarantee of achieving
international peace and security. Using military force is
neither the sole or best way to protect civilians. In
those extreme cases where it is necessary, its
application should be based on the principle of
proportionality.

The economic greed of some Powers, which need
to perpetuate their neocolonialism to ensure their own
survival, is the main threat to human life in the world.
The growing influence of big economic and financial
transnational corporations on the decisions taken by
various agencies of the United Nations system,
particularly the Security Council, is therefore
deplorable.

We recognize the importance of the expressions
of democracy that have been demonstrated in North
Africa and the Arab and Islamic world. The Venezuelan
people stand in solidarity with the legitimate
aspirations of all peoples of the world who seek, in a
sovereign manner, to achieve their human rights and
enjoy democracy, freedom and independence. The
people are the only owners of their own destinies, and
therefore cannot countenance continuing foreign
interventions by imperialist Powers in the internal
affairs of the countries of the South, carried out on the
pretext of protecting civilians.
Inequality, poverty, unemployment, the
inequalities of the international economic system and
foreign domination and occupation are all causes of
conflict in many countries around the world. To
prevent civilian conflict, what is needed first and
foremost is to promote policies of social justice. That
should be the approach taken in international
cooperation.

The Bolivarian Government believes that attacks
on civilians must be condemned regardless of who is
responsible. Attacks on civilians and civilian targets
are prohibited under international law, yet the world
has witnessed indiscriminate attacks on innocent
people, using missiles and bombs, which have caused
thousands of deaths in the name of the protection of
civilians.

The Security Council has acted selectively, as
some of its members have acknowledged today, in
choosing which civilians deserve protection. It also
uses the sanctions regime to punish the Governments
and peoples of developing countries. In contrast, it
remains silent in the face of massive human rights
violations, such as those committed against the
Palestinian people. Why is protection not given to the
Palestinian civilians whose human rights are
systematically violated?

The notion of the responsibility to protect has
been manufactured by the ideologues of neoliberalism
and unbridled capitalism so as to trespass on the
sovereignty and self-determination of nations. The
responsibility to protect is a lethal weapon used by
imperialists to justify and impose their interests. Its
most ardent proponents are precisely those countries
that, in the past, implemented colonial policies and
subjugated the peoples of the South.

This notion is a reformulation of the old
imperialistic political theories. The Western Powers
claimed back then that their superior civilization gave
them the right to invade sovereign nations, supposedly
to distance them from their allegedly barbaric
practices. That ominous history gave rise to the
international regime of protectorates, established by
the League of Nations.

We categorically declare that the responsibility
for the protection of civilians is solely the purview of
States, and that any assistance given by the
international community, as applicable, must always
have the consent of the affected State.

By delegitimizing the principle of sovereignty -
the main political institution of the post-war
international order - the imperialists and neoliberals
are rejecting the fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

In the name of the responsibility to protect, acts
of aggression have been carried out that violate
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. The case of Libya has
been emblematic in that regard. The so-called
collateral damage of death and destruction wrought by
NATO in that country must be thoroughly examined by
the Council, as suggested by some ofits members. That
collateral damage has a human face, seen in the
children, the women and the elderly of Libya, which
cannot be forgotten, and it cannot go unpunished, as
those who caused it would wish.

