Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, I wish to welcome you once again to the
Council. I would like at the outset to thank the
Mexican delegation for having convened this open
meeting at a time when we really needed it. Secondly, I
wish to thank the representatives of the various
regional and subregional organizations for their
valuable contributions to our debate. I should like in
particular to thank the Executive Secretary of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), Mr. Chambas, for his important statement.

In my delegation's view, the organizations whose
representatives we have just heard, because of the
structure that they have established and of their
experience, have reached a stage where they can truly
address crisis situations. However, there are
difficulties. Among them are, of course, the limited
resources available - financial, material and logistical.
To take the example of ECOWAS, the statement just
made by the Executive Secretary was very instructive
in this respect. For more than a decade now, given the
numerous civil wars the subregion has faced, ECOWAS
has been taking concrete steps to deal with those
conflicts and end them. Very significant results have
been achieved. But if we consider the current situation
in Cote d'Ivoire, we have to recognize that there is an
urgent need for funds. Efforts have already been made
by some States, which the Executive Secretary has just
mentioned - and my delegation thanks them. But I

believe that it is important that other States follow the
lead of those that have already acted.

I think that it would be good also to stress
compliance with Security Council resolutions through
cooperation rather than confrontation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. That is particularly important. It is
normal that regional and subregional organizations
should sometimes defend the interests of their member
States. However, some States systematically violate
Council resolutions. I think that is not a normal
situation and that it should be condemned. The regional
and subregional organizations must in that respect
work closely with the Council.

Without naming any State, I would like to give an
example. While the authorities of a State consider it
quite normal to send the President of the Security
Council a letter communicating their reasons for
violating Council resolutions, it is simply a delaying
tactic used to justify their systematic refusal to respect
the principles of the Charter and their obligations. I
think such conduct deserves to be denounced and
should in no way be supported by subregional
organizations.
With respect to maintaining ongoing relationships
between the United Nations and the regional and
subregional organizations through the representatives
of the Secretary-General in various Member States, I
think the West African subregion does not have any
problems. The Executive Secretary has just welcomed
the opening in Dakar of the United Nations Office for
West Africa. As far as I know, cooperation between
ECOWAS and that Office is functioning correctly.

I had a question, but I shall not ask it, as the
Executive Secretary has described the situation of the
troops of the ECOWAS in Cote d'Ivoire. I wanted to
know what steps he considers that the international
community and the Security Council should take to try
to find a solution to the financial problems that the
ECOWAS is facing. As he responded to that question
in his statement, it is not worth asking again.

