Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
crisis in Darfur is dire. Large numbers of people face
starvation and oppression. Tens of thousands have
already died, and many more continue to live in fear
for their lives.

For months, the United Nations family, the
African Union, bilateral donors and other organizations
have been mobilizing attention and resources to avert
the humanitarian and security catastrophe which has
been emerging. My own ministers have worked
tirelessly to that end.

This resolution is a further vital step forward in
the Council's consideration of Darfur. It builds on
some positive steps which have been taking place, but
underlines the need for the Government of Sudan to
implement all the commitments it has already made to
the Secretary-General. Those commitments include the
most basic of a Government"s obligations to its own
people: the obligation to protect them - something
that the Government of Sudan has so far failed to do.

The rebels in Darfur also bear their share of the
responsibility for the present crisis. The resolution
demands that they, too, meet their obligations and,
without pre-condition, engage in peace talks and act to
resolve the conflict.

The resolution supports the positive involvement
of the African Union on the ground, and emphasizes
the need for the international community to provide
more humanitarian assistance.

There has been progress elsewhere in Sudan, and
we look forward to the successful completion of the
Naivasha process. In this resolution, the United
Nations is signalling its willingness to support that
agreement and, as necessary, deploy a peace support
operation. But a solution to Darfur is a necessary
condition for that support.

The international community wants to work in
concert and cooperation with the Government of
Sudan. This would be greatly preferable to compulsion
and sanctions. But the message to the Government and
to the rebels should be clear and firm. If commitments
and obligations are not met, if peace talks are not
entered into constructively and in good faith, and if the
intimidation and atrocities do not end, then the
Council, when it reviews progress next month, will be
considering measures as provided for in Article 41 of
the Charter.

The adoption of this resolution underlines the
commitment of the Security Council to ensure that all
Governments fulfil that most basic of obligations - the
duty to protect their own citizens.

