The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to recall that, at its 6285th meeting, on 18 March 2010,
the Security Council adopted resolution 1914 (2010),
by which it decided that the election to fill the vacancy
in the International Court of Justice should take place
on 29 June 2010 at a meeting of the Security Council
and at a meeting of the General Assembly at its sixty-
fourth session.

This morning, the Security Council and the
General Assembly will proceed independently with the
election, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Statute of the Court, for the purpose of filling the
vacancy that occurred on 28 May 2010 owing to the
resignation of Judge, former Vice-President and former
President of the International Court of Justice Mr. Shi
J iuyong of China.

The Security Council has before it document
S/2010/297, which contains the candidate nominated
by national groups of States parties to the Statute of the
International Court of Justice, as well as document
S/2010/299, which contains the curriculum vitae of the
candidate nominated by national groups.

The Security Council also has before it a
memorandum by the Secretary-General (S/2010/298)
that describes the present composition of the Court and
sets out the procedure to be followed in the conduct of
the election. Following the deadline for nominations,
nominations were also received from the national
groups of India and the Slovak Republic.

I should like to remind the Council that, in
accordance with Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute
of the International Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly and in
the Security Council shall be considered as
elected."

The required majority in the Security Council is
eight votes.
2
Article 15 of the Statute of the Court provides that

"A member of the Court elected to replace a
member whose term of office has not expired
shall hold office for the remainder of his
predecessor's term."

Accordingly, the member elected to fill the
remainder of the term left vacant by the resignation of
Judge Shi Jiuyong will serve until 5 February 2012.

The Council will now proceed to draw lots to
select two delegations to serve as tellers. Obviously,
the delegation of China will not be considered to serve
as a teller because a candidate of that nationality has
been nominated. The delegation of Mexico will also be
excluded from serving as a teller because it occupies
the presidency of the Council this month.

>l<>l<>l<

The President (spoke in Spanish): The names of
the delegations of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Gabon
have been drawn. I request them to appoint one of their
members to serve as tellers.

At the invitation ofthe President, Ms. Durbuzovie
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) and Mrs. Onanga
(Gabon) acted as tellers.


The President (spoke in Spanish): The voting
will be held by secret ballot. When we proceed to the
vote, members of the Council will receive a ballot
paper containing the name of the candidate. Members
of the Council will be requested to place an "X" in the
box next to the name of the candidate for whom they
wish to vote. Votes may be cast only for a candidate
whose name appears on the ballot paper.

May I take it that the Council is now ready to
proceed with the election of a member of the
International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

I ask the Conference Officer to distribute the
ballot papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in
the box next to the name of the candidate for whom
they wish to vote.

>l=>l<>l<


The President (spoke in Spanish): All the ballot
papers have been collected. The tellers will now count
10-42670
the ballots. There will be two independent countings of
the ballots, one by each teller.

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
suspend this meeting until the ballots are counted.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

The meeting was suspended at 10.40 am. and
resumed at I] am.


The President (spoke in Spanish): The result of
the voting is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of abstentions 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:

Xue Hanqin (China) 15

Accordingly, Ms. Xue Hanqin has obtained the
required majority of votes in the Security Council.

I shall now send a letter to the President of the
General Assembly informing him of the result of the
voting in the Security Council.

I request the Council to remain in session while
we wait for the President of the General Assembly to
inform the Council of the result of the voting in the
Assembly.

***
10-42670


The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the members of the Council that I have just
received from the Acting President of the General
Assembly the following letter:

(spoke in English)

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
102nd plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing a member
of the International Court of Justice, the
following candidate obtained an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly: Ms.
Xue Hanqin."

(spoke in Spanish)

As both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on the same candidate, Ms. Xue
Hanqin has been elected as a member of the
International Court of Justice for the remainder of the
term of office of Judge Shi Jiuyong, that is, until 5
February 2012. I should like to congratulate her most
warmly and to wish her every success in the high office
to which she has been elected. I should also like to
thank the tellers for their assistance.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
business for this meeting.

The meeting rose at 11.05 am.

