Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Mladenov for his customary
concise and incisive briefing, which elucidated for us
the current situation in the Middle East in general and
in Gaza in particular.

We want to begin by expressing our serious concerns
about the conflicts that persist in the Middle East from
Syria to Yemen and Lebanon and the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, leading to enormous losses in human life and
humanitarian devastation on a broad scale, particularly
in the case of Yemen and several regions in Syria and
in the Gaza Strip. It is regrettable to note that, far from
seeing any signs of a resolution to those conflicts, we
are seeing them deteriorate with the danger of greater
devastation, such as in the case of Israel and Palestine
in the Gaza Strip.

We must recognize that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has lasted for a long time now and is
fundamental and central to the entire situation in the
Middle East. We can hardly expect to achieve peace
in the region without a fair and lasting solution to
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The significance and
gravity of the conflict lie not only in the fact that it
is causing great suffering to those who are directly
affected, but also in the undeniable impact that it has
on stability in the region.

We have already seen how the ramifications of
the Syrian conflict are directly affecting the situation,
as recent events show. Efforts must be aimed at
preventing an escalation. The parties must refrain
from unilateral actions that could hinder initiatives
geared towards dialogue aimed at resolving the issue.
Such a resolution requires a commitment by the parties
to negotiate in a direct and frank process without
preconditions and within the framework of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the principle of land for peace. The final status
of Jerusalem must also be part of the outcome of
those negotiations.

In order to facilitate that process, the parties must
refrain from unilateral acts that could hinder dialogue or
further complicate an already precarious situation. It is
important that the parties respect resolution 2334 (2016).
We reiterate our call to both sides to strive for
peaceful coexistence, to respect international law
and to act in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions, so as to arrive at a solution that
satisfies the interests of all parties.

There is no other possible solution to the
Palestinian question than a two-State solution in
which Israelis and Palestinians alike live in peace and
security. The international community must support
the process by offering guarantees aimed at achieving
a successful outcome. Actors with influence in the
Middle East must play a decisive role in convincing
the parties to engage in the dialogue process.
The international community has no choice but to
redouble its diplomatic and mediation efforts to the
best ofits ability in order to seek a satisfactory solution.
However, let us not fool ourselves, only Palestinians
and Israelis have the ability to resolve the problem.

Equatorial Guinea believes that the historical
demands of the Palestinians are just, in accordance
with the various positions taken by the African Union.
However, we also believe that Israel has every right
to live in peace and security. Palestine and Israel
must respect each other's right to exist and avoid
any action that could aggravate the current situation.
Similarly, we call for intra-Palestinian dialogue and
for Palestinians to resolve their differences, which
we believe could help achieve a lasting solution to the
conflict in general.

Equatorial Guinea condemns the acts ofviolence that
took place during the Great March of Return convened
by Palestinian civil and political organizations, which
resulted in the deaths of dozens of Palestinians and
hundreds of injured in the Gaza Strip. We very much
regret the loss of human lives and would like to make
a vigorous appeal for an independent and transparent
investigation into those deaths in order to clarify the
circumstances surrounding them and their cause.

The continuing outbreaks of violence between
Palestine and Israel are a source of concern for
Equatorial Guinea, as is the serious humanitarian
situation in Gaza. The humanitarian situation of the
population in Gaza, with problems of water, electricity
and so on, which Mr. Mladenov recently called a
humanitarian, economic and ecological calamity
(see S/PV.8183), requires urgent action in the form
of projects. We must work together to alleviate that
humanitarian disaster and provide full support for
Egypt's reconciliation efforts. It is very urgent that no
effort be spared to avoid the risk of conflagration in the
Gaza Strip, which, as Mr. Mladenov clearly pointed out
in his briefing, would have devastating consequences
and could deteriorate into another open war in Gaza.

Finally, I would also like to express our appreciation
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) for its
efforts to alleviate the humanitarian situation and crisis
in the occupied territories. We call on the international
community to resolutely support UNRWA so that it
can carry out its work and alleviate the suffering of the
people in the occupied territories.

