The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Sudan in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Manis
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/59l and addendum 1, containing the
report of the Secretary-General on Darfur.

Members of the Council also have before them
document 8/2006/699, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Argentina, Denmark,
France, Ghana, Greece, Slovakia, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
Republic of Tanzania and the United States of America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Congo, Denmark, France, Ghana,
Greece, Japan, Peru, Slovakia, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America

Against:
None

Abstaining:
China, Qatar, Russian Federation


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 12 in favour, none against and 3 abstentions.
The draft resolution has been adopted as resolution
1706 (2006).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements following the
voting.


