Mr. Annan: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to address the Council today. The topic of today's
discussion is extremely important and one that is close
to my heart. I will limit my remarks today to what
concerns Africa, although I believe that the challenges
facing the continent also have relevance for many other
parts of the world. I believe that Council members have
received the Africa Progress Report 2013 - "Equity in
extractives".

For years, we have seen that natural resources have
been a presence in and at times a driver of internal
and regional conflicts in Africa. Over the past 15
years alone, rivalry for access to natural resources has
fuelled wars and rebellions in Sierra Leone, Liberia,
the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Sudan, South
Sudan, and elsewhere. Oil has also played an important
role in the recurring violence in the Niger delta.
This close and recurrent association between natural
resources and war has led some people to describe
the discovery and exploitation of natural resources in
Africa as a curse.

Such a View is far too simplistic. For every conflict,
one can find several contrasting examples of African
countries where natural resources are now fuelling
sustained high growth and are improving their citizens'
daily lives. Natural resources are neither a curse nor a
blessing; they are simply a source of opportunity. They
can be used for tremendous good or they can be wasted.

Over the past decade, Africa's economies have
been riding the crest of a global commodity wave.
Surging demand for natural resources in China and
other emerging markets has pushed export prices to new
highs. Africa's petroleum, gas and natural resources
have become a powerful magnet for foreign investment.
With new exploration revealing much larger reserves
than were previously known, Africa stands to reap a
natural resource windfall.

The challenge facing the region's Governments is
to convert the temporary windfall into a permanent
breakthrough in human development.

Let us remember that natural resources do not cause
war. Violent conflict happens when national institutions
are too weak to contain political, ethnic or religious
tensions within a peaceful national dialogue. But
competition for natural resources can often amplify and
accelerate conflict, tearing apart the already weakened
fabric of such fragile States, or raise the stakes in latent
conflicts between neighbouring countries.

The discussion therefore needs to focus on how
natural resources can contribute to higher human
development outcomes and reduce inequality; the
actors involved in their extraction; and the rules that
govern international commerce that can help prevent
such centrifugal forces from occurring. The effective
and transparent management of a country's natural
resources is a priority for preventing conflict, fighting
corruption and promoting sustainable development.

For societies to function and prosper, we need
three interrelated conditions - what I call three
pillars - economic and social development; peace and
security; and the rule oflaw and respect for human rights.
If exploited well, natural resources can contribute to
strengthening all three. The responsibility for ensuring
that lies primarily with African Governments. The
starting point is for all countries to develop national
strategies that set up the terms under which their
natural resources will be developed, including fiscal
policies, contractual arrangements and tax regimes.
Those strategies should replace short-term calculations
with the necessary long-term thinking.

Critically, those national strategies must identify
extractive projects that can generate more jobs by
linking effectively to the existing local economy. Africa
cannot build dynamic growth and shared prosperity
while extractive projects operate within enclaves, or
countries export natural resources without value added.
Above all, national strategies have to set out how the
extractive sector fits with plans for poverty reduction,
inclusive growth and social transformation.

Success will require leadership, transparency and
accountability. Transparency is a powerful tool, and
there is no substitute for public scrutiny in developing
effective and equitable policies.

However, African Governments cannot resolve
all those governance challenges on their own. The
international community must also shoulder its
responsibility. When foreign investors make extensive
use of offshore companies, shell companies and
tax havens, they weaken disclosure standards and
undermine the efforts of reformers in Africa to promote
transparency. Such practices also facilitate tax evasion
and, in some countries, corruption, draining Africa of
revenues that should be deployed against poverty and
vulnerability.

This year's Africa Progress Report found that
anonymous shell companies were used in five deals
that cost the Democratic Republic of the Congo nearly
$ 1.4 billion between 2010 and 2012. That sum is
equivalent to almost double the country's combined
budget in 2012 for health and education. Indeed, Africa
loses more money every year through the tax-avoidance
technique known as "trade mispricing" than it receives
in international development assistance.

Conflicts driven by natural resources can, and
should, be prevented long before they start. Once arms
are drawn it is too late. By securing international rules
to close down opportunities for tax avoidance, rules
that limit the use of shell companies and other tools
that contribute to secret, murky and exploitative deals,
the international community may help prevent the
conditions that lead to armed competition for the spoils
of natural wealth. Once an armed conflict has started,
natural-resource wealth both drives it, by increasing the
reward for victory, and fuels it, by providing revenue to
buy arms and ammunition.

The Council can play an important role in ending
the plunder of minerals and other natural resources
that perpetuates violent conflict. In West Africa,
for example, the Council took vigorous action to ban
the trafficking in diamonds and timber, the proceeds
of which was funding armed groups. Without those
measures, the efforts of the United Nations to end
the wars in that region would have been harder. The
Kimberley Process to prevent "blood diamonds"
was not ideal, but it showed that the international
community was able to work together to cut off illegal
revenue streams that fuel wars.

What we need today is a much more ambitious and
comprehensive framework for transparency, fair tax
practices and asset pricing so that the conditions that
contribute to conflict over natural resources can be
eliminated. The Africa Progress Panel, which I chair,
looked in detail at how natural-resource wealth could
best contribute to improved well-being and equitable
growth for African nations. Our outlook is optimistic.

For the first time in more than a generation, the
number of people in poverty in Africa has fallen. Child
death rates are declining. There has been progress
in combating major infectious diseases. More of
Africa's children are in school. All of that is evidence
that a combination of stronger economic growth and
strengthened policies can deliver results.

Building on a decade of strong growth, economic
governance continues to improve in many countries,
providing protection against the boom-bust cycle
fuelled by earlier commodity booms. Across the
region, democracy is sinking deeper roots, and the
accountability that comes with democracy strengthens
natural-resource management. Some foreign investors
show that they can make a healthy return from
African investment while also adhering to the highest
international standards of social and environmental
protection.

Economic collaboration across borders has shown
itself to be a very strong peace-builder. Such cross-
border collaboration should be strongly encouraged
by Governments with private sector partners, when
it comes to the exploitation and processing of natural
resources, whether it is through multi-country
pipelines, iron ore smelters, refineries or other down-
stream industries based on extraction.

It is encouraging that today a shared agenda
is emerging. What is striking is that change is
happening, and happening fast, as the demand for
greater transparency and fairness extends globally and
accelerates. For example, for citizens everywhere, in
Africa, in the Group of Eight (G-8) countries and across
the globe, current tax practices are raising questions
about fairness, social justice and citizenship.

In the past year, the United States and the European
Union have introduced new transparency requirements.
We have seen the United Kingdom and France Sign up
for the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative,
and now Canada has announced its intention to
introduce mandatory transparency requirements for
its extractive sector. Switzerland has also just voted to
draft a payment disclosure law similar to the ones ofthe
United States and the European Union.

The international community has a major
responsibility to put in place such an environment.
The G-8 Summit in Lough Erne earlier this week was
a major step towards creating such an environment. I
hope the United Nations can continue to play its role in
helping to make this happen.

