Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): Six long
years after the ceasefire resolution 687 (1991) established
the framework for establishing peace and security in the
Persian Gulf and for reintegrating Iraq into the
community of peaceful nations, Iraq remains far from
compliance with the obligations it made to this Council.
On the contrary, Iraq has expended its best efforts to
thwart the will of the Council, particularly in the crucial
area of weapons of mass destruction. Never has this been
made more clear than by Chairman Ekeus when he
briefed the Council this week on the extremely serious
incidents that have led us to this draft resolution today.

Chairman Ekeus documented a pattern of Iraqi
abuses that extends well beyond the three incidents of
blockage directed at inspection teams of the United
Nations Special Commission (UN SCOM) on 10 June and
12 June. Since 1991, Iraq has made every effort to
conceal its true weapons capabilities, to destroy evidence
of its programmes and supply routes and to lie about it to
this Council. In the last two years, Iraqi efforts to
interfere with the Special Commission in the execution of
its mandate have intensified. UNSCOM. inspectors have
videotapes of members of the Republican Guard burying
missile components; UNSCOM. inspectors have observed
blatant efforts to remove documents and other evidence
from sites while the inspectors themselves have been
prevented from entering; and UNSCOM. inspectors have
been refused permission to interview knowledgeable
individuals.

 

Not only do these actions grossly violate Iraq's
obligations under Security Council resolutions 687 (1991),
707 (1991), 715 (1991) and 1060 (1996), they abrogate
even the modalities that Iraq itself agreed to with the
Chairman just last year. And as Iraqi officials said
explicitly to UNSCOM. inspectors, these obstructionist
actions were taken under orders from the highest authorities
in Baghdad. There can be no doubt, as Chairman Ekeus has
documented, that the UNSCOM. system of inspection,
verification and elimination faces the most serious threat it
has faced since it was established.

Iraq's continued failure is a serious threat to the
region's peace and security. In his report of 11 April,
Chairman Ekeus states that he cannot certify that Iraq has
accounted for all the proscribed weapons it possesses. He
underscores again that Iraq maintains a policy deliberately
designed to conceal the extent of its capabilities and the
quantities of weapons it still maintains from the eyes of
United Nations inspectors and continues to provide
deliberately misleading information in its so-called full,
final and complete declarations. His recent briefings to the
Council confirm that there has been no improvement in
these alarming policies since April.

The report also concludes, tellingly, that UNSCOM
will not be able to complete its work until the "major
political decision" is made by Iraq's leadership

"to give up, once and for all, all capabilities and
ambition to retain or acquire proscribed weapons".

Time and again this Council has expressed its support
for UNSCOM. through resolutions and the statements of the
Council President. Iraq has responded with contempt. Well,
the time for mere words is over. Iraq has shown us that it
will never voluntarily comply with resolutions of the
Council unless the Council acts firmly and decisively to
enforce its will. That is why we have brought forward this
draft resolution today, which will demonstrate conclusively
to Iraq that its actions have serious consequences. Iraq has
to know that if it not only fails to make progress but
deliberately moves backwards in its respect for the Council
and for the Commission, then there is a price to pay.

Let me be clear about the action the Council is taking
today. We have chosen these particular steps because they
are measured and targeted. The draft resolution limits
suspension of the 60-day sanctions review to a fixed period,
specifically until the next semi-annual
UNSCOM/International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
progress report in October. The Council's action suspends
only the reviews scheduled for 30 June and 30 August. In
our View, there is no possibility that either of those
reviews could result in a change in the sanctions regime,
given the extent to which Iraq's current challenge has set
back the Commission's work. So this measure sends a
strong message to Baghdad that lifting sanctions will be
impossible until Iraq fundamentally changes its approach.

Similarly, the Council expresses its intent to impose
new measures, targeted precisely at those parties most
responsible for the continued concealment of Iraq's
weapons programmes, if Iraq ignores this latest draft
resolution and fails to comply not just with the form but
with the substance of the Commission's authority to
conduct inspections and interviews without interference of
any sort.

My Government shares the concerns of Chairman
Ekeus that those hurt most by the actions of the Iraqi
Government are the Iraqi people themselves, whose
country remains a pariah because of the obstinate refusal
of its leaders to abide by their international obligations.
We too would like to see the day when Iraq can rejoin
the world community as a respected member nation. But
if UNSCOM. cannot fulfil its mandate because of Iraqi
interference, if the Executive Chairman cannot report that
Iraq is in compliance with the resolutions of the Council,
then the day cannot come when sanctions relief is in
sight. The steps we have taken here today should be a
concrete demonstration of this fact to the ruling clique in
Baghdad. We hope they will heed this lesson well and
draw the correct conclusions.

I should also like to add that by any measure, Rolf
Ekeus's efforts as the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM
since its beginning in 1991 have been exceptional. He
brought refreshing candour, ingenuity and tenacity to the
often daunting job of carrying out the Security Council's
requirements. We thank Rolf Ekeus for his outstanding
service. We are confident that Ambassador Butler will
continue to provide the kind of leadership that
distinguished his predecessor.

The United States pledges its continued strong
support to UNSCOM. in its mission to ensure full Iraqi
compliance with Security Council resolutions. By its
decision today, the Council has demonstrated that it will
do the same.

