Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General James Swan for his comprehensive
briefing on developments in Somalia. We also thank
the other briefers for the information they have shared
with us. We join other speakers in expressing our
condolences in connection with the tragic death of
Ms. Almaas Elman.

Russia supports Mogadishu's efforts to achieve
domestic political and socioeconomic stability. We are
committed to working diligently in the Security Council
to facilitate a resolution to the crisis in Somalia while
preserving both its unity and territorial integrity. We
note the importance of the general elections planned for
2020 and 2021 for strengthening Somali statehood. We
welcome the steps taken by the Somali authorities to
prepare for that event, which is historic in every sense,
with the holding ofa popular vote based on the principle
of one person, one vote, for the first time in 50 years.
Somalia's National Independent Electoral Commission
is now functioning smoothly, and the National
Electoral Security Task Force has been established
with the support of international partners. In our view,
the next logical steps are enacting an electoral law and
introducing the necessary constitutional amendments.
In that connection, we welcomed Mogadishu's
commitment, affirmed at the Somalia Partnership
Forum at the beginning of October, to meeting the
deadlines for those undertakings. We hope the process
will continue to develop according to plan.

The situation in Somalia remains highly volatile.
The Federal Government is dealing with numerous
challenges, including the need to restore State
institutions and establish a dialogue between the
centre and the regions, as well as among the regions
themselves. We call for continued efforts to strike a
balance of interests among all clans. We believe that the
federal states' ultimatums with regard to Mogadishu and
their lack of commitment to constructive cooperation,
along with the conflicts between individual regions,
threaten to unleash a spiral of decentralizing trends.
That hampers the national dialogue and makes it
difficult to organize collective efforts on major issues
on Somalia's domestic agenda. We are pleased about
the results that the Federal Government achieved in the
reconciliation processes in Galmudug and South-West
states. That success should be developed further. We
call for intensifying efforts to build bridges with the
Jubaland and Puntland authorities.

We are concerned about the increase in Al-Shabaab's
activity, which is producing growing numbers of
casualties among civilians as well as personnel of the
Somali National Army and the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), including foreign specialists.
We believe that AMISOM. is an essential component in
countering Al-Shabaab, and we call on the international
community to continue the agreed measures to build
up the capacity of the Somali National Army and
AMISOM. While it is clear that African peacekeepers
cannot remain in Somalia indefinitely, the drawdown
of the Mission should be carried out in stages, based
on the level of the Somali National Army's readiness
to provide security independently to the State and its
citizens. Given the difficult humanitarian situation
in Somalia, the Russian Federation will continue
to provide assistance to the country and to Somali
refugees in neighbouring countries through earmarked
contributions to the relevant World Food Programme
funds. We also intend to continue to provide training to
Somali civilian personnel.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize once again
that the only way to effectively combat all these
challenges is through strict respect for the sovereignty
of Somalia and non-interference by foreign players in
its internal affairs.

