Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to welcome Mr. John Holmes, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and to thank him for
his briefing to the Council on his recent visit to
Somalia, Ethiopia and the Sudan, and his operational
activities there in the areas of humanitarian relief.

We note that Mr. Holmes's previously expressed
warning that we should be prepared for a very bad year
from the humanitarian perspective was correct. That
justifies the high importance he attaches to
humanitarian relief efforts, prominent among which are
the activities of the United Nations as the one
Organization capable of confronting deteriorating
humanitarian situations.

One humanitarian problem that has worsened,
and which is being increasingly neglected by the
international community, is the suffering of Somali
civilians in the deteriorated security and political
situation in the country. Most inhabitants of the capital
are living in insecure conditions. Mr. Holmes has
stated that more than 1.5 million people are internally
displaced, suffering from a shortage of basic foodstuffs
and facing the danger of starvation. If the international
community is to provide assistance to Somalia, the
situation there should be described frankly, explicitly
and objectively so that no one can mistake it for a mere
matter of food assistance or a difficult humanitarian
situation. We must address the root causes that led to
the current degradation of the situation in Somalia.

As everybody knows, one of the principal root
causes is the fact that the country is under the yoke of
occupation, while flagrant violations of international
law and international humanitarian law, as well as war
crimes committed against Somali civilians, continue
unabated. Throughout the country, there are
widespread extrajudicial executions and crimes against
humanity in all their forms and manifestations,
including rape, torture, violations of human rights,
especially those of women and children, and the
flagrant violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Times
of War.

Making the situation even worse is the United
Nations inability to respond to the call by the African
Union for support to the Africa Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which the
Union has been unable fully to deploy until now. It is
well known that the Security Council, following the
adoption of resolution 1772 (2007), has been unable,
regrettably, to respond to that call due to the
reservations of some States members of the Council
over providing the necessary logistic support to
AMISON, as well as to the fact that foreign forces in
Somalia are responsible for the deteriorating situation.
Such forces should withdraw in order to calm the
situation in that country, allowing AMISOM. to assume
the responsibilities entrusted to it through its
acceptance by the Somali people. That is precisely
what we called for in December 2006, when we
presided over the Security Council, with a warning
about just what we are seeing today.

As Mr. Holmes stated, we attach great importance
to ongoing work to implement the joint communique
agreed last March by the Government of the Sudan and
the United Nations on the provision of humanitarian
assistance. We also assign high priority to ongoing
efforts to build confidence in the Sudanese
Government to mitigate all the obstacles that might
face humanitarian assistance in Darfur, prominent
among which are the attacks undertaken by the rebel
groups. We condemn all criminal acts perpetrated by
the rebels, including threats and the targeting of
humanitarian assistance convoys and peacekeepers. We
reiterate our condemnation of the terrorist acts
undertaken by the rebel groups in Darfur, following the
most recent attacks on the headquarters of the African
Union Mission in Sudan in Haskanita in early October
of this year, which were also condemned by the
Security Council in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2007/35.

We further confirm the importance of deploying
the hybrid operation to facilitate the political and
humanitarian tracks, and call for deterrence of the rebel
groups that have recently threatened the States that will
participate in this operation. It is clearly critical and
inevitable that we exert increasing pressure on those
rebel groups.

There is no doubt that Africa is home to many of
the world's most dire humanitarian situations. Armed
conflict is one of the main reasons for the suffering of
a huge number of civilians.

For my part, however, I would like to draw
attention to the region I am from - the Middle East,
which has its share of worsening humanitarian
disasters. I refer in particular to the difficult
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, as one of the worst-ever cases in the world,
especially in the Gaza Strip. That situation is unique in
comparison to other disaster areas in the world, as the
area is a huge prison due to the closures policies of the
Government of Israel and its occupying forces.

There is no doubt that the availability of
sufficient financial resources from donors is one of the
most important means for coping with natural disasters
and for providing assistance to civilian populations
facing a very difficult and deteriorating humanitarian
situation. Our humanitarian duty compels all of us to
continue to provide that necessary financial assistance
in order to continue emergency relief efforts. The State
of Qatar is one of the leading States that actually did
what it said it would, and provided quick financial and
in-kind support for relief efforts and emergency
assistance, in particular in the case of humanitarian
disasters.

