Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to express our gratitude for
this opportunity for States non-members of the
Security Council to express their views on the very
serious situation in the Gaza Strip.

The recent developments in the Gaza Strip are
alarming and once again show that the main victims of
violence and military operations are innocent civilians,
especially Palestinians. On the occasion of the
beginning of the Israeli military operations in Gaza on
3 January, the Argentine Government condemned such
operations and the disproportionate use of force by
Israel, as well as the continuous rocket attacks by
Palestinian groups against Israeli territory.

In spite of the reiterated calls on behalf of most
of the international community, hostilities have
intensified over the past few days, and yesterday saw
the death of more than 40 civilians as a result of Israeli
attacks against a school operated by the United Nations
in the Gaza Strip. My country most vigorously
condemns these attacks and believes that an
independent international investigation should be
established to determine responsibilities and to prevent
such acts from being repeated. I would like to convey
to the families of the victims of this conflict the sincere
condolences of the Argentine Government and people.

The Israeli response after 27 December has been
altogether excessive and disproportionate. Israel must
fully respect its obligations in the framework of
international humanitarian law and take all steps to
protect the Palestinian civilian population. United
Nations and other reports regarding the number of
Palestinian civilians who have died as a result of Israeli
bombing and land operations show that such steps have
not been taken.

That is why my country feels that the immediate
priority is to declare a ceasefire and to end violence
and all military operations. The Israeli troops must
withdraw from the Gaza Strip and attacks against
Israeli territories much cease. The Israeli proposition to
establish a ceasefire for a few hours is clearly an
unacceptable response, since it cannot contribute in
any way to resolving the grave and urgent
humanitarian needs of the Palestinian civil population.
What is needed at this hour is a permanent and
unconditional end to all hostilities.

Taking into consideration that the parties alone
are not capable of arriving to an agreement, the
8
Security Council must assume its responsibilities and
adopt a resolution in this regard. The Council avoids
this obligation only at the risk of gravely damaging the
credibility of the United Nations. My country supports
the various efforts being made to establish conditions
conducive to the adoption of a decision of this nature.

The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip is
alarming. Under the current conditions, international
assistance cannot reach the affected population. If we
do not act urgently in the short run, it may escalate to a
major humanitarian crisis that could affect more than
1.5 million Palestinians.

Argentina is currently putting together a
significant package of humanitarian assistance for
Gaza. We are prepared to join our efforts with those of
the rest of the international community. However, those
efforts will be meaningless unless assistance
immediately reaches the thousands of Palestinian men,
women and children who are at this very moment
suffering as a result of the violence. It is therefore
urgent that a ceasefire be declared, so that
humanitarian agencies can deploy on the ground and
begin to work.

Finally, I would like to say that the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict has been on the agenda of the
Security Council for more than 60 years. The current
crisis illustrates to us once again the urgency of
achieving a lasting peace in the region that will lead to
the establishment of a democratic, viable and
contiguous Palestinian State living side by side with
Israel in peace and security, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, the
principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

Argentina hopes that the Security Council will
this time shoulder its responsibilities and contribute to
immediately ending hostilities and to establishing the
conditions necessary to achieve peace, so as to benefit
all the peoples living in the Middle East.

