Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it is my pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Allow me to thank Ambassador Ramlan
Bin Ibrahim, Permanent Representative of Malaysia,
for his report as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. I
would also like to thank Mr. Bernardino Leon, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
important briefing. I congratulate him on his courage,
persistence and patience. I would congratulate him and
his team in particular for their achievements thus far in
a complicated and difficult mission.

Allow me to stress to Mr. Leon that the Libyan
Government supports the efforts that he and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya are making to assist
Libyan parties in reaching full agreement on the various
issues that would pave the way towards the creation of
a Government of national accord, which would stem
the bloodshed, enable Libya to emerge from its crisis,
guarantee security for Libyan citizens and revive their
hope of achieving what they fought for in the revolution
of 17 February.

Allow me to begin by addressing the issue of the
Sanctions Committee. Regrettably - and I would say
this frankly - the Committee has indirectly contributed
to continuing instability and further entrenched
terrorism in Libya by insisting on an undeclared veto on
providing weapons to the Libyan army, in contradiction
of paragraph 7 of resolution 2214 (2015), in which the
Council:

"Calls upon the Committee established
pursuant to paragraph 24 of resolution 1970 (2011)
to consider expeditiously requests under paragraph
8 of resolution 2174 (2014) for the transfer or
supply of arms and related materiel, including
related ammunition and spare parts, to the Libyan
Government for the use by its official armed forces
to combat ISIL, groups that pledged allegiance to
ISIL, Ansar Al Charia, and all other individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities associated with
Al-Qaida operating in Libya".

The practices of the Sanctions Committee are in
full contradiction with the provisions of that paragraph.
The Libyan Government's request to the Committee on
26 February 2015 was met with a decision three weeks
later by the Committee that it was to be put on hold
until further information was provided. On the very
next day, 17 March 2015, we provided the information
requested by the Committee. We stressed that delivery
would be made based on payments over six months.
Nevertheless, that request was totally ignored, and we
have yet to receive a response from the Committee.
This shows clearly that there is a premeditated effort
to hamper the efforts of the Libyan Government to
strengthen its capacity to combat terrorism and extend
its authority to all of Libyan territory.

Regrettably, there is also a communication problem
between the Committee and the Libyan Mission. For
example, a proposal was made to list Libyan citizens
on the sanctions list without officially notifying the
Libyan Mission or seeking the opinion of the Libyan
Government on the accuracy of the information
provided, or indeed as to whether the timing was
appropriate for the Security Council to take such a step.

To date we have not indicated that the procedures of
the Committee serve the interests of the Libyan people.
One month after a request was made for exception
from the arms embargo, although we responded to
all clarification requests and indeed suggested that
observers be dispatched to ensure that weapons would
be delivered only to regular army units, we have not
obtained agreement. We hope that the Committee will
change its practices and take into consideration the fact
that transparency and cooperation with the Missions of
the States concerned, and, indeed, respect for all the
provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
is the ideal way to make the sanctions regime effective
and to ensure that any new sanctions, if imposed, are
imposed correctly.

Libya has suffered four years of security and
institutional chaos, a year of civil war and fratricide
for no reason other than the wish of those who claim to
represent Islam to hold onto power to control various
institutions of the Libyan State and its resources. That
has led to the displacement of one third of Libyan
citizens, the wide-ranging destruction of infrastructure
and grave losses in terms of State resources.
Undoubtedly, the political agreement reached in
Skhirat, Morocco, is a major achievement that paves
the way for a peaceful solution that stresses the unity of
the Libyan people and the integrity of Libyan soil and
that ensures State sovereignty throughout its territory,
preserves the rights of all Libyans, ensures the return
of internally displaced persons and refugees to their
homes in conditions of safety, and closes the door to any
potential return of the previous regime or dictatorship,
under any form.

Most Libyans undoubtedly welcome the agreement
and look forward to the implementation of all its
provisions as soon as possible. However, we must not
look to the Skhirat agreement as being the goal; it is but
a path to a goal, a path that is replete with obstacles that
will require major efforts on the part of both the Libyan
people and the United Nations to overcome.

There are personal interests, and there are extremist
and terrorist groups that certainly do not believe in
democracy or the nation State. Some of those remain
a core component within the Libyan Dawn militia
alliance, which controls and occupies the capital,
Tripoli, refuses to sign the agreement and indeed bets
on its failure.

Therefore the agreement remains conditioned
on the resolve of the international community in
convincing all sides and compelling them to commit
to the agreement. It depends on the efforts being made
to implement it in good faith and providing a safe
environment for the work of the Government of national
unity. Furthermore, they need to provide support to the
Government to accelerate the rebuilding of a strong
army, under civilian control, as well as arming the
police and security forces and ensuring their return to
work.

Some positive developments have taken place
in the past few weeks. They make us more hopeful
that common sense will prevail and that there will
be a general commitment to the agreement and its
implementation. I wish to mention the following points.

First, the Misrata brigades have withdrawn
from the areas west of Tripoli. There is a popular
movement in the city of Misrata calling for accord and
for an end to war. There is a pragmatic, reasonable
movement of accord among militias in the western part
of the country, a part of which seems to include the
beginning of the breakdown of relations between the
Libya Dawn militias among extremists and moderates.
However, there also seems to be an attempt to abort
that movement by stressing the association among
moderates and extremists. Indeed, the Italian television
station Canale 7 recently broadcast a report stressing
that weapons continued to flow across the sea from
Misrata to the extremist militias that call themselves
the Benghazi Revolutionaries Shura Council; that
group includes Ansar al-Sharia and Al-Qaida elements,
and it is a movement that since its creation has rejected
democracy. That is clear from the report of the Panel of
Experts (S/2015/128).

The second element is an agreement between
certain militias in the western region to cease hostilities
and to allow the deployment of the army and the police
in some areas, as well as an exchange of detainees, and
allowing the army to enter three areas without a shot
being fired.

Thirdly, there is discord and infighting between the
Daesh militias and the Al-Qaida-associated militias in
the city of Derna, although they have similar ideologies
and they continue to be allied in other areas against the
army, particularly in Benghazi.

Unlike the Daesh militias, the Al-Qaida-associated
militias are present in a number of Libyan cities,
whether as individual militias or within the so-called
Mujahedeen Consultative Council. They have strong
support in terms of money and weapons from illegitimate
authorities in the capital, Tripoli, and certain States,
and they obtain funds from the Libyan central bank.
There is no doubt that some members of the Security
Council are well aware ofwho leads Al-Qaida in Libya,
who provides weapons to Al-Qaida and, indeed, who
supports its political leadership. Surely this must end.

The alliance of malevolent forces from abroad has
been able to deceive many Libyan youths by raising
fears of the return of the previous regime, calling for
respect for, and the application of, the rules of Islam,
and by tempting them with money. They have made
them fodder for a savage war against the State - against
their very brothers - with the aim of ensuring that
terrorism could ultimately strengthen its hold over the
Libyan people, throwing Libyans from their homes,
stealing their money and destroying their property,
and ultimately occupying the capital. Having failed
to achieve any measure of success in the elections,
they have also resorted to every means to destroy the
elected Assembly of Deputies. Perhaps it is a source
of optimism that certain militias and some youths have
come to realize the facts of the matter and have begun
to disassociate themselves from extremist militias
associated with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
Al-Qaida and even Ansar al-Sharia. We hope that the
establishment of a Government of national unity will
be a historic opportunity for all Libyans to reaffirm
their love for their homeland, their mutual respect and
their desire for reconciliation and tolerance with their
brothers, and their wish to heal the wounds of the nation
and come together to save the country from the mire of
terrorism and backwardness and turn towards a better
future for all.

Combating terrorism cannot entail just an ad hoc
response to attacks and criminal acts by terrorist groups.
Fighting terrorism must be based on a clear strategy and
policy built upon a real awareness of the threat. That
implies mobilizing all material and human resources
in every Libyan city in order to combat terrorist
groups and thwart all individuals, States and entities
that provide assistance and support to terrorists. The
time has come for the Security Council to realize the
difference between those who fight to uproot terrorism
as a strategic choice in the interests of the entire Libyan
people - and who say so clearly and honestly, as is the
case in Benghazi 4 and those who have been forced
to become involved with terrorist groups because they
have been coerced or because they seek to safeguard
their spheres of influence, as is the case in Sirte.
Every passing day without Libyan unity in combating
terrorism, without facilitating the provision of weapons
to the Libyan army and without concrete support
from the international community to the legitimate
authorities, serves as another opportunity for terrorist
groups to become stronger by acquiring ever more
weapons and drawing in more foreign fighters to Libya.
The longer that the Security Council turns a blind eye
to the support provided to terrorist groups in Libya
by certain countries, the more the Libyan crisis will
escalate, the more the threat to neighbouring States will
increase and the more distant the hope for achieving the
aspirations of the Libyan people as expressed by way of
their revolt against dictatorship.

Regrettably, the extremists and their allies have thus
far refused to sign the Skhirat agreement. They have
been emboldened by the foot-dragging in the Security
Council on the issue of arming the Libyan army, by the
fact that they are receiving more money and weapons
from their allies abroad and by the emerging desire of
the legitimate Government to avoid the use of force to
re-enter the capital and extend its authority over all of
Libyan territory. We hope this situation will change
through the taking of effective and practical steps by
the Security Council and the international community
as soon as possible to strengthen the capacities of the
Libyan army and by becoming directly involved in
combating terrorism.

