Mrs. Smith (Norway): First of all, I would like to
join others in expressing our deepest condolences to
those affected by the violent attack in Mogadishu
yesterday.

Every twentieth ship passing through the Gulf of
Aden is Norwegian-owned. To fight the increasing
problem of piracy, Norway is actively engaged in all
relevant international forums. Our goal is to offer
greater protection to ships and their crews and to
support those engaged in the prosecution and
incarceration of pirates.

Norway puts great emphasis on supporting
African solutions to the piracy problem. I wish in
particular to thank the Governments of Kenya and
Seychelles for their leading roles. Other States are
preparing their own welcome contributions. Those
States deserve recognition for their efforts.

Impunity for piracy sends the wrong signal. It is
simply unacceptable that suspects are released when
there is sufficient evidence against them. Moreover,
this undermines the credibility and effectiveness of the
naval presence. Pirates must be brought to justice in
accordance with widely recognized principles of due
process and applicable human rights.

Norway appreciates the Council's engagement on
this issue. We strongly welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/394), which once again
confirms the magnitude and urgency of the problem.
Ideally, Somalia should prosecute and imprison its own
pirates. In parts of Somalia, this is already the case,
and such domestic efforts should be encouraged.
Nevertheless, extradition to Somalia is not yet an
option. We thus need well-functioning, alternative
mechanisms for the prosecution of pirates.

Our point of departure is that the prosecution and
incarceration of pirates should take place in the region,
close to where the actual act of piracy is committed.
There are several reasons for this. First and foremost,
there are the preventive and deterrent effects of
prosecution and imprisonment. In addition, cultural,
linguistic and family considerations are strong
arguments. Cost-effectiveness and practical aspects are
also important.

We strongly believe in financial burden-sharing.
Norway has already contributed €500,000 to the
Contact Group Trust Fund. Today I would like to
announce that we will double our contribution to the
Fund. We encourage all affected States to follow suit to
ensure that the Fund can continue its ambitious work.
Norway believes that the Trust Fund should be spent
primarily on building the capacity of the justice sector
in States in the region that accept pirates for
prosecution. The Fund should also be spent on projects
in States that announce their willingness to prosecute
pirates. In addition, the Trust Fund should be used to
strengthen the justice sector in Somalia. In the short
term, the prison sector is being upgraded to make it
possible for pirates convicted elsewhere to serve their
sentences in Somaliland and Puntland.

In Norway's view, enhancing prosecution in
existing judicial systems of States in the region is the
best option. It promotes burden-sharing, it strengthens
the justice sector and it prevents the creation of a two-
tier system in which pirates are treated differently from
other criminals.

Norway will continue to follow this matter
closely.

