The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.

First, let me again thank the Secretary-General
for his presence here today, his important statement and
his commitment to lend his full support to the
implementation of resolution 1511 (2003).

Today's vote is a vote for the future of Iraq. By
its unanimous adoption of this resolution, the
international community has demonstrated its
wholehearted support for the people of Iraq.

During the past six weeks, we have engaged in
intense and constructive discussions about the role of
the international community in Iraq. My Government
has listened carefully to the concerns of each Council
member, and we greatly appreciate the thorough
exchange of views. The end result of our dialogue is a
strengthened resolution, a resolution that will enlarge
the international community's participation in Iraq's
stabilization and reconstruction. Extending both hands
to a key country in a strategic region will serve our
mutual interests in peace and security.

We started these discussions in the wake of the
devastating trio of terrorist bombings in Baghdad: at
the Jordanian embassy, United Nations headquarters
and the Imam Ali mosque. Those actions represented
an assault on the new Iraq, as did the tragic
assassination of Governing Council member Dr. Akila
al-Hashimi. To meet this challenge, it was necessary to
recommit the international community and, in so doing,
expand the opportunities for participation by Member
States, regional organizations and the United Nations.

In crafting this resolution, we never lost sight of
conditions on the ground. Our consistent aim has been
to support the Iraqis and those who have joined them in
this unprecedented stabilization, reconstruction and
recovery effort.

The resolution has four key elements. First, it
confirms Iraqi leadership in establishing a political
horizon for the transfer of power and makes clear that
the interim Iraqi leadership embodies Iraqi sovereignty
during the transition. In this regard, the resolution also
reaffirms a point that the United States has never left in
doubt: the exercise of governmental authorities in Iraq
by the Coalition Provisional Authority is temporary in
nature. We will not waver from our stated objective of
transferring governing responsibilities and authorities
to the people of Iraq as soon as practicable.

Secondly, in addressing the crucially important
process of political transition, the resolution provides
for an expanded United Nations role, commensurate
with the United Nations unique experience and
expertise, subject to United Nations capacity in Iraq.

Thirdly, the resolution establishes a United
Nations authorized multinational force under unified
United States command and provides a platform for
contributions to the training and equipping of Iraqi
police and security forces.

Fourthly, the resolution encourages the
international financial institutions and others to provide
significant and sustained contributions to the
reconstruction and development of Iraq's economy as
tangible proof of their commitment to the economic
health and political stability of Iraq.

By addressing the triad of politics, economics and
security, the resolution offers a solid base for expanded
international engagement. My Government's careful
consideration of text during these past weeks reflects
our commitment to a multilateral approach to this
compelling matter. We welcome those who have joined
us, including of course the co-sponsors, and urge all
States to review how they might best contribute to Iraqi
efforts to forge a better future. If there ever was a time
to help Iraq, it is now.

I resume my function as President of the Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of this matter.

The meeting rose at 11.45 am.
