Mr. Mero (United Republic of Tanzania): At the
outset, allow me to welcome the Swedish initiative to
convene this ministerial-level open debate on children
and armed conflict under the theme "Protecting
children today prevents conflict tomorrow". I thank
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, the Executive Director of UNICEF and others
for their briefings.

United Nations reports indicate that more than
10,000 children were killed or maimed amid armed
conflicts worldwide last year, while others were raped,
forced to serve as armed soldiers or caught in attacks
on schools and hospitals. Furthermore, a total of more
than 21,000 violations of children's rights were reported
in 2017, according to the Secretary-General's annual
report on children and armed conflict (S/2018/465).

The United Republic of Tanzania is greatly
concerned by violations of the rights and interests of
children and supports the efforts of the United Nations
to protect children in armed conflicts. That is why
currently we have over 2,000 troops deployed in various
United Nations peacekeeping missions, including those
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan,
Lebanon, the Central Africa Republic and South Sudan.
In this regard, I would like to emphasize the following
few points.

First, to prevent children from participating in
armed conflict requires a comprehensive solution.
Efforts should be made to prevent, mitigate and resolve
conflicts by addressing root causes. The process should
be owned by the respective States. The United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations should
supplement those efforts.

Secondly, prevention-oriented training programmes
regarding the protection of children through security
sector reform should be given priority.

Thirdly, women security sector actors can make
distinct and valuable contributions to peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding efforts. They can offer
important ideas on communities and cultures and
provide the option of new preventive approaches to
dealing with the use of child soldiers.

Fourthly, increasing aid and capacity-building
to conflict-ridden countries in order to rebuild
infrastructure and health systems could be very helpful.

To conclude, let me reiterate the importance
of addressing the root causes of armed conflicts,
including poverty in some countries, which is the most
conclusive way of ending the majority of them. The
United Republic of Tanzania will continue to work
with the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations in preventing armed conflict and thereby
protect children from the effects of war. Children must
be protected.

