Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): South Africa is grateful to Belgium for scheduling this meeting today. We welcome in particular the President of the State of Palestine, His Excellency President Mahmoud Abbas, to the Security Council and thank him for his important statement, in which he has articulated the true aspirations and the voice of the people of occupied Palestine - a people who lives under occupation in an asymmetrical environment and, for decades, has fought for its right to self-determination and for the recognition of its basic human rights. We also wish to thank the Secretary-General and his Special Coordinator for the Middle East for their important briefings this morning. The Security Council held its first meeting on the matter of Palestine (see S/PV.222) on 9 December 1947. In the over 72 years since then, we have, unfortunately, not progressed in resolving this matter, as the views and aspirations of the Palestinian people have been consistently ignored. In that context, the Palestinian people have once again sought to come to the Council to set out their substantive legal and political case. It is our responsibility, as the organ tasked with maintaining international peace and security, to take on this task and assist both the Palestinians and the Israelis. South Africa notes the recent developments that have brought renewed focus and attention to this decades-long conflict. Unfortunately, the recent initiative and proposal do not take into account the substantive views and aspirations of the Palestinian people. It is only through initiatives developed with the full participation of all parties, specifically the Palestinians, that lasting peace and stability can be achieved. A genuine, inclusive and open dialogue, where both parties are at the table, is the only means to resolve this current impasse. Peace cannot be imposed. It can be premised only on a mutually acceptable and just solution. It has been universally acknowledged, in the Security Council and in other international forums, that the only way peace can be established between the Israelis and the Palestinians is through direct negotiations between them. The Security Council must help create an environment that will allow Israel and Palestine to come together, as equals, to resume the peace process. Peace initiatives aimed at resolving the Israeli- Palestinian conflict must conform to the internationally agreed terms of reference and parameters, including the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative, the initiatives of the Quartet and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and Security Council - resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 2334 (2016), among others. Flagrant violations of international law, at the expense of what is deemed by some as political reality or expediency, undermine the rule of just law and the global multilateral system, which has developed over the past 75 years. South Africa's position on the question of Palestine is very clear. We have consistently called for a peaceful, negotiated settlement and continue to support international efforts aimed at the establishment of a viable Palestinian State, existing side by side and in peace with Israel, within internationally recognized borders, based on those existing on 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with all relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and other internationally agreed parameters. That is also in line with the sentiments expressed in the African Union summit just concluded in Addis Ababa, where African Union leaders reaffirmed the African continent's solidarity with the people of Palestine in support of their inalienable right to self-determination. South Africa maintains its principled position that any peace plan should not allow Palestinian statehood to devolve into an entity devoid of sovereignty, territorial contiguity and economic viability. Doing so would severely compound the failure of previous peacemaking efforts, accelerate the demise of the idea of a two-State solution and fatally damage the cause of durable peace for the Palestinians and the Israelis alike. Any solution must therefore be premised on a just settlement with just laws. It must focus on rights and facilitate equality and equity for all who have a right to live in the territories of Israel and Palestine. That includes sovereign equality between States.Consequently, all final-status issues, including illegal Israeli settlements, the status of Jerusalem and the right of refugees to return to their homeland, must be settled in accordance with international law. In conclusion, 11 February is a historic day in South Africa's history, and indeed in the history of oppressed people worldwide, for it is on this day, 30 years ago, that Nelson Mandela was released from prison after 27 years in captivity. His release and eventual election to the highest office as the President of a united and democratic South Africa demonstrated that what for some had seemed to be an intractable conflict was actually solvable. May that serve as a lesson for finding peace between Palestinians and Israelis.
