Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me first to convey to you, Sir, my thanks
for holding this plenary meeting, which offers to the
members of the international community, without
distinction, the opportunity to exchange views on an
important question which concerns all and greatly disturbs
many people, and that is the issue which has come to be
known as the Lockerbie crisis.

The nature of this dispute and its development over
more than seven years call on the family of nations to
consider seriously, with greater objectivity and flexibility,
how to go about finding a just and lasting solution that will
be respectful of the rights of all the parties involved. My
country, along with the member States of the League of
Arab States, the Islamic Conference, the Movement of Non-
Aligned Countries, the Group of 77 and the Organization of
African Unity, feels that the blockade imposed on the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is not the best solution to the
dispute and that it transforms an essentially legal issue into
a political problem with incalculable ramifications.

The blockade, which still continues, represents a
collective punishment being borne by the population as a
whole. Its repercussions have spared none of the Maghreb
countries. That is why the family of nations, headed by this
Council is being urged to lift the sanctions. We feel that the
Lockerbie crisis is a legal matter and needs to be returned
to its proper context, as was confirmed by the International
Court of Justice in its two Judgments of 27 February.

In the light of these facts, we believe it is necessary
to seriously consider the three options presented by the
League of Arab States and the Organization of African
Unity as a basis for a solution to the crisis. First, try the
suspects in a country to be chosen by the Security
Council; secondly, try them at the seat of the International
Court of Justice at The Hague, in accordance with
Scottish law and by Scottish judges; and thirdly, establish
an ad hoc criminal court to try them at the Court's seat.
We believe that these three options would open the way
to a fair solution to this affair.

