Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to address the Security Council on behalf
of the Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. The
38 Member States that make up this informal network,
representing all five regional groups of the United
Nations, are Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Benin, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany,
Ghana, Guatemala, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Liechtenstein, Mali, Mexico, Namibia, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Portugal, San Marino,
Slovenia, Slovakia, South Africa, the Republic of
Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Uruguay.

The Friends of Children and Armed Conflict
thank the United Kingdom presidency for holding this
debate and thank the Special Representative and the
other briefers for providing the Security Council with
timely information and analysis on the impact of armed
conflicts on children around the world.

In that regard, however, the Group of Friends
regrets that today's debate could not be held in an open
format, as has been the case in the past. The traditional
open debate provides all Member States with the
opportunity to publicly reconfirm their commitments
to the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict throughout the world and to provide advice and
recommendations to the Security Council for further
concerted action from the wider membership on an
issue relevant to all of us. The 38 Member States that
constitute the Group of Friends on Children in Armed
Conflict reaffirm their support in the strongest terms
for the work that the Security Council has undertaken
to ensure the full protection of children from the grave
violations committed against them in armed conflict.

Since 1999, the Security Council has established
a robust system of protection that has been tirelessly
implemented by the Council's partners in the field,
including the Office ofthe Special Representative ofthe
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF, the task forces and civil society organizations.
Part of the system of protection is ensuring that the
Security Council is seized of and receives information
concerning the situation of children affected by armed
conflict. In that regard, the Group of Friends welcomes
the recent annual report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/245) on children and armed conflict and
reiterates the importance of such annual reporting, so
that the Council may better protect children affected by
conflict and hold perpetrators to account.
(spoke in French)

The Group of Friends welcomes the recent signing
of action plans by the Governments of Myanmar,
Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In that regard, the Group of Friends calls on Member
States to establish local groups of friends, such
as the one established in Kinshasa, to support the
Governments concerned and the United Nations in
the implementation of the action plans. We applaud
the work of the Special Representative to promote
the conclusion and implementation of action plans
with listed Governments and now call on the Special
Representative to redouble her efforts with non-State
actors.

The Group of Friends further urges the relevant
Member States to allow for dialogue between the United
Nations and non-State actors in order to influence them
to cease violations against children and conclude and
implement action plans to that end. The Group of Friends
also wishes to see greater transparency in action plans
and calls for signatory parties to widely disseminate
action plan commitments to facilitate community-wide
efforts to monitor and support implementation efforts.

(spoke in English)

The next true test of the Council's work in halting
violations against conflict-affected children is how the
Council deals with the category of parties listed by the
Secretary-General as persistent perpetrators. Those
parties to conflict, which chronically violate children's
rights and which have been listed in the Secretary-
General's annexes for more than five years, make up
more than half of the parties listed by the Secretary-
General.

The Group of Friends reiterates its call for the
Council to ensure that grave violations against children
trigger the imposition of sanctions in all the relevant
Sanctions Committees, to take decisive action against
persistent perpetrators and, in those cases where there is
no designated Sanctions Committee, to consider how to
address that gap through proactive means. We welcome
the recent discussions in the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict on options
for increasing pressure on persistent perpetrators. In
that regard, we call for a Secretary-General's report
specifically addressing perpetrators and how to hold
them accountable.

The Group of Friends also calls on the Council to
ensure that the Special Representative regularly briefs
the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, the Council's relevant Sanctions
Committees and the Security Council directly,
especially on emerging situations such as Libya, Syria,
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and northern Mali.

(spoke in French)

Concrete measures for holding perpetrators to
account for grave violations against children continue
to be rare, as indicated by the Secretary-General in
his annual report; yet, holding perpetrators to account
is a crucial element for protecting children's rights.
The Group of Friends encourage Member States to
strengthen national accountability mechanisms and
judicial capacities, including by developing child-
protection legislation that criminalizes all serious
violence perpetrated against children. In those cases
where national authorities are unwilling or unable to
hold perpetrators to account, due, for instance, to a
lack of capacity or resources, international justice
mechanisms, including through the work of the
International Criminal Court or ad hoc and mixed
tribunals, can and should play a complementary role.

Another means by which accountability measures
can be reinforced, and by which the Council can make
a direct positive difference in the lives of the world's
children caught in conflict, is to strengthen provisions
for the protection of children in all the relevant Security
Council mission mandates. The Group of Friends
further calls for the Council to ensure that child-
protection advisers are deployed in sufficient numbers
to carry out a mission's child-protection tasks, and that
they have direct access to senior mission leadership.

