Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan of
Australia, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), for his quarterly briefing
and the work carried out by the Committee under his
chairmanship. We also welcome the ongoing support
of the Committee's Panel of Experts and encourage
it to continue its work in a professional and impartial
manner and to share its conclusions with concerned
States.

Like all my colleagues before me, I welcome the
interim agreement concluded between Iran and the
P5+1 in Geneva on 24 November, which provided,
inter alia, for the immediate suspension of the Iranian
enrichment programme in exchange for an easing of
sanctions accompanied by regular inspections of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). In that
respect, we note with satisfaction the visit to the Arak
site on 8 December by two IAEA inspectors, which is
a positive sign of Iran's commitment to implementing
the interim agreement, as necessary. Rwanda will, of
course, continue to follow this issue.

Given the new state of affairs and the climate of
restored trust, we encourage Iran to resume contact
with the 1737 Committee, in particular by responding
to its letter dated 12 April regarding the launch of the
Shahab-l and -2 missiles, during the Great Prophet VII
exercise, in violation of resolution 1929 (2010), and
to the letter dated 21 May regarding the interception
of a shipment of arms in violation of paragraph 5 of
resolution 1747 (2007).

As the Chair of the Committee reminded us, despite
the interim agreement the sanctions regime established
by the four Security Council resolutions on the issue
remain in force, and States must comply with it. In that
respect, Rwanda notes with satisfaction the activities
of the Committee during the reporting period and
welcomes the participation and cooperation of States
and other sanctions committees and United Nations
agencies that deal with the issue. Having said that,
Rwanda would like to see Iran and the P5+1 resolve to
engage in constructive dialogue aimed at the conclusion
of a comprehensive agreement to ensure that Iran fully
complies with its international obligations and that
the sanctions, which weigh so heavily on the Iranian
people, are lifted.

To conclude, Rwanda fully understands the threat
posed by the Iranian nuclear programme to the countries
of the region. Our country therefore calls on all parties
concerned to act with a sense of responsibility so as to
ease tensions and ensure that diplomacy prevails as the
only possible solution to the crisis. We thank Germany,
China, the United States, the Russian Federation, France
and the United Kingdom for their commitment to and
perseverance in searching for a peaceful settlement to
the crisis.

