Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): It was a pleasure to have the Secretary-General of the United Nations here, as well as the Secretary-General of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Dato Lim Jock Hoi, whom we thank for his briefing and for highlighting ASEAN's essential and growing role in regional cooperation. ASEAN lies at the heart of our relationship with the Indo-Pacific region. The United States partnership and friendship with ASEAN has been consistently guided by our respect for sovereignty and our commitment to the rule of law, good governance and sovereignty enabling economic growth. On the basis of those foundational principles, the United States supports strong cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN, guided by Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. The United States and ASEAN's deepening economic relationship has resulted in explosive growth and tangible benefits on both sides of the Pacific. United States collective investment in ASEAN member States stands now at $271 billion, and American businesses strengthen ASEAN communities where they operate. We play by the rules, we believe in fair competition, we abhor corruption. Those principles build trust, grow human capital and establish lasting, mutually beneficial relationships. In addition, the United States is partnering to advance high-quality infrastructure development through the Blue Dot Network. The Network provides a seal of approval for high-standard projects, demonstrating our enduring commitment to the best interests of the region. ASEAN also plays a critical role in reinforcing the international rules-based order, which is as important as ever in maintaining global peace and stability. As we see attempts to impede the lawful exercise of navigational rights and freedoms under international law, we must steadfastly uphold those rights and freedoms. Among the places where the freedom of the seas is most threatened is the South China Sea. The assertion of unlawful and sweeping maritime claims, including through ongoing bullying against long-standing oil and gas development and fishing practices by others, threatens the rules-based order that has enabled the region to prosper. Our position in the South China Sea and elsewhere in the world is simple: the rights and interest of all nations, regardless of size, power or military capabilities, must be respected. We call on all States to resolve their territorial and maritime disputespeacefully and without coercion; to fashion their maritime claims and conduct their maritime activities in accordance with international law, as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea; and to respect the freedoms of navigation and overflight and other lawful uses of the sea. We take note of the ongoing negotiations on a code of conduct for the South China Sea. We have consistently expressed our support for a meaningful code of conduct, fully in accordance with international law, that commits all parties to refraining from provocative and destabilizing behaviour. However, we are concerned that, as the document is being negotiated, the People's Republic of China has repeatedly engaged in provocative and destabilizing activity aimed at pressuring South-East Asian claimant States into entering joint development arrangements for marine resources. The most recent example of that type of coercion is the presence of a large China-flagged fishing fleet with armed escorts in the vicinity of an island belonging to an ASEAN country. That follows interference by the People's Republic of China with another ASEAN country's long-standing oil and gas activities through the redeployment of a Government- owned survey vessel, together with armed escorts, into waters offshore of that country. Such behaviour, especially amid ongoing code of conduct negotiations, raises serious doubts about the intention of the People's Republic of China to agree to an effective code of conduct. If a code of conduct is used by some to legitimize egregious behaviour and unlawful maritime claims, or is inconsistent with international law, it will prove harmful to the region and to all who value the freedom of the seas. The United States also remains deeply concerned by the plight of the Rohingya. As we continue to support Burma's democratic transition, we urge Burma's Government to address the root causes of the situation, create conditions conducive to safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable returns, provide justice for the victims and hold those responsible for ethnic cleansing and other grave human rights abuse to account. With regard to the order of the International Court of Justice, the United States encourages all parties to respect the Court's order and comply with the provisional measures indicated in it. We welcome ASEAN's efforts to address the situation and Rakhine state. United Nations agencies have unique expertise and capacity, and we urge the ASEAN Humanitarian Assistance Centre and the recently established ASEAN Secretariat Ad Hoc Support Team to work closely with United Nations agencies and support their ongoing efforts. The year 2020 also marks the five-year anniversary of elevating our relationship with ASEAN to a strategic partnership. Support for a strong, united ASEAN remains at the heart of our Indo-Pacific strategy. We greatly value that partnership and the chance to hear ASEAN's voice on changing regional dynamics and challenges. President Trump also looks forward to listening to that voice when he hosts ASEAN leaders in the United States in the first quarter of this year. We hope to discuss our shared principles and vision for the region, one that sees ever-greater prosperity and security and is grounded in respect for the rights and freedoms granted to all nations.
