Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Russian presidency for convening
this important debate on the situation in Afghanistan
and express my gratitude to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Yamamoto, Under-
Secretary-General Voronkov and Under-Secretary-
General Fedotov for their comprehensive updates.
We also appreciate the statement of our good friend
Ambassador Saikal.

We would like to express our appreciation for
the dedicated work of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Yamamoto and the team of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, as
well as that of other United Nations agencies, to bring
peace and security to Afghanistan. The delegation of
Kazakhstan, being committed to the stable development
of Afghanistan as our neighbour, friend and partner,
would like to highlight five key points today.

First, on the political-military dimension, we
commend the Afghan Government's efforts on the
political track to launch an intra-Afghan political
dialogue to stabilize the situation, improve public
administration, reform the legal sphere and prepare for
the upcoming parliamentary elections in October. The
elections should be fair, free, transparent, trustworthy
and inclusive if they are to succeed, as preliminarily
discussed this January during the Security Council
mission to Kabul. To demonstrate our continued
support for the Afghan Government in that regard,
we believe that a Security Council press statement
would be quite timely. We also welcome the second
meeting of the Kabul process for peace and security
cooperation as an Afghan-led and -owned peace effort,
as well as the adoption of the Kabul declaration. We
also welcome the intensified Afghan-Pakistani talks
on building peace, security and confidence between
the two neighbours. We stress the need to continue
providing diversified assistance to Afghanistan during
the transformation period. My country has therefore
provided $4 million to the Afghan National Army to
train Afghan military specialists.

Secondly, on the security track, despite the
effective measures taken by the international
community and the Government, the security situation
remains complicated. We express our hope that the
brief ceasefire announced by the Afghan Government
and the armed opposition during the holy month of
Ramadan and the Eid Al-Fitr holiday, will be the first
step towards national reconciliation.

Thirdly, on the counter-terrorism track, we must
say that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/
Da'esh in Afghanistan remains combat-capable and
continues to step up its presence in various provinces
of the country. Increased terrorist activity in the
north of Afghanistan, near its borders with Central
Asian States, is of particular concern. In that regard,
the effective implementation of the third phase of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in
Central Asia is important. Afghanistan must serve as a
platform where the Security Council demonstrates its
unity in the fight against this persistent scourge and
collectively confronts it. We express our deep concern
over the increase of drug production in Afghanistan,
which is one of the main sources for terrorist financing.
In that connection, we also welcome the outcomes of
the high-level international conference on countering
terrorism and violent extremism, held on 3 and 4 May
in Dushanbe.

Fourthly, we fully support Special Representative
Yamamoto's view that peace and security are closely
connected with development and that we need to increase
regional connectivity and economic cooperation in
the wider region in order to achieve stability and
prosperity in Afghanistan and its neighbourhood. In
that context, we welcome the Tashkent international
high-level conference on peace and development in
Afghanistan, held in late March. The launch of the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline
project is also a welcome measure. That, along with the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization road map to assist
Afghanistan, corresponds to the common position in
our part of the world to strengthen ties with Afghanistan
as a potentially profitable economic partner.

In that connection, we see it as critically important
to implement the three-pronged strategy for conflict
prevention, which includes strengthening the security
and development nexus and utilizing a regional
whole-of-system approach based on the development
strategy for the wider region. In that regard, we note
the importance of regional cooperation as a means of
ensuring the economic prosperity of Afghanistan and
strengthening its security. We must involve regional
countries in the development of trade, economic, transit/
transport and humanitarian ties with Afghanistan by
providing them with related grants for such purposes.

In addition, we believe that it is necessary to
involve the United Nations in the development of a
regional development strategy, including engaging all
country offices of the Organization, in accordance with
the priorities of the Governments of the region and
Afghanistan, while uniting and coordinating the efforts
of all funds and programmes based on the Delivering
as One principle. The main task is to integrate the
region on development programmes for the Sustainable
Development Goals through trade and economic
integration and connectivity.

Fifthly, Kazakhstan attaches great importance
to the empowerment of women and the development
of education, as it does to strengthening the role of
women and easing the plight of children in Afghanistan
in order to ensure the country's stable and progressive
development. In that regard, an official ceremony
dedicated to the completion of Kazakhstan's assistance
project in Afghanistan, through the mediation of the
United Nations Development Programme, was held in
April in Astana. The project was aimed at strengthening
the economic independence of Afghan women and
training Afghan citizens in Kazakhstan. Training was
provided in needed fields for Afghanistan, such as
public administration and health, with a special focus
on maternal and child health.

In the light of the successful completion of
Kazakhstan's public educational programme for
Afghanistan, we proposed to prolong it with the help
of other stakeholders. We suggested to our partners
to consider continuing the programme in a tripartite
format - to be comprised of Kazakhstan, Afghanistan
and the corresponding sponsor.

In addition, next September in Astana, we are
planning to organize an international conference entitled
"Expanding Opportunities for Women in Afghanistan".
The main goals of the conference are to assess the role
and contribution of women to the peaceful development
of Afghanistan and the issues related to empowering
Afghan women in the socioeconomic and political
spheres by increasing their participation in the public
and private sectors. The conference will also provide
an opportunity to share international experiences
in the promotion of gender equality and to develop
specific recommendations for empowering women
in Afghanistan.

The Government of Kazakhstan made a contribution
to UNICEF in 2018 for projects on reintegration,
rehabilitation and providing access to education for
children in Afghanistan.

In general, Kazakhstan will continue to assist
Afghanistan in all areas in order to achieve peace and
stability in that brother country. Cooperation between
Afghanistan and Central Asian States could become
a model of partnership for peace and development for
other regions. We have great hope for the forthcoming
ministerial conference on Afghanistan in Geneva,
to be held on 25 November, and we look forward to
a productive discussion on ensuring security and
development in Afghanistan and the wider region.

