Mr. Molina (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM) in
this open debate where we are commemorating the
first anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 2286 (2016) on the protection ofthe wounded
and sick, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel
in armed conflict.

First, on behalf of the States members of NAM, we
wish to convey our respects to Mr. Rodolfo Nin Novoa,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay. We also
convey our best wishes to his delegation for a successful
month in leading the work of the Council. We also
recognize the efforts made in preparing the concept
note (S/2017/365, annex) for this open debate, which
will serve as a basis to guide our discussions today. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his statement and
Ms. Christine Beerli and Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte for
their briefings.

The world in which we live today faces many
complex, new and emerging threats and challenges to
international peace and security. They include those
brought on by terrorism and violent extremism and
war and protracted conflicts. In the context of armed
conflicts, we have seen how the human suffering of
innocent civilians, trapped in the midst of the conflict,
can be exacerbated by deliberate, indiscriminate and,
in some cases, systematic attacks on the wounded and
the sick, on health-care personnel and humanitarian
personnel dedicated exclusively to medical missions,
and on their means of transport and equipment, as
well as on hospitals and other health institutions. That
includes attacks perpetrated by non-State actors, all of
which jeopardize the inviolability of those institutions
under international law.

The Non-Aligned Movement therefore emphatically
condemns such acts of violence, attacks and threats. The
Non-Aligned Movement deplores the consequences over
the long term of such attacks on the civilian population
and the health systems of the affected countries. Those
attacks, which could constitute war crimes, must come
to an end. Those responsible must face justice in order
to break the cycle of impunity and send a clear and
united message of zero tolerance.

In that regard, during the 17th Summit of the
Non-Aligned Movement, which took place in September
2016 on Margarita Island, Venezuela, the Heads of
State and Governments condemned the increasing
attacks on the safety of humanitarian personnel, and
they called on the Governments of States Members
of the United Nations to guarantee the protection
of the personnel of humanitarian organizations, in
accordance with the relevant international law and its
humanitarian provisions.

In reaffirming that the protection of civilians
throughout their territory is the primary responsibility
of host countries, the Heads of State and Government
of the Movement ofNon-Aligned Countries recognized
that that task is sometimes also entrusted to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, to which they
reaffirmed their commitment.

In that regard, the members States of the
Non-Aligned Movement recognized that many
humanitarian agencies and health personnel operate in
countries where United Nations peacekeeping missions
are deployed, where they play an important role in
assisting civilians in the context of armed conflicts. It is
therefore necessary for all parties to comply fully with
their obligations under international law, as appropriate,
and under international humanitarian law, in particular
their obligations under the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and their obligations under the Additional Protocols
of 1999 and 2005, as indicated in the concept note
(S/2017/365, annex) for this open debate. That is needed
in order to enable and facilitate the safe and unimpeded

passage of impartial humanitarian relief, including
medical missions, personnel and supplies.

The member States of the Non-Aligned Movement
also call on all parties to international armed conflicts
to redouble their efforts to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law. That includes the
principles of precaution against attacks, proportionality
and differentiation aimed, inter alia, at banning attacks
against civilian populations, civilian property and some
special properties during an armed conflict. This also
includes the obligation of the parties to any conflict
to ensure general protection from dangers posed by
military operations to civilian facilities, hospitals,
means of transport and relief materials, as well as to
the distribution of such materials.

The Non-Aligned Movement also stresses that
humanitarian agencies and their personnel must
respect international humanitarian law and the laws of
the country in which they are operating, as well as the
guiding principles of humanitarian assistance set out
in the annex to General Assembly resolution 46/182,
including the principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality, as well as non-interference in the internal
affairs of host countries, and the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, national unity and independence of States.

The Non-Aligned Movement recognizes the
importance of early and effective recording and census
systems as a means of quantifying and assessing the
need for the provision and delivery of humanitarian
assistance. It recognizes also the need to respect
international refugee law and to preserve the civilian
and humanitarian character of refugee camps, and
in this regard calls on receiver States to ensure the
demilitarization of refugee camps.

Another matter of deep concern to the States
members of the Movement is their ability to respond
to humanitarian emergencies, including in the context
of armed conflict, owing to the impact of various
phenomena ranging from climate change to the
consequences of the economic and financial crisis, and
from insecurity in the area of food, energy and water to
the negative impacts of unilateral coercive measures,
among many others. In this regard, we must work
together to address these challenges and strengthen
our capacity for resilience, particularly in terms of
prevention, preparedness and response.

In conclusion, the 120 States members of the
Non-Aligned Movement wish to pay tribute and
acknowledge the commendable work done by the many
humanitarian workers, including physicians and other
health personnel, who are carrying out their work in
the context of armed conflicts and who, in many cases,
work under adverse conditions on the ground, risking
their lives daily, in their quest to alleviate the human
suffering of those trapped in armed conflict. Our
sincere appreciation goes to the men and women who
work for life and for humankind.

