Mr. Simonovie (Croatia): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Ireland,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands,
Poland, Portugal, Romania. Spain, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Sweden, the United Kingdom and my own country
Croatia, all of which are also members of the European
Union (EU).

Our discussions today come at a critical juncture
for the Middle East peace process and the viability of
a two-State solution. Security Council resolution 2334
(2016) calls for positive steps to be taken immediately in
order to reverse the negative trends on the ground that
are imperilling the prospects for a two-State solution.
Almost three years after the adoption of the resolution,
the situation on the ground has continued to deteriorate.
Israel has continued its occupation of the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, and its settlement activities.
Recently there have also been calls for annexation. The
constant threat of violence, the incitements to hatred
and violence from extremists and terrorists and the lack
of progress on intra-Palestinian reconciliation all erode
the prospects for peace and a two-State solution. In the
meantime, no proposals for peace have been made.

Against that backdrop, the EU reiterates its
readiness to work with both parties and our partners
in the region and the international community towards
a resumption of meaningful negotiations, aimed at
resolving all final-status issues and achieving a just
and lasting peace. We continue to advocate for a
negotiated two-State solution and for finally putting
an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with an
agreement that would end the occupation begun in
1967, put a stop to all claims and fulfil the aspirations
of both parties, including ensuring the security needs
of Israelis and Palestinians and meeting Palestinian
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty on a basis of
international law, the internationally agreed parameters
and the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
EU's firm and united position has been set out in detail
on numerous occasions. In line with international
law, including resolution 2334 (2016), the EU has
consistently reiterated its strong opposition to Israel's
settlement policy and actions taken in that context.
Any settlement activities in East Jerusalem seriously
jeopardize the possibility of Jerusalem serving as the
future capital of both States. The EU has also made
clear that it will not recognize any changes to the pre-
1967 borders, including with regard to Jerusalem, other
than those agreed to by the parties. We expect both
parties, including any future Israeli Government, to act
in accordance with international law.

The political and security situation in Gaza remains
volatile, and the humanitarian situation continues to
be a matter of grave concern. All Violence, including
the firing of rockets into Israel from Gaza, reminds us
that restoring a political horizon for peace is essential
to reducing violence and containing extremism in the
region. We reiterate our call on Israel to respect the
fundamental right to peaceful protest, as well as our
call on Hamas to ensure that protests remain strictly
non-violent. We call once again on all parties to take
urgent steps, in line with resolution 2334 (2016), leading
to a fundamental change in the humanitarian, political,
security and economic situation in Gaza, including
through an end to the closure policy, the full opening
of crossing points and the granting of humanitarian
access, while also addressing Israel's legitimate
security concerns. Such steps would implement
resolution 2334 (2016) and would increase the chances
for a two-State solution.

Since the refugee issue - another internationally
agreed parameter for the resolution ofthe conflict- also
remains unsolved, it is of the utmost importance that
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) be able
to continue to provide Palestinian refugees with the
necessary protection and essential services. The work
of UNRWA is also important for the stability of the
region, and the EU will continue to support it.

The Palestinian Legislative Council was dissolved
in December 2018. Strong, inclusive, accountable and
functioning democratic Palestinian institutions that are
based on respect for the rule of law and human rights
are Vital to the two-State solution. In that context,
and taking note of the announcement by President
Abbas concerning the holding of elections (see A/74/ PV.7), a date should be set very soon for elections in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and in the
Gaza Strip. The EU calls on all Palestinian factions to
unequivocally commit to democratic principles prior to
the elections.

Successful negotiations between the parties are
possible, as we saw recently when an arrangement was
reached on tax revenue transfers. The agreement shows
that progress can be made if there is political will.
Both parties should summon the courage to use such
political will to advance a two-State solution. It is still
possible to reach peace based on the two-State solution
if credible steps are taken. Ultimately, and as the EU
has said previously, it is the lack of implementation
of international law that is the real challenge to the
achievement of peace and security in the Middle East.
Progress towards a resolution to this conflict would
also have an impact on efforts to resolve other crises
in the region.

Allow me to briefly turn to the situation in Syria. It
remains one ofthe worst crises of our times - a conflict
that has killed half a million people, displaced half of
the Syrian population and threatened the stability of the
entire Middle East. It has also provided fertile ground
for the rise of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS). Barely a month ago, during the high-level
week at the General Assembly, the European Union
hosted a ministerial event on Syria with the objective
of reaffirming the strong commitment to achieving a
political solution to the Syrian conflict and to sustaining
international support for the Syrian people through
the pledges made at the three Brussels conferences.
The event also helped to reiterate our support for
refugee-hosting countries while reaffirming the EU's
firm position on reconstruction, namely that the EU
will be ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria
only when a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive
political transition, in the framework of resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva process, is firmly under way.

During the event, there was a rare spark of optimism
in the Hall in the light of the Secretary-General's
announcement on 23 September that the Syrian regime
and the opposition had reached an agreement on the
launching of the Constitutional Committee - the first
inter-Syrian agreement since the start of the war in
2011. However, events move fast in Syria, and only two
weeks later we witnessed Turkey's unilateral incursion
into north-eastern Syria. The EU swiftly condemned
Turkey's military action, as it seriously undermines
the stability of the whole region, and called for an
immediate cessation of hostilities. The fighting has
resulted in civilian suffering and further displacement,
and has also hindered access to humanitarian
assistance. Extrajudicial killings have been reported,
and they need to be investigated thoroughly in order to
establish accountability.

The Turkish incursion has significantly undermined
the progress achieved so far by the Global Coalition
to Defeat ISIS, the latter which remains a threat to
European, regional and international security. It
has also made the prospects for the United Nations-
facilitated political process to achieve peace in
Syria far more difficult. The continued efforts of the
international community, including in the Security
Council, are needed in order to permanently halt this
military action. Turkey's security concerns in north-
eastern Syria should be addressed through political
and diplomatic means and in full accordance with
international law and international humanitarian law.

The situation in north-western Syria, where
violence and civilian displacement persist, also remains
of great concern. The presence of United Nations-listed
terrorist groups in the area contributes to the suffering
of civilians, yet fighting terrorist groups cannot be
used by the regime and its allies as a reason to justify
violations of international humanitarian law. The EU
continues to call on Russia and Turkey to restore the
ceasefire in Idlib upon which they agreed under the
Sochi memorandum.

As we have always said, there can be no military
solution to the Syrian crisis. We will maintain our
strong support for the United Nations-led process in
Geneva and continue to support the United Nations
Special Envoy's efforts to revive the political process
and assist in the establishment of a balanced and
inclusive Constitutional Committee to pave the way for
free and fair elections in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015); to support Syrian civil society, including
women and their equitable and meaningful engagement
in the political process; to identify confidence-building
measures between parties to the conflict, including
on the issue of detainees and missing persons; and to
maintain an international dialogue on Syria.

Furthermore, we will remain at the forefront
of international efforts to promote accountability
and justice and to combat impunity as part of any
future process of national reconciliation in Syria,
and we reiterate our support for the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. We reiterate the EU call to have the situation in
Syria referred to the appropriate justice mechanisms,
including the International Criminal Court.

The EU strengthened its sanctions against the Syrian
regime earlier this year and will continue to consider
further restrictive measures as long as the repression
continues. We support the right of Syrian refugees and
internally displaced persons to a safe, voluntary and
dignified return. Conditions defined by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
need to be put in place and robustly monitored.

Finally, we are pleased to report that since March,
when the third Brussels Conference on Supporting
the Future of Syria and the Region was held, where
pledges reached a total of €8.3 billion for 2019 and
beyond, two-thirds of those funds were pledged by the
EU and its member States, of which 92% have already
been committed.

