Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First of all, let
me thank Special Envoy Said Djinnit for his briefing
and, above all, his important work. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Raymond Serge Bale of the Republic
of the Congo for his statement and his personal efforts.

In the light of the fifth anniversary of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, I will make three
points: first, the Framework is as relevant today as it
was five years ago; secondly, the political instability
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi
constitute an additional serious threat to peace and
security in the region; and, thirdly, we should increase
coordination with the countries in the region on these
issues.

As to my first point, the continued relevance of
the Framework, five years since its signing, significant
progress has been achieved, as others, such as our
colleagues from Cote d'Ivoire and Equatorial Guinea,
have said today. The presence of some foreign armed
groups has been reduced. Judicial and development
cooperation in the region has increased. Regional
organizations like the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) have been strengthened.
However, significant challenges remain.

Armed groups continue to operate within and
across the borders. Members of foreign armed groups,
including the Mouvement du 23 mars and the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, have yet to
be repatriated. The Framework remains the viable
political framework to deal with these challenges. Its
relevance was once again demonstrated after the border
clashes between the Rwandan and Congolese armies
on 13 February. We welcome the investigation by the
expanded Joint Verification Mechanism of the ICGLR
in that regard. We furthermore welcome the renewed
commitment of the signatories to the Framework, as
communicated after the high-level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism last October.

As to my second point, the political instability
in the region, security challenges in the region have
evolved, and 2018 is a crucial year for peace and
security in the Great Lakes region. Elections are due
to be held in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The contested referendum on constitutional reform
is planned in Burundi. But every single political and
security crisis in the Great Lakes region has cross-
border effects. The Great Lakes region is home to the
biggest displacement crisis in Africa. It is of course the
primary responsibility of Governments to prevent the
suffering of their peoples. We call on the Governments
ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo and Burundi to
respect fundamental human rights and open up political
space to enable the full and free participation ofpeaceful
political parties, civil society and the media, which hold
the key to opening the door to peaceful, inclusive and
credible political processes and to national and regional
stability. The meaningful participation of women is
vital to achieve that end. We welcome the words of the
Special Envoy on his ambitions to include women at all
levels in political processes, as he just mentioned.

As to my third point, the importance of regional
coordination, we often talk of African solutions to
African problems, and our Chinese colleague just did
so. We agree that only regionally owned and shared
efforts will provide sustainable solutions to regional
problems. The Framework continues to serve as an
important platform to enable such solutions. It is geared
towards addressing the root causes of conflict so as
to put an end to the recurring cycles of violence. We
welcome the role that the African Union, the ICGLR
and the Southern African Development Community
have played in strengthening the implementation of the
Framework. We strongly believe in their important role
in mitigating evolving security challenges in the region.
We strongly support the Special Envoy in focusing his
good offices on supporting those efforts.

In conclusion, there is a proverb that says, "Ifa man
is stung by a bee, he does not destroy all beehives". This
is true for the Framework as well. Challenges remain,
but with commitment and effort its implementation will
be strengthened. Let us aim for reaching that goal as
we advance towards the next anniversary of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. Enhancing
peace, security and cooperation is crucial for the people
of the Great Lakes region.

