Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me first of all to thank the leadership
of both Tribunals for their briefings and for the reports
submitted to the Security Council on the
implementation of the completion strategies for the
work of those two judicial bodies. Unfortunately, the
information to be found in the reports is cause for
serious concern.

The Tribunals, in essence, state their inability to
implement in a timely manner the resolutions of the
Security Council adopted in accordance with Chapter
VII of the Charter. The International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), for example, plans
to conclude cases in the first instance only by 2010,
whereas this was to have already been done by the
beginning of the current. We believe that the Security
Council, which established the Tribunals, must actively
address the implementation of the completion
strategies and give the Tribunals clear guidance for
further action.

To that end, we propose the adoption of a Council
decision to the effect that the Tribunals can begin no
judicial proceedings in the first instance after 1 January
2009. In that way, the cases of all those individuals,
both those under the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and
those being sought, for whom there have not been any
judicial proceedings by the end of this year would be
referred to national jurisdictions. The indictments of
those individuals who are referred to by name in
Security Council resolutions can come under the
jurisdiction of the international residual mechanism
that will be established in the near future.

In that same context, we should solve the issue of
the extension of the functions of the judges themselves.
We trust that such a decision will fully comply with the
criteria established by the Council, pursuant to which
the Tribunals are to conduct proceedings only with
regard to high-ranking leaders suspected of bearing
major responsibility for committing crimes falling
under the jurisdiction of the Tribunals.

It has been 14 years since the creation of the
Tribunals. In Rwanda and in those States that have
emerged from the territory of the former Yugoslavia,
we now see functioning, independent court systems.
We see no basis for denying the sovereign right of
those States to conduct national judicial proceedings,
especially since those countries have stated their
readiness independently to try those accused in the
ICTY and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR).

With specific reference to the reports of the
Tribunals, I would like to point out the following.
Regarding the ICTR, we see at least some movement in
compliance with the key element of the completion
strategy - the referral of cases to national jurisdiction.
Hearings are currently being held on four such cases
and there are plans to transfer nine more accused who
are fugitives from justice.

We consider the situation with respect to the
ICTY to be unsatisfactory. From that body's report it is
generally difficult to glean any coherent information on
referrals to national courts. The previous report of
November 2007 stated that, from the time of the
adoption of the rules of referral of cases, the
Prosecutor had submitted 14 motions with regard to 22
accused. The current report refers to 22 motions. The
question therefore arises: Over the past half-year
period, has the Prosecutor submitted eight more
motions and, if so, where is the information on those?
We also draw attention to the information that was
distributed by the Serbian side considering cooperation
with the Tribunal, which raises doubts as to the
objectivity of the various sections of the report ICTY.
In general, we can now see that the ICTY has not
fulfilled the completion strategy on time, and the report
gives no convincing reasons in justification of that.

I would also like to refer to the scandalous
circumstances surrounding the acquittal of one of the
leaders of the Kosovo Liberation Army, the former
Prime Minister of the province Ramush Haradinaj. The
judges referred to the lack of evidence on any single
charge of the many dozens brought against him, while
issuing a statement on the unprecedented pressure
placed on witnesses in that matter. For the first time in
the history of international jurisdiction, witnesses have
been subject to blatant blackmail and intimidation,
while some have been done away with physically. It is
amazing that such actions have been carried out in an
atmosphere of complete impunity in spite of the
international presence in Kosovo.

The Russian Federation has repeatedly drawn the
attention of the Council to that unacceptable situation
and called for decisive action in investigating the
deaths of those people and for ensuring a more
effective witness protection regime in Kosovo.
Unfortunately, for various reasons our appeals have
been blocked. The Haradinaj case has become yet
another stain on the ICTY's reputation.

We expect from the Tribunal a detailed
accounting of those steps that have been taken in the
wake of the shocking revelations made by the former
Prosecutor of the ICTY, Carla Del Ponte, with regard
to facts on which the Tribunal has remained silent until
recently. The current report represents more of the
same. The comments that we heard at the ICTY's press
briefing on that issue on 16 April can hardly be called
acceptable. One gets the impression that whereas
serious accusations, such as that concerning the
numerous cases of forced removal of human organs,
are simply disregarded by the Tribunal on a variety of
pretexts, it stresses the urgency of concluding its work
on schedule, the supposed lack of substantive
information, and so on.

We believe that the ICTY has the duty to
investigate those facts. When they are verified, we can
then think about how the accountability of those who
are accused of that outrageous crime can be included in
the completion strategy of the Tribunals' work.

