Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): Let me join
other Council members in thanking Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing on the situation in
Iraq and his introduction of the Secretary-General's
report on the United Nations Assistance Mission for

08-3196]

Iraq (UNAMI) (S/2008/266). We also thank
Mr. Khalilzad for his update on the multinational
forces in Iraq.

My delegation shares the Secretary-General's
positive view of the initial achievements of the people
of Iraq in strengthening unity, stability and economic
growth. We welcome the positive developments that
have resulted from those efforts, such as the decline in
the level of violence across the country, the gradual
assumption by local authorities of control of
competencies for security and the passage of key
pieces of legislation. We are encouraged by the
announcement by Prime Minister al-Maliki on 24 April
2008 that all political factions have agreed to rejoin the
Cabinet, and we call upon all the parties concerned to
build on the momentum for the well-being and interests
of the entire nation.

The improvement of Iraq's international relations,
especially those with neighbouring countries, should be
supported and encouraged to continue, as that is
essential long-term peace and stability not only in Iraq
but also throughout the whole region.

However, we concur with the Secretary-General's
concerns about formidable challenges, including the
outbreak of sectarian violence, disputed internal
boundaries, pervasive poverty and marginalization,
substantial foreign debt and a lack of resources, as well
as the worsening of the human rights and humanitarian
situation, especially the situation concerning internally
displaced persons, refugees and prisoners, as partially
reflected in the UNAMI report issued on 15 March
2008.

While reaffirming Viet Nam's continued support
for the efforts of the Iraqi Government and other
concerned parties in consolidating peace and security,
advancing political dialogue and strengthening national
reconciliation, my delegation believes that more
tangible progress should be sustained in improving the
rule of law, countering corruption, curbing illicit use of
weapons and disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating
militias and armed groups.

Recognizing the organic relationship between
security and development, we note the steps taken by
the Government of Iraq to galvanize fundamental
socio-economic reforms, poverty reduction, public
resource management, governance and institutional
capacity-building, basic services delivery and social
welfare development.

We recognize the important role of the United

Nations in assisting Iraq with the political process,

regional dialogue, economic reconstruction and

humanitarian relief. We call upon United Nations
agencies to make further contributions in this regard.

We commend UNAMI for its work in helping the
Iraqi Government address key priority issues, as
mandated by resolution 1770 (2007), such as national
reconciliation, constitutional support and electoral and
humanitarian assistance. In the same vein, we hope that
the upcoming high-level meeting of the International
Compact with Iraq, in Stockholm, will further
consolidate efforts of the international community and
countries of the region in helping Iraq better address
various security, humanitarian, national reconciliation
and socio-economic development challenges in the
medium term.

Let me take this opportunity, once again, to
reiterate Viet Nam's solidarity with and support for the
Government and the people of Iraq in their quest for
lasting peace, stability and development.

