Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to begin
by thanking Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), and
Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, for their comprehensive
and informative briefings.

Japan co-sponsored resolution 2309 (2016) with a
View to enhancing aviation security together with the
international community. Civil aviation has been an
attractive target for terrorists over the past decades,
as we witnessed with the attacks in the United States
of 11 September 2011, and more recently in Brussels
and Istanbul last year. Terrorists will use all available
methods to attack civil aviation. We therefore need to
use all available tools to prevent them from doing so.
While aviation security covers a wide range of areas of
activty, information exchange is among the most basic
and effective.

As the briefers pointed out, advance passenger
information (API) and passenger name record (PNR)
systems should be introduced in order to detect foreign
terrorist fighters, in accordance with resolutions 2178
(2014) and 2368 (2017). ICAO's API guidelines and
PNR reporting standards demonstrate how useful
such systems can be. API includes passport and flight
information, while PNR includes passengers' booking
information, including itineraries, the names and
nationalities of travelling companions and payment
methods. That information helps the authorities analyse
and detect possible foreign terrorist fighters before they
arrive at airports.

However, as Ambassador Aboulatta pointed
out, according to the March report of the Executive
Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, only
57 out of 193 Member States have introduced API
and only 15 use the PNR system. Japan calls upon
all Member States to employ those systems as soon
as possible, as encouraged by relevant resolutions.
In order to support such efforts, Japan has provided
$2.24 million of assistance to the Asia-Pacific region
to promote API and PNR for aviation security. We hope
that other Member States will also promote support for
the wider use of those systems.

Moreover, API and PNR systems will not be
enough. We must collect information on terrorists in
order to be able to match the information obtained
by API and PNR. Therefore, updating the sanctions
lists on the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Al-Qaida and populating INTERPOL databases,
including stolen and lost travel documents databases,
is important. Those databases should be extended
to airports and border checkpoints. If those areas do
not have access to the databases, terrorists can sneak
across borders unnoticed due to the lack of timely
notice. However, more than 100 out of the 190 member
States of INTERPOL do not use that powerful database
to screen travellers at airports and border checkpoints.
Therefore, I urge Member States to extend access to
INTERPOL databases to airports and other front-line
checkpoints in accordance with resolution 2322 (2016).

With regard to aviation security,l would like to
take this opportunity to strongly condemn the series of
ballistic missile launches carried out by North Korea in
flagrant violation of Security Council resolutions. We
demand that North Korea immediately cease all such
actions. Those ballistic missiles were launched without
any prior notification. They could have catastrophic
consequences and pose a threat to aviation security.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of moving towards implementation. Japan is always
ready to work closely with other countries to enhance
their capacities in counter-terrorism, including
aviation security. We must unite against terrorists
by implementing resolution 2309 (2016) and related
resolutions and further enhancing our counter-
terrorism measures.

