Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Bangladesh
appreciates the presence, and the statement, of the
Secretary-General at this important meeting on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We believe that his
contacts with the leaders of the region advance the
cause of peace.

We also appreciate the briefing by Ambassador
Kamel Morjane. Looking back at the situation as it
existed a year ago, one must recognize the progress
that has been made. The challenge now before us on
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo is to see how we
can give the peace process momentum and real
substance.

Over the past two years, the Security Council and
its members have made considerable efforts to resolve
the conflict. The Council held several high-level
meetings, including meetings with the leaders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of other
countries of the region. Serious efforts have been made
to facilitate dialogue and understanding among them.
In addition, the Council sent two missions to the Great
Lakes region in the course of about a year. The United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) was authorized in
February 2000, and the Council remains committed to
supporting the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement.

All those efforts have not been in vain. The
parties have remained committed to the Lusaka
Agreement - of course, realizing the Council's strong
support for that agreement. They signed the Kampala
disengagement plan and the Harare sub-plans. The
ceasefire has been holding for several months now. The
leaders have also met bilaterally and have talked. The
basic problems over the inter-Congolese dialogue have
been resolved.

But difficulties remain. As Ambassador Morjane
just said, there is always a temptation to live with the
status quo.

In our View, three factors are key to moving the
peace process ahead: disengagement and withdrawal;
the inter-Congolese dialogue; and expansion of
MONUC.

First, on disengagement and withdrawal,
MONUC continues to face difficulties in deploying and
in carrying out its mission. The disengagement and
withdrawal process that would demonstrate real
progress in the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement has not advanced. The Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratic (RCD), which is required
to withdraw from Kisangani under a Chapter-VII
resolution of the Council, resolution 1304 (2000), has
not done so. The rebel movement has yet to comply
with the demand of the Council. The demilitarization
of Kisangani could allow the reconstruction of that
ravaged city and provide the necessary rehabilitation of
its inhabitants. It could provide a context for initiating
the inter-Congolese dialogue. In Equateur province, the
Front de liberation du Congo (FLC) has yet to
demonstrate understanding and cede administration to
the Government as per the Kampala disengagement
plan.

Secondly, on the inter-Congolese dialogue, the
early commencement of such a dialogue is of crucial
importance for engaging the parties in the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. We note that
the facilitator has had to postpone the preparatory
meeting to 20 August, apparently for technical reasons.
We hope that arrangements are being made for holding
that meeting on the new date. The dialogue must start
as soon as possible. It must be open, representative and
inclusive. It must be free from any outside interference.
It should allow full participation by Congolese civil
society.

Thirdly, with respect to the expansion of
MONUC, it has long been argued by the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and by its
allies that the size of MONUC does not correspond to
what the situation demands. The Secretary-General, in
his last report, said that at that stage he was not asking
for an enlargement of MONUC beyond the authorized
strength. At a new stage that may occur when the
parties have made progress in disengagement and
withdrawal, we shall have to consider the expansion of
MONUC.

We stress that the Council must make a clear
commitment in line with its policy to consider
expanding the size of MONUC so that the Mission can
carry out the tasks assigned to it as well additional
tasks it should assume. There is a practical need for the
Council to demonstrate a credible presence,
determination and commitment in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The parties are perhaps not
taking seriously the will and capacity of the United
Nations. We have seen in Sierra Leone the difference
that a credible United Nations presence can make.

Ambassador Morjane has indicated that MONUC
would have to deploy at least two battalions of troops
to secure Kisangani following the eventual withdrawal
of the RCD. That would not leave enough troops for
MONUC to deploy to other parts of the country.

I wonder if the Council can, with due regard to
the reality on the ground and with respect for its own
relevant resolutions, continue to say that MONUC
cannot provide security to civilians. I am referring, of
course, to resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000). In
that connection, we welcome the initiatives of the
Secretary-General in following up those resolutions,
including through closer cooperation and joint strategic
planning between the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, as described in his letter
dated 16 July 2001 (S/2001/7l2).

Entry into the third phase should not be delayed.
It should not be delayed by Council. It should not be
delayed because of a lack of preparedness. We have to
put constant pressure on the parties to live up to their
commitments. At the same time, as the Security
Council, we have to demonstrate our commitment to
support full implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.

The Secretary-General, in his seventh report,
outlined the needs for a third phase. In his eighth
report, he makes reference to that. As we said at our
last meeting on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
preparedness is of crucial importance. Let us not be
caught by surprise. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo is an enormous country, with 16 million people
affected by the war; the challenges of peacekeeping
and peace-building will be enormous.

Let me conclude by paying a very warm and high
tribute to Ambassador Kamel Morjane, who, as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, has rendered a
tremendous service in support of the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and pursued the
mandate of the Council with determination and
perseverance. He took over his responsibilities in the
midst of conflict on all fronts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As he leaves, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is now in a much better
situation with a real prospect of peace. We would have
wished him to continue, at least until definite progress
is made in the implementation of the peace Agreement,
but he has to move on. I wish him well in his new
assignment with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. We look forward to our
future interaction with him and, personally, it will be
my pleasure to keep in touch with my friend and
brother.

