Mr. An Myong Hun (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea expresses its appreciation to China
for having organized this open debate on the topic of
reaffirming the strong commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We expect that this wide-ranging topic will serve
to squarely reflect on the real picture in terms of
international peace and security.

The purpose of the United Nations - to maintain
international peace and security and develop friendly
relations based on respect, the principle of equal
rights and the self-determination of peoples - and the
principles of the United Nations, which are centred on
respect for the sovereign equality of all its Member
States, remain valid 70 years after the founding of the
United Nations and assume even stronger vitality and
relevance in view of today's reality.

Today, an absolute majority of the countries of
the world participate in the activities and work of the
United Nations as sovereign States with equal rights
and qualifications, irrespective of differences in
ideology or system, population size and territory, or
level of development.

However, the equality of rights and qualifications
of sovereign States, that is, sovereign equality, is not
yet embodied in the overall work and activities of the
United Nations, but rather ignored, even trampled upon.
Threats to or infringement upon States' sovereignty,
political and social system, genuine human rights and
culture are being perpetrated to a dangerous degree,
and justice and truth are being trampled under the
pretext of democracy, anti-terrorism, the protection of
human rights, freedom of expression, non-proliferation
and so on. Therefore, world peace and security, which
is a main and permanent theme of the United Nations,
has not yet been achieved, and challenges to it are
increasing.

The United Nations has entrusted the Security
Council with the maintenance of international peace
and security as its first and foremost responsibility.
However, the activities of the Security Council today
lag too far behind the principles enshrined in the
Charter.

The present reality of the Council is that one
permanent member State seeks to act as the world
police through either military blocs or bilateral military
alliances that have nothing to do with the United
Nations, or through abuse of the Security Council. The
large-scale military exercises of an aggressive nature
conducted by that permanent member against a State
Member of the United Nations are ignored, but self-
defence capabilities built to defend sovereignty and the
right to existence are brought up as a threat to peace
and security, and sanctions are imposed.

Satellite launches conducted by some Member States
are not questioned, but the same satellite launches by
other Member States are questioned. Missile launches
conducted by some Member States are not questioned,
but the missile launches conducted by other Member
States are seriously questioned. The horrible acts of
torture committed by that permanent member in other
countries are downplayed, but the so-called human
rights issues of a Member State, fabricated on the basis
of false testimony by those who are morally inhuman,
who committed crimes at home and defected, are cast
as a threat to peace and security.

The atrocities committed by Israel, which infringe
upon the right to self-determination and are aimed at
extinguishing the very existence of the Palestinian
people, are perpetrated in connivance and even
encouraged, but the just demands and hope of the
Palestinians to exercise self-determination and to live
in their homeland are vetoed by that permanent member.

Twelve years ago, we heard the accusation made
by the United States in the Security Council arguing
that there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.
Only after the military invasion took place, followed
by continued tragic bloodshed, did the world come to
realize that it had been the big lie of the century, whose
catastrophic consequences we are still witnessing.

Unless the present circumstances, in which the
Security Council is abused to serve the unjust purpose
of one permanent member and to justify its actions,
are properly addressed, the Security Council will
no longer be able to deal with issues of international
peace and security in conformity with the aspirations
and demands of Member States and the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter.

The arbitrariness and high-handedness reflected in
the actions of the Security Council, due mainly to one
permanent member, find their clear manifestation in the
situation created on the Korean peninsula. Today the
handling of the Korean problem in the Security Council
is not oriented towards promoting peace and security
on the peninsula, but forced into realizing the strategic
aim of the United States to destroy the sovereignty and
right to existence of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea.

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
the liberation of Korea and the seventieth year since
the artificial division of the Korean nation by foreign
forces. In the course of those decades, the world has
made tremendous advances and the times have seen
dramatic changes. But the Korean nation has not yet
achieved reunification, suffering the pain of division. It
is a deplorable fact known to all and lamentable to all.

In order to open up a broad avenue to independent
reunification this year through the joint efforts of the
whole Korean nation, the Government of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea put forward initiatives to
remove the danger of war, ease the tension and create a
peaceful environment on the Korean peninsula. For its
realization, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
requested the United States to stop the large-scale war
exercises it conducts continuously throughout the year
in South Korea and to fundamentally change its policy,
which is hostile to the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea.

However, the United States Administration
responded by a confrontational announcement to topple
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea - to topple
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and I repeat
this phrase because these are the exact words spoken
by President Obama - and to continue to conduct war
exercises aimed at occupying Pyongyang.

Thus, the United States has completely destroyed
the basis of the so-called dialogue it has been talking
about, though outwardly, and openly confirmed its
strategy of toppling the system of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. It is the policy of the
United States Administration to mobilize all possible
means - nuclear, human rights, cyberattack, freedom
of expression and so on - in order to eliminate the
ideology, system and sovereignty of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

That is the reality unfolding on the Korean
peninsula, where the present situation of world peace
and security is consolidated, and that is the position
and attitude of one permanent member towards the
principle of respect for sovereign equality enshrined in
the Charter.

The downgrading of the status quo of the Security
Council to a tool of arbitrariness should be redressed,
hence an urgent need for comprehensive reform of
the Security Council has arisen. The United States
must withdraw its unilateral hostile policies against
sovereign Member States and refrain from abusing
the Security Council for its unjust unilateral purposes.
If the Security Council is to demonstrate its serious
stance and attitude towards peace and security issues,
it will have to duly address the United States war
exercises aimed at targeting and toppling a sovereign
State and the horrible CIA acts of torture and atrocities
committed in other parts of the world.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea will
discharge its responsibility and duty as a State Member
of the United Nations to achieve peace and security
for all, in conformity with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter, and, for the sake of
discharging that responsibility and duty, will continue
to stand against any move to abuse the United Nations
for the pursuit of individual purposes and interests.

