Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for having
convened this emergency meeting in the delicate
circumstances our region is experiencing and which
pose a threat to international peace and security. I
would also like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing ,and I thank the members ofthe Security
Council that called for this very important meeting to
be convened.

The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan underscores that the decision taken by
the United States Administration on 6 December to
recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and transfer
the Embassy of the United States there constitutes a
violation of internationally legitimate resolutions and
a transgression of the Charter of the United Nations,
which confirms that the status of Jerusalem can be
decided only through final-status negotiations between
the parties involved. The Hashemite Kingdom believes
that any unilateral measure aiming to impose a new
situation on the ground is null and void. That is why
Jordan rejects this decision, which risks exacerbating
tensions, consolidating the Israeli occupation on
Palestinian land and even prejudge the outcome of
negotiations on the final status, as well as inciting anger
and provoke anti-Muslim and anti-Christian sentiment
throughout the Arab world.

We believe that the occupation is the principal
cause of tension in the region and that there will be no
security or stability without a settlement to bring justice
to the Palestinian people and satisfy their legitimate
rights to freedom and the creation of an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Jordan also highlights the importance and the need to
intensify consultations to find a political horizon that
will prevent despair and aggression from taking root in
the region and its surroundings.

The issue of Jerusalem must be addressed
from the perspective of all three religions. We once
again underscore that the question of Jerusalem is
a final-status issue that must be resolved through a
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, while guaranteeing the existence of an
independent Palestinian State along the borders of
4 June 1967 and with Jerusalem as its capital. That is the
only way of achieving security, stability and peace in
accordance with internationally legitimate resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

The United States recognition of Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel has no validity under law as it only
perpetuates the Israeli occupation of the eastern part of
the City occupied by Israel in June 1967. Resolution 478
(1980) stipulates the non-recognition of Israel's basic
law on Jerusalem and calls on the Member States with
embassies in Jerusalem to close them. Any proceedings
or measures taken by Israel on Jerusalem that aims to
alter its legal nature and status, including declaration of
it as capital, are null and void as confirmed by various
relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolutions 465 (1980), 476 (1980) and 478 (1980).

We must emphasize that recognition of any status of
Jerusalem as the capital ofIsrael can have no legal effect
in changing the status of Jerusalem from occupied land,
as determined by the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the Legal consequences of the
construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory (see A/ES-10/273). Jordan also condemns the
expansion of settlements and asserts their illegality. We
highlight the need to halt all unilateral Israeli measures
that may impose a new reality on the ground. We must
also emphasize the need for the United States to play its
central role as a neutral mediator to settle this conflict
and achieve peace on the basis of the two-State solution,
agreed upon by the entire world as the only way of
settling this conflict and achieving lasting peace.

I wish to emphasize that the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan will spare no effort and take all possible
measures, together with the international community,
to help successfully reach a settlement and realize the
legitimate rights of our brotherly Palestinian people. I
would also like to inform the Council that the Hashemite
Kingdom, together with our brothers in the Palestinian
National Authority, has called for an emergency meeting
of the Council of the League of Arab States at the
ministerial level in Cairo tomorrow to coordinate our
position regarding the United States decision and agree
on a collective action mechanism to lessen its negative
effects and contain the potential consequences.

Jordan has also called on Istanbul to hold a meeting
of the Foreign Ministers of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation to unify efforts. That meeting will precede
the summit convened by Turkey, which will be held
next Wednesday in Istanbul rather than on Sunday
in Amman.

In conclusion, under the leadership of His Majesty
King Abdullah ll bin Al-Hussein, as Custodian of
the Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem, the
Hashemite Kingdom ofJordan will continue its intensive
diplomatic efforts at the regional and international
levels. In close coordination with our brothers in the
Palestinian Authority, we will endeavour to put an
end to the occupation and strive for the creation of
an independent Palestinian State, the protection of
Jerusalem and its Islamic and Christian holy sites and
the preservation of its legal and historic status - a top
priority for Jordan.

The meeting rose at 1.15 pm.
