Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to convey to you, Sir, and to the other
members of the Security Council my profound thanks
for your speedy response to the request of the Arab
Group to hold this urgent meeting to discuss the
dangerous developments occurring in the occupied
Palestinian territories.

I would like to extend my congratulations to you,
Sir, upon your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I also thank your
predecessor, the Ambassador of France, on his
successful presidency of the Council during the last
month.

The Security Council is holding its meeting today
in light of the very dangerous circumstances witnessed
in the occupied Palestinian territories that are due to
the policies practised by the Israeli Government
towards the Palestinian people, and to its dependence
upon methods that include extrajudicial assassinations
which target the national and political symbols of the
Palestinian people. Such methods are themselves
serious threats to the security and stability of the
region.

A few weeks ago, the terrible assassination of
Sheikh Ahmed Yassin was clearly condemned by the
international community. Since that time, the Israeli
occupying forces have perpetrated another
assassination which targeted, this time, Mr. Abdel Aziz
Al-Rantisi, the leader of the Hamas movement in Gaza.
Tunisia has expressed its denunciation and
condemnation of the assassination by the Israeli
occupying forces of Mr. Rantisi and expresses once
again its belief that targeting Palestinian political
leaders will lead to the escalation of the spiral of
violence and strengthen feelings of hatred in the
region. All such actions put an end to any opportunity
for establishing a just, comprehensive and permanent
peace in the Middle East and reduce the possibility of
resuming negotiations.

Tunisia follows with great concern the serious
developments in the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories because of the continuation by
the occupying Power of its policies of assassination. It
calls upon the international community to effectively
and decisively provide protection for the Palestinian
people and to find a political solution to the present
situation in accordance with resolutions of international
legitimacy.

Within that framework, we would like to
emphasize our deep conviction that resuming peace
negotiations is the only way to bring about a permanent
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East, and we
renew our invitation to address the importance of
implementing the road map, which underlines and
consecrates the vision of the two States living side by
side.

