Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Madam President, allow
me at the outset to thank the Lithuanian presidency for
holding this open debate, thus giving us an opportunity
to reaffirm our commitment to promoting freedom of
opinion and expression as a fundamental right and an
essential precondition for democracy, the rule of law,
peace and stability.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union and welcomes
the adoption of Security Council resolution 2222
(2015) on this topic earlier today, which we were glad
to co-sponsor.

Free, diverse, objective and independent media are
indispensable in any society determined to promote
and protect freedom of opinion and expression. Without
free journalism, many injustices might go unnoticed
by the international community, and much human
suffering would fade into oblivion without a single word
of protest. Every day journalists are on the front lines,
sometimes on the domestic fields of political and social
battles, providing us with important information and
inside views, but some of them are on real battlefields,
reporting from burning crisis areas and risking their
lives for information or a video clip that speaks
volumes and will make a difference. In areas where few
dare to go, journalists serve as our eyes and ears, and
often as our conscience. Their need for protection is,
unfortunately, very real, and it is well deserved.

Croatia is deeply worried about the continuing
attacks on independent journalism in certain countries,
as well as by the escalating trend of intimidation,
harassment, arrests, torture and prosecution of
journalists worldwide. We strongly condemn all actions
that suppress freedom of the press, including the brutal
murders of journalists by terrorist groups in Iraq and
Syria, the murderous attacks against media outlets such
as the French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo, and
the kidnappings of journalists and media workers by
militant groups in eastern Ukraine, to cite just a few
examples from a long and inglorious list.

In this century alone, according to the Committee
to Protect Journalists, 795 journalists and media
workers have been killed. The number ofjournalists in
prison, kidnapped or taken hostage in the same period
exceeds 2,200. These are horrifying numbers. It is
equally troubling that those responsible for attacking
and killing journalists very rarely face justice. Against
this disturbing background, we highly value and fully
support the continuing efforts of the Human Rights
Council and the Security Council to provide journalists
with more effective protection and develop a single,
strategic and harmonized approach to the issue of the
safety of journalists and the impunity of perpetrators of
crimes against them.

The General Assembly and Human Rights
Council annual consensual resolutions on the safety of
journalists are valuable tools in encouraging concrete
initiatives aimed at combating impunity for attacks
against journalists and media workers. We need to
ensure full cooperation between existing protection
mechanisms, in particular with Special Rapporteurs and
Representatives: those on the promotion and protection
of the right to freedom of opinion and expression;
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary execution; violence
against women; torture; and forced disappearances and
arbitrary detentions, all of whom play a crucial role in
monitoring different aspects of the issue of the safety
ofjournalists.

Croatia supports the 2012 United Nations Plan of
Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of
Impunity. With these calls to action in mind, and in the
light of the distinctive threats faced by journalists, we
have to continue to recognize the particular vulnerability
of journalists in United Nations resolutions on crisis
situations. We also wish to underscore the specific
risks faced by women journalists, including sexual and
gender-based violence, and call for a gender-sensitive
approach when considering measures to address the
safety ofjournalists.

The Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Human Rights Council have called upon all States
to act on their legal obligations to promote a safe and
enabling environment for journalists, so that they can
perform their work independently and without undue
interference.

In our joint efforts to end the heinous practices
that threaten the safety of journalists worldwide, we
need to ensure better cooperation and coordination
among various international, regional and local actors,
including in establishing effective early-warning
mechanisms. We also need to call on all relevant actors
to comply with existing standards on the protection
of journalists; we need to be more systematic and
vigorous in condemning attacks againstjournalists and
violations of their rights; and we need to fight impunity
and hold the perpetrators accountable.

To conclude, let me say that as a former journalist
who reported from this very building 25 years ago, I
can testify to the fact that while the world of media
has changed profoundly through new technologies and
means ofreporting, some things have remained the same
since the dawn of this profession. Goodjournalism can
change the world for the better. Journalism must never
be silent; by the same token, we must never cease our
efforts to provide it with the best protection possible.

