Mr. Ripert (France)(spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for
his report, submitted pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005).

In 2005, the Security Council referred the
situation in Darfur to the International Criminal Court
(ICC), pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter, in
response to the extremely serious violations of
international humanitarian law committed in that
region.

The most recent quarterly report of the Prosecutor
unfortunately confirms that, six years later, these
violations are continuing and that serious and repeated
crimes falling under the jurisdiction of the ICC and
within the purview of resolution 1593 (2005), continue
to be committed in Darfur. Therefore, the submission
to the Court remains fully justified.

In its preamble, the Rome Statute emphasizes that
crimes as serious as those perpetuated in Darfur
"threaten the peace, security and the well-being of the
world" and affirms that "the most serious crimes of
concern to the international community as a whole
must not go unpunished".

These words provide a full explanation of the
Security Council's action. We adopted resolution 1593
(2005) because the struggle against impunity is
inseparable from the restoration of peace and security
to Darfur. By its resort to article 13 of the Rome
Statute, the Security Council, the principle organ for
the maintenance of international peace and security, is
fully carrying out the mission entrusted to it by the
United Nations Charter.

Three investigations on the crimes committed in
Darfur have been opened by the Prosecutor since the
adoption of resolution 1593 (2005). The first led to the
issuance by the Court of arrest warrants against
Mr. Ahmed Haroun and Mr. Ali Kushayb for crimes
against humanity and war crimes. The second led the
Prosecutor to request the issuance of an arrest warrant
of the President of the Sudan for genocide, crimes
against humankind and war crimes. Finally, in the
third, the Prosecutor placed before the Court charges
on war crimes against three rebel commanders
allegedly responsible for the Haskanita attack against
African Union forces.

In the first instance, the Government of the Sudan
is still not cooperating with the Court in the carrying
out of the arrests of Mr. Haroun and Mr. Kushayb. At
the moment, nothing leads us to believe that it intends
to carry out these arrests. Mr. Haroun even continues to
occupy his ministerial functions.

In the two other cases, we await the decision of
the Court, which will make a fully independent ruling
based on the merits of the indictments. As the
Prosecutor has emphasized, no procedure has actually
been begun within the Sudanese judicial system
regarding the cases currently before the ICC.

France is dedicated to the authority of both the
Security Council and the ICC, the judicial body
authorized to punish the most serious crimes against
international humanitarian law and human rights.
The responsibility for the present situation in
Darfur falls neither on the Security Council, which has
taken the measures it deems necessary for the
maintenance and restoration of peace, nor on the ICC
and its various bodies, to which the Council entrusted a
mission which it is exercising in full independence.
The Sudanese authorities have the obligation to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court with
regard to the execution of the warrants issued for
Mr. Haroun and Mr. Kushayb. They could, for
example, themselves undertake to pursue the two
accused under national jurisdiction in accordance with
articles 17 to 19 of the Statute of Rome.

Furthermore, the Sudanese authorities bear a
heavy portion of the responsibility for hindering
international deployment and humanitarian activity in
Darfur, for the cross-border activity of armed groups
aimed at destabilizing the neighbouring country of
Chad and for the absence to date of a potential political
solution to the crisis.

Progress has recently been made in the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the renewal of moratoria
on the restrictions on humanitarian operations and the
resumption of diplomatic relations with Chad.
However, that does not constitute a radical change in
the policy of the Sudanese authorities in Darfur.
Attacks continue despite the proclamation of a +-
unilateral cessation of hostilities; the J anjaweed militia
show no signs of concern; the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. For their part, the rebels must
assume their full responsibility in seeking to reduce
violence, to respect international law and to effect the
active resumption of the political process.

As the Prosecutor has done in his report, I would
like to recall the language of the presidential statement
adopted by the Security Council, our Council, on
16 June:

"The Security Council takes note of the
efforts made by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court to bring to justice
the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Darfur and the transmittal by the
Registry of the International Criminal Court to
the Government of the Sudan on 16 June 2007 of
arrest warrants and the opening by the Prosecutor
of other investigations on crimes committed by
various parties in Darfur.
"In this respect, the Council urges the
Government of the Sudan and all other parties to
the conflict in Darfur to cooperate fully with the
Court, consistent with resolution 1593 (2005), in
order to put an end to impunity for the crimes
committed in Darfur" (S/PRST/2008/21).

That presidential statement remains fully
relevant. The Sudanese Government's dispute of both
the authority of the Security Council and the
jurisdiction of the Court is not admissible. We must
remind the Sudan of its obligations to respect the
Security Council's resolutions and to cooperate with
the International Criminal Court in the implementation
of resolution 1593 (2005). In 2005, the Security
Council gave the Court the task of fighting impunity in
Darfur in the interests of justice and peace. The
Sudanese Government must cooperate with the Court
to carry out this mission, as do all other parties to the
conflict in Darfur and, more generally, all States and
regional and international organizations concerned.

