President Bush: I would like to express
appreciation to all the members of the Security Council
for participating in this summit. Our presence here
reaffirms the seriousness of the challenges we face and
our determination to confront them.

We are meeting just over two months after the
terror attacks in London, one year after the terrorist
massacre of schoolchildren in Beslan and four years
after the terrorist attack in this city. Acts of terrorism
like those emerge from a radical ideology that tolerates
no dissent and justifies the murder of innocent people
as the best way to achieve its goals.

Today, we supported the resolution sponsored by
the United Kingdom that condemns the incitement of
terrorist acts and calls on all States to take appropriate
steps to end such incitement. I want to thank the Prime
Minister and his Government for their hard work on
that issue. The United States of America strongly
supports the implementation of that resolution.

We have a solemn obligation. We have a solemn
obligation to stop terrorism in its early stages. We have
a solemn obligation to defend our citizens against
terrorism, to attack terrorist networks and deprive them
of any safe haven, and to promote an ideology of
freedom and tolerance that will refute the dark vision
of the terrorists. We must do all we can to disrupt each
stage of planning and support for terrorist acts. Each of
us must act consistent with past Security Council
resolutions to freeze terrorist assets, to deny terrorists
freedom of movement by using effective border
controls and secure travel documents and to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons, including weapons
of mass destruction. Each of us must act to share
information to prevent terrorist attacks before they
happen. The United States will continue to work with
and through the Security Council to help all nations
meet those commitments.

The United States also reaffirms its commitment
to support the prevention of unjust armed conflict,
particularly in Africa. That is why we joined Algeria,
Benin and Tanzania in co-sponsoring today's second
important resolution. We support the need to improve
the ability of the African Union and subregional
organizations to deploy both civilian and military
assets to prevent such conflicts. Over the next five
years, the United States will provide training for more
than 40,000 African peacekeepers as part of a broader
initiative by the G-8 countries. We will help train
African forces to preserve justice and order in Africa.

Terrorism and armed conflict are not only threats
to our security, they are the enemies of development
and freedom for millions. I want to thank the members
of the Security Council for supporting today's
resolutions, to help ensure that the twenty-first century
is one of freedom, security and prosperity.

