Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Let me
reiterate our heartfelt condolences to France, Lebanon
and the Russian Federation, which have been brutally
victimized by terror in the past few days.

Thank you for organizing this open debate,
Mr. President. 1 also wish to thank the Secretary-General
and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission for their
briefings. Let me also congratulate Ms. Bouchamaoui
for the vital contribution of the Tunisian National
Dialogue Quartet to ensuring peace and democracy in
Tunisia.

Brazil has long upheld the notion that development
and security are closely interconnected, mutually
reinforcing and central to the achievement of lasting
peace. Experience has demonstrated that achieving
development leads a country to strengthen its
commitment to peace and stability. That positive link
was the subject of an open debate promoted by Brazil's
most recent presidency of the Security Council in
February 2011 (see S/PV.6479).

However, the relationship between security and
development cannot be understood from a simplistic
perspective. We should clearly reject any notion that
poverty itself might constitute a threat to peace. One
should not lose sight of the fact that the gravest threats
to international peace and security, including world
wars, have historically risen from tensions between
developed industrial nations. Militaristic agendas and
the unilateral use of force are far more significant
sources of instability than poverty per se.

A broad and strong consensus has emerged on
the centrality of conflict prevention to the promotion
of peace, as the Secretary-General states in his latest
report on the matter (S/2015/730). The issue was also
highlighted by all three high-level reviews conducted
this year, since preventive approaches are consistent with
more effective peace operations, more comprehensive
peacebuilding efforts and more empowering initiatives
on the women and peace and security agenda.

Adopting a multidimensional approach to conflict
prevention is therefore a wise strategy. Traditional
instruments to solve disputes and avert wars, including
mediation, good offices and conciliation measures,
remain essential. Nevertheless, preventive diplomacy
goes far beyond those tools. Understanding and
tackling the root causes of conflict are a key step in
preventing the emergence of new hostilities. While
every crisis derives from a specific context, some
challenges are particularly frequent, including
economic and social inequality, disputes regarding the
ownership of land and natural resources, human rights
violations, the insufficient participation of women
and the marginalization of minorities and vulnerable
populations.

Other structural factors, often linked to the
behaviour of developed countries, also contribute to
international instability. In order to genuinely face the
underlying causes of conflicts, the Security Council
should also consider measures to control the flow of
arms, promote nuclear disarmament, ensure respect
for the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
concerning the use of force, enforce withdrawal
from illegally occupied territories and expand the
participation of developing countries in the Council's
deliberations.

A situation that deserves particular attention in that
regard is the extreme case of "de-development" that is
taking place in Palestine as a result of our collective
inability to translate into reality our commitment to
a two-State solution. The national report of the State
of Palestine, submitted by Palestine to the Economic
and Social Council in 2014 (E/2014/60, annex), unveils
the root causes of a protracted conflict that requires
priority attention from the Security Council.

Discerning the root causes of a particular conflict
is a complex endeavour that should not be confused
with the attainment of a development agenda. The first
silo to be broken down by this debate is the erroneous
perception that only developing countries need to build
peaceful and inclusive societies. Moreover, the various
challenges faced by all countries in areas related to
public order should not be interpreted as threats to
peace, security or stability. In that regard, it is worth
stressing the key legal and practical distinction between
conflict and violence.

The notion of conflict describes a politically
motivated situation that might represent a threat to
international peace and security. Response to conflicts
may involve instruments associated with collective
responsibility or security. The concept of violence, on
the other hand, can relate to a purely domestic challenge
within the realm of public security that is subject to
national laws. Although international cooperation, upon
request, can be a useful tool to curb violence, we are
dealing with different spheres ofresponsibility to which
different remedies should be applied. In other words,
the Security Council is not mandated, for instance, to
reduce high levels of homicide or criminality in a given
country.

From the point of View of international humanitarian
law, the Geneva Conventions that apply to conflict
prescribe, as a rule, that force, when resorted to, must
observe the criterion of proportionality. Conversely,
in situations of domestic violence, different criteria
apply; every casualty or injury caused by a State public
agent must be accounted for according to domestic
penal laws. Utmost care must be taken not to bring
issues of internal public order into a body that deals
with conflicts and threats to international peace and
security. Such a mistaken approach could exacerbate
the problems rather than help to solve them.

Having engraved the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes into our Constitution, Brazil
will continue to contribute towards a virtuous cycle of
security and development in our region and beyond. We
are proud to belong to a zone of peace, as defined by the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the long-
standing commitment of Brazil to the prevention of
conflict through dialogue, diplomacy and development.

