Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): My delegation associates
itself fully with the statement delivered by the
representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of the
European Union.

As a sponsor of the draft resolution before the Council
today, Portugal reaffirms its full support for the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The
Tribunal plays a crucial role in the significant efforts that
the international community is making to help peace take
root in the former Yugoslavia. In Bosnia today, it is the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) that ensures a secure
environment for the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. Portugal continues to field troops in that Force.

But the mere absence of war does not make peace. In
paving the way towards the reconstruction and rehabilitation
of Bosnia, the High Representative is responsible for
overseeing the implementation of the civilian aspects of the
Peace Agreement, in which the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and, particularly, the United
Nations International Police Task Force, play a crucial role.
There too, Portugal has police observers on the ground.

However, this long process of peace-building must
also be based on reconciliation among the various
communities. This is where the Tribunal comes into play.
In seeking to prosecute, try and convict war criminals, the
international community, through the Tribunal, is laying
a foundation of justice which in turn will foment trust and
hope in Bosnia and elsewhere in the former Yugoslavia,
where former neighbours became enemies, and where
former enemies must now become neighbours once more.

For this entire process to be effective, the Tribunal
must be given the necessary means to function, and this
is the reason for today's draft resolution. Through the
Secretary-General, the President of the Tribunal, Judge
Gabrielle Kirk McDonald, has requested that the Security
Council establish a third trial chamber. This would be
decided in the draft resolution before us. We strongly
support these additional resources for the Tribunal.
Portugal is honoured to have a judge serving on the
Tribunal.

Security Council resolutions demand that States fully
cooperate with the Tribunal in the fulfilment of its
mandate. We strongly support the appeals to that end.

Finally, I would like to say that the important work
of this Tribunal and of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda points ever more emphatically to the need for a
permanent court to bring the perpetrators of war crimes
and other serious international crimes to justice. Portugal
will strongly support the establishment of an international
criminal court this summer at Rome.

