Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I warmly congratulate Viet Nam on assuming its seat on the Security Council and commend it for skilfully presiding over the Council this month. We thank the delegation of Viet Nam and its Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs for convening this timely debate on upholding the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security. We thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of the Elders, for their briefings on a matter requiring the urgent attention and engagement of all if we are to preserve the international rules-based order in the face of the many challenges ahead and are to strengthen multilateralism in service of global peace, stability and prosperity. I also would like to say that we associate ourselves with the statement delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1). Although unjustly denied full membership in the United Nations, the State of Palestine has pledged to respect the Charter and to act in accordance with its noble purposes and principles. We do so despite being deprived of one of its most fundamental principles - that of equal rights and self-determination of peoples - as the Palestinian people continue to suffer a prolonged foreign occupation and constant oppression, dispossession and colonization obstructing their independence and freedom. In spite of the profound scope and scale of that injustice, we are firm in our conviction in the inevitability of the realization of our right to self- determination and equally firm in our conviction that upholding the Charter is vital for the fulfilment of that right and ofall our inalienable rights for the achievement of a just and peaceful solution and the establishment of regional and global peace and security. We know that we are in good company with the overwhelming majority of the international community, who agree that the United Nations and its effective functioning is critical for preventing conflicts and peacefully resolving them, safeguarding human rights, and promoting friendly relations and cooperation among all States. Yet, some that are granted the rights and privileges of a Member State have chosen instead to trample the Charter and abuse United Nations organs, seeking to benefit only themselves while disrespecting the Organization at every turn. Disparaging multilateralism, they even mock the Security Council and its responsibility for international peace and security, going so far as to claim that it has no role in resolving certain conflicts - specifically the Israeli- Palestinian conflict - while flagrantly defying the Council's authority and violating its resolutions. That has been done systematically for decades without real consequences, undermining the Council's role and credibility and the Charter's purposes and principles. Such selectivity has been gravely counterproductive and damaging. Upholding the Charter must mean defending it in all circumstances and insisting on compliance, without exception, and it must also mean that any breach will lead to consequences. Accountability and respect are two sides of the same coin. When the right to self-determination is violated, when force is unlawfully used to kill and injure civilians and destroy their homes, when threats of annexation are routinely declared and boasted of - as we witness being perpetrated every single day by Israel, the occupying Power - and when all such actions have no consequences to hold the perpetrators accountable for their crimes, the international community has failed in its obligation to uphold the Charter and can only bear witness to its continuous degradation. This is to the detriment of all - both those who believe in international law and in our shared values and humanity and those who do not, for the world can only become less safe, less prosperous and less peaceful for all in the absence of respect for the law. Yet we maintain faith in the Charter and in the centrality of international law when it comes to addressing the challenges our world is facing and to establishing the peace, stability and security vital for us all to develop and thrive. This debate has reinforced that faith within us, as has the recent decision by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to open a formal investigation into alleged war crimes in Palestine following a ruling by the Pre-Trial Chamber, which is an important step that will allow for the realization of long-overdue accountability and justice for the many victims of the war crimes that have been and continue to be perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power, against the Palestinian people, as well as for deterring future crimes. This accountability is the way in which impunity must be responded to and stopped. It is how justice - the cornerstone of any peaceful solution - must be realized. It is how our collective international legal obligations, including under the Charter, must be upheld - not just in words but in deeds.
