Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): I should like
to join other members of the Council in congratulating you,
Sir, on your assumption of the responsibilities of President
of the Security Council for this month, and to express again
my appreciation to Ambassador Al-Khussaiby for his good
stewardship last month.

The situation in Rwanda has changed significantly
over the course of the presence in that country of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR).
Internal conditions, we are gratified to note, are fairly
stable, due to the combined efforts of the Government of
Rwanda, the donor community and UNAMIR itself.
UNAMIR has been a factor in helping to foster a climate
of security within Rwanda.

Unfortunately, the situation in the region of which
Rwanda finds itself a part still faces instability, due to the
presence of over a million refugees just over Rwanda's
borders. As former President Carter, the President of
Rwanda and the leaders of Rwanda's neighbours all
acknowledged at the Cairo Summit last month, the
repatriation of those refugees is a critical element in
bringing peace and stability to the region.

We believe UNAMIR can play an important role in
facilitating the voluntary and safe return of refugees to their
former homes in Rwanda. To that end, the mandate of
UNAMIR for the next three months has been refocused on
the range of tasks it can perform to help smooth the way
for the refugees' repatriation.

Another element in bringing about the return of the
refugees and national reconciliation is the work of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda. We are heartened that,
after a regrettably slow start, the Tribunal is on the verge
of having an impact on the culture of impunity which
permeates society. It is vitally important that the Tribunal,

 

as an institution and as individuals working in the cause
of justice, have the sense of security needed to continue
their impartial investigations and prosecutions. Clearly,
they cannot do so without the protection and goodwill of
the Government of Rwanda. It is equally clear that they
need the added guarantee of an impartial third party to
ensure their independence. The Tribunal, we understand,
is arranging for a United Nations presence that would
replace UNAMIR in ensuring its independence, and we
appreciate the cooperation of the Government of Rwanda
in that effort. However, that new presence is not yet in
place. We firmly believe that the duties of UNAMIR
must continue to include assisting in the protection of the
Tribunal's personnel and premises until alternate
arrangements are operational.

UNAMIR has provided invaluable support and
assistance to the various United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations which have been working to
assist the people and Government of Rwanda. The
presence of the peacekeepers has helped to reassure these
international aid personnel as they carry out their tasks in
a volatile and unstable environment. We fully expect
UNAMIR to continue to assist the humanitarian agencies
as the need arises. United Nations forces have the
right - indeed, the obligation - to come to the aid of
other United Nations and other international personnel in
times of need.

The resolution we have just adopted renews
UNAMIR for a final period of three months. After that
time, UNAMIR will be terminated and all its military
personnel withdrawn within six weeks. Following the
departure of UNAMIR, however, the international
community should not abandon Rwanda. The United
Nations needs to retain a strong presence in Rwanda to
provide the assistance in reconstruction, rehabilitation,
justice and political reconciliation that is so sorely needed
there. This includes non-governmental organizations,
some of which have been essential in helping United
Nations agencies, such as the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to
carry out their work. The expulsion of non-governmental
organizations is a matter which causes concern for my
Government.

The last three months of the mandate should be used
to put into place a non-military logistics lifeline to sustain
the various United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations, including the
International Tribunal and the Human Rights Field
Operation in Rwanda, which have benefited from the

 

presence of UNAMIR's extensive logistics and
communications network.

UNAMIR has been successful in its mission. I would
like to take this opportunity to commend all the men and
women who have served with UNAMIR throughout its
difficult tenure in Rwanda, from Special Representative
Khan and the Force Commanders to the support staff. They
will continue to rely on the active cooperation of the
Government of Rwanda to carry out their mandate and
draw their mission to a close.
Peace and security have been restored to Rwanda,
after devastating events. We hope the people of Rwanda
can finally put the horrors of the past behind them and
move into a phase of rehabilitation, reconstruction and
reconciliation.

