Mrs. Haley (United States of America): What
would members of the Security Council say if they
were sitting across the table from a rape survivor in
a protection-of-civilians site? What would they say to
the countless women who had to witness their own
husbands and children being shot right in front of
them? What would they say to the two brothers who
were forced to watch as those fighters gang-raped their
mother and then were forced to actually take turns
shooting at their mother until she was dead?

Those are not hypotheticals. Those are the stories of
real people whom I saw and heard when I visited South
Sudan. That is the sad reality because the leaders of
South Sudan have failed to protect them. Those stories
are not exceptional. Those kinds of horrific abuses
happen all too frequently in South Sudan. Armed
groups, including Government forces, are assaulting,
robbing and slaughtering civilians almost every
single day. Four million people have been displaced
by fighting, another 2.5 million people have become
refugees, and the fighting is getting worse.

Multiple United Nations special representatives
described in a statement what has happened in recent
weeks.

"Testimonies indicate that women and girls
of all ages have been subjected to rape, including
pregnant women, lactating mothers and girls as
young as 4-years-old."

In another case, young soldiers attacked the island
of Meer in former Unity state. Women, children and
the elderly were slaughtered. Other civilians drowned
while trying to flee, including children. Again I would
ask, what would each of us say to those people?

We should be telling them that we will do everything
possible to help protect them and stop their suffering.
We should be explaining to the people of South Sudan
that the Security Council will take decisive action
to hold their leaders accountable for those atrocities.
We should be putting real pressure on them to end
the fighting.

The Security Council has not imposed an arms
embargo, even though the need is obvious. The Council
has not sanctioned a single individual since 2015, even
as the violence associated with the renewed civil war
has killed thousands of people. The South Sudanese
Government actually promoted one of the handful of
individuals the Council previously sanctioned to the
position of Chief of the Defence Forces. That is not just
an insult to the Council, it is a farce. The United States
has lost its patience. The status quo is unacceptable. It
is long past time for all of us to demand better for the
South Sudanese people. I for one went to South Sudan
with an open mind. I had a genuine conversation with
President Salva Kiir, and since then all we have been
asked to do is wait. We are told more time is necessary
for talks, or more time is necessary before the Council
will be able to impose sanctions. But all we see on the
ground is more fighting and more atrocities.

Last December the parties in South Sudan signed
the agreement on the cessation of hostilities. A few days
ago they supposedly recommitted to that agreement
with church leaders. So far, those are just words on
paper. The parties have violated that agreement from
day one. Neither the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development nor the African Union have applied
consequences for the violators. What we need now is
concrete action by the full international community
to hold the warring parties accountable. The draft
resolution before us today (8/2018/515) is a modest
step in that direction. It extends the sanctions regime
for 45 days. It demands that the parties fully adhere
to the cessation of hostilities. We hope they seize this
opportunity for the sake of the South Sudanese people.

This is a draft resolution that we should all support.
We urge Council members to use this time to think
about the reality of life in South Sudan. I have said
often that my fear when it comes to South Sudan is that
the children are growing up uneducated, unskilled and
resentful. That will be the issue of each one of us when
they become adults. Those children deserve a brighter
future and, in the face of such barbaric violence, the
Council's failure to act denies them that future. I do not
think any of us could look a survivor of this conflict
in the eye and say the right thing to do today was to
delay. We must stop making excuses and take real steps
to end the conflict instead. I for one cannot justify
anything else.

