Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Like others, I too would
like to welcome the presence among us of the President
of Timor-Leste. I would also like to thank him for his
thoughtful statement, which I think should make others
think as well. I would also like to thank Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa for his introduction of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2006/24) and for his briefing.

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union. I shall
therefore limit myself to some additional comments.

We are all encouraged by the significant positive
developments described in the report of the Secretary-
General. It seems that sufficient progress has been
made towards further developing the capacity of
Timor-Leste's democratic State institutions in the
justice, human rights and national police sectors. The
report of the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation, which President Gusmao presented to
the Secretary-General last Friday, is just one such
example of that progress.

The successful holding and completion of local
elections, the preparations for the presidential and
parliamentary elections to be held in 2007 and the
adoption of key legislation demonstrate that the
process of creating a functioning democracy is on the
right track, in a country that gained its independence
just a few years ago.

In addition, we very much appreciate the
improving relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia, which led to the establishment of the
bilateral Commission for Truth and Friendship, as well
as the progress made in the negotiations to finalize the
delineation of the remaining 4 per cent of the land
border between the two countries. That is a very good
example that should also be taken into consideration in
other conflict areas. The establishment and work of the
Commission for Truth and Friendship indicate the
resolve of both countries to achieve accountability for
crimes and human rights violations committed in 1999.
We recognize the significance of the entire endeavour
and hope to see tangible results in the fight against
impunity for those serious crimes, something that is of
the utmost importance for the Timorese people.

We hope that the report of the Secretary-General
on justice and reconciliation for Timor-Leste, including
a practical and feasible approach as requested by the
Security Council, will be an important additional
contribution to that end. It is to be hoped that the entire
process will allow the two peoples both to face the
crimes of the past and to promote reconciliation, which
will pave the way to a better future for them and for the
entire area.

Greece welcomes the signing, a few days ago, of
the agreement with Australia on equally sharing
revenues from the natural resources of the Timor Sea.
We consider that the agreement will greatly contribute
to much-needed sustainable economic development
and that it will enable Timor-Leste to attain the
Millennium Development Goals. There are of course
still major challenges to be addressed, especially as
regards the difficult economic situation in the country.
In that respect, the work of various United Nations

specialized agencies - such as the World Bank, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
International Monetary Fund - must also be

commended.
The assistance of the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) to the Government and people
of Timor-Leste has been invaluable. UNOTIL advisers
have demonstrated ability, dedication and effectiveness
in transferring knowledge and skills, coordinating
various activities and settling border incidents by
facilitating communication and contacts between
Timorese and Indonesian border-patrol forces.

The mandate of UNOTIL will end on 20 May
2006. We are pleased to note that the Secretary-
General's report refers to the preparations under way
for the successful transfer of certain tasks to other
international development actors. The Secretary-
General has also identified a number of serious
remaining challenges in the areas of justice, finance
and border control. To those one could add the
preparations for and holding of the 2007 presidential
and parliamentary elections.

In that context, the recent request made of the
Secretary-General by Timor-Leste's Prime Minister to
establish a special United Nations political office
deserves our particular attention. We believe that
providing further United Nations assistance through
that well-coordinated format is suitable in the current
circumstances. We ought to consolidate the
achievements in Timor-Leste, and not compromise
their success, at this crucial stage. We will favourably
examine the proposals to be submitted by the
Secretary-General.

I also wish to join previous speakers who have
called upon the United Nations and the international
community to continue their presence and to assist
Timor-Leste in achieving full self-reliance in the near
future. Greece will continue to actively participate in
all relevant bilateral and European Union efforts and
activities.

Finally, I should like to extend to the President of
Timor-Leste my Government's best wishes for the
speedy fulfilment of all the goals of the Timorese
people for the stable and prosperous future they
deserve.

