Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
commending Bolivia for organizing today's debate
and for its leadership in steering the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu and Mr. Joseph
Ballard for their respective briefings.

Ethiopia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Bolivian Republic
of Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Ethiopia welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
subsequent resolutions aimed at preventing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
and their means of delivery to non-State actors.
However, we note with great concern the continued
risk of proliferation, particularly considering reports
on the use of chemical weapons by terrorists in the
Middle East. Such reports clearly indicate the serious
threats posed by the proliferation of WMDs and their
means of delivery when they fall into the hands of
non-State actors.

In relation to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and subsequent Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2325 (2016), I would like to highlight the
following four points.

First, addressing the risk of proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction would primarily require
a total ban and elimination of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons of mass destruction. That is why
it is important to work towards the universalization
and full implementation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and the Biological Weapons Convention.
The successful conclusion of the ongoing negotiation
on a legally binding instrument on the prohibition of the
production and use of nuclear weapons, ifnot a total ban
on them, with the possible adoption of a legally binding
outcome document would, in our view, significantly
contribute to addressing the risk of proliferation of
nuclear weapons into the hands of non-State actors.

Secondly, as you highlighted in your opening
remarks, Mr. President, the prevention of proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction into the hands of
non-State actors would require a range of legislative
and enforcement measures that prohibits them from
developing, acquiring, manufacturing, possessing,
transporting, transferring or using WMDs and their
means of delivery. Coordinated national measures by
Member States involving all relevant stakeholders, such
as the law-enforcement, customs and financial sectors,
will be critical in preventing the risk of proliferation.
Such national efforts could be complemented by
international and regional efforts. They could also
be supported by assistance programmes within the
framework of the 1540 Committee.

Thirdly, enhancing cooperation between the 1540
Committee and regional organizations would also be
relevant. For instance, the African region, through the
Common African Defence and Security Policy, has
identified the accumulation of stockpiling, proliferation
and manufacture of weapons of mass destruction,
including nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
and their means of delivery, as a common external
threat to continental security as they may endanger or
pose a direct or indirect constraint on individual and
collective efforts to achieve continental security goals.
It is therefore important for the Committee to further
strengthen its cooperation with the African Union
and its member States in the implementation of the
Common African Defence and Security Policy and
other regional frameworks, such as the African nuclear-
weapon-free zone. Through such a regional approach,
the Committee could identify the specific priorities and
challenges of each region and subregion and strengthen
its support and assistance accordingly.

Enhanced cooperation at the regional and
international levels within the framework of the 1540
Committee, including through assistance programmes
and exchange of information and best practices, is very
important. In this regard, we welcome the holding of
the three original courses for 1540 points of contact.
We would further encourage the Committee to explore
other mechanisms to strengthen its support for member
States and regional organizations in accordance with
paragraph 9 of the 1540 Committee's programme of
work.

I would like to conclude my statement by
reaffirming Ethiopia's commitment to continuing
to take all the necessary measures to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, to keep
them from falling into the hands of non-State actors
and to fully implement resolution 1540 (2004) and
subsequent Security Council resolutions on the issue, in
particular by strengthening the legal and administrative
framework for prohibiting the manufacture, acquisition,
possession, development, transport, transfer or use of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors.

