The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the members of the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Guinea, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fall
(Guinea) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting today in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have received
photocopies of a letter dated 16 December 2000 from
the Permanent Representative of Mali to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under symbol S/2000/1201.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at developments on the border that
Guinea shares with Liberia and Sierra Leone.

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the recent incursions into Guinea
by rebel groups coming from Liberia and Sierra
Leone that have affected villages and towns along
the entire length of Guinea's border, including in
Gueckedou on 6 December 2000 and in
Kissidougou on 10 December 2000. The Council
deplores the fact that these attacks claimed many
lives, in particular the lives of civilians, and
caused an exodus of local inhabitants and
refugees, further exacerbating an already grave
humanitarian situation. The Council also
condemns the recent looting of the facilities of
the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
humanitarian organizations. The Council
demands an immediate halt to all acts of violence,
especially those directed against civilians, as well
as the infiltration of displaced persons camps by
armed elements, and that those responsible for
the violations of international humanitarian law
be brought to justice.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Guinea.
It expresses its serious concern, in this regard,
over reports that external military support is
being provided to these rebel groups. It calls on
all States, particularly Liberia, to refrain from
providing any such military support and from any
act that might contribute to further destabilization
of the situation on the borders between Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. The Council further
calls upon all States in the region to prevent
armed individuals from using their national
territory to prepare and commit attacks in
neighbouring countries.

"The Security Council notes with interest
the common undertakings assumed by Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone at the Conference of
Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
held in Bamako on 15 and 16 December 2000
(S/2000/1201, annex) and calls upon them to
implement those undertakings fully and without
delay. It again pays tribute to the current
Chairman of ECOWAS and to that organization
for the important role they play towards restoring
peace and security to the three countries of the
Mano River Union. The Council requests the
Secretary-General to consider what support the
international community, and in particular the
United Nations, might provide to ECOWAS in
order to ensure security on the border that Guinea
shares with Liberia and Sierra Leone, and to
report in that connection to the Council as soon
S/PV.4252

 

as possible. The Council supports the appeal
made by the Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS for an urgent meeting of the Heads of
State of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone under
the auspices of ECOWAS and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU).

"The Security Council expresses deep
appreciation for the Government of Guinea for
hosting a large number of refugees. The Council
is concerned by the growing hostile attitude
among the local population towards refugees, and
urges the Government of Guinea to take urgent
measures to discourage the propagation of such
anti-refugee feelings.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern over the fate of all those who continue to
live in a state of insecurity, especially the local
populations and the tens of thousands of refugees
and displaced persons. It urges all the competent
organizations to ensure that humanitarian relief
continues, and it underlines the importance of
integrated action by the United Nations agencies,
acting in coordination with the Government of
Guinea and with the support of ECOWAS. The
Council believes that humanitarian assistance in
secure locations must be made available not only
to displaced refugees and Guineans, but also to
those refugees returning to Sierra Leone. The
Council calls on the Secretary-General and
UNHCR to ensure that suitable programmes of
reintegration and assistance exist and are
enhanced where security permits in Sierra Leone.
It also recognizes the important role of the
international community and the competent non-
governmental organizations in providing the
humanitarian relief which the local populations,
the refugees and the displaced persons so sorely
need. The Council is concerned over the security
of humanitarian personnel working in Sierra
Leone and Guinea. It calls on all the parties
concerned to facilitate the work of the
humanitarian organizations. It urges the parties to
guarantee the security of refugees and displaced
persons, and the security of the staff of the United
Nations and humanitarian organizations. The
Council also reaffirms the need to respect the
civilian character of refugee camps.

"The Security Council welcomes the
proposed Inter-Agency multidisciplinary mission
to West Africa, supports its earliest possible
departure to the region and looks forward to its
report and recommendations."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2000/4l.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

