The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

Bolivia welcomes the reports of the President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), Judge Carmel Agius; the President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Theodor Meron; and the Prosecutor
of the ICTY and the Mechanism, Mr. Brammertz (see S/2017/436 and S/2017/434). We take this opportunity
to convey our support to them in carrying out the work
entrusted to them.

We also express our gratitude for the work done by
Ambassador Rosselli and his team in his capacity as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. We also thank the Office of Legal Affairs
for its support and cooperation in connection with
facilitating the work of the Informal Working Group.

It is important to underscore that the establishment
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
through resolution 827 (1993), of 25 May 1993, and
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
through resolution 955 (1994), of 8 November 1994,
have contributed significantly to justice through the
fight against impunity and have played a key role in
restoring the rule of law in the countries of the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.

In the more than 20 years that both Tribunals were
up and running, the international community saw that
they represented a key element in the quest for justice.
As they have done a great deal of work, the Security
Council must provide them the necessary support so
that they can conclude their mandate, and also urge
the Mechanism that it assist in this process in the best
possible conditions.
Against this backdrop, and in order to ensure that
the Tribunal can fully discharge the mandate conferred
upon it by the international community and complete
the remaining cases by December 2017, as set out in the
completion strategy, it is vital that all States cooperate
with its work.

We listened very carefully to the update on Judge
Aydin Sefa Akay, which is a very delicate case when it
comes to the work of the Mechanism. We hope that a
swift resolution to this issue can be found. We also pay
tribute to the dedicated work of the staff of the Tribunal
through the lifetime of its mandate and reiterate that its
cooperation and assistance will be key also during its
drawdown period. We deem it important to ensure that
the Tribunal has the resources necessary to facilitate the
work of the Mechanism and the closing of the Tribunal.

We stress and welcome the work done in terms of
preserving the Tribunal's legacy through dialogues with
academia and with the general public, as was done in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia. We believe that
those awareness-raising activities are clear testimony
of the efforts made by the Tribunal to ensure the right
to truth, justice, reparations for harm caused, keeping
memories alive and most of all to ensure that such
events are never repeated, and that in all circumstances
dialogue and conciliation should be used to resolve
conflicts, as set out in the Charter ofthe United Nations.

Finally, Bolivia looks forward to the events that
will take place in December both in The Hague and in
New York prior to the closure of the Tribunal, as well
as the high-levels symposiums that will mark the end of
24 years of work.

Bolivia is firmly committed to the fight against
impunity and to the maintenance of international peace
and security, which are the cornerstones of the Charter
of the United Nations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign and European Affairs
of Croatia.

