The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered,
during its public meetings of 14 May and 18
December 2001, the report of the Inter-Agency
Mission to West Africa (8/2001/434).

"The Security Council welcomes with
satisfaction the above report and fully supports
initiatives taken with a view to implementing its
recommendations. It welcomes, in particular, the
establishment of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa to, inter alia, ensure the strengthening of
harmonization and coordination of the activities
of the United Nations system in an integrated
regional perspective and to the development of a
fruitful partnership with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
other subregional organizations and international
and national actors, including civil society.

"The Security Council emphasizes that
greater subregional integration must remain a key
goal for the United Nations system in the search
for lasting solutions to the conflicts in West
Africa and to the human suffering to which these
give rise. It stresses the need to further strengthen
the capacities of ECOWAS in the areas which
should enable it to act as the engine of
subregional integration and increased cooperation
with the United Nations system.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of taking steps to develop cooperation
and coordination among the intergovernmental
bodies and entities of the United Nations system
which can influence the situation in West Africa,
and expresses its intention to consider measures
to coordinate its action with these bodies and
entities.

"The Security Council emphasizes the need
to maintain regional peace and stability and, in
that connection, welcomes the progress made in
the Mano River Union area. It also emphasizes
the need to see to the effective implementation of
the confidence-building and cooperation
measures agreed on by Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone and strongly encourages these three
countries to do their utmost to hold a summit
meeting of their heads of State and to ensure its
success. It commends the role of the civil society
and particularly the Mano River Union Women's
Peace Network for their instrumental role in
facilitating dialogue among the leaders of the
region.

"The Security Council also emphasizes the
need to strengthen the capacity of ECOWAS to
monitor and to stem the illicit flows of small arms
and the establishment of militia. In this
connection, it welcomes the extension for a
period of three years, starting on 5 July 2001, of
the Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation
and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa. It appeals to the
international community to provide appropriate
financial assistance to the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development and to the national mechanisms
involved in the fight against the proliferation of
small arms in West Africa.

"The Security Council also emphasizes the
urgent need to solve the problem of refugees and
displaced persons in the subregion by permitting
voluntary returns as soon as possible, under
acceptable security conditions.

"The Security Council reiterates its
condemnation of the use, by State and non-State
actors, of children as combatants, in violation of
the relevant international instruments on the
rights of the child and the Accra Declaration on

War-Affected Children in West Africa and the
related Plan of Action. It calls for the immediate
demobilization of all child soldiers.

"The Security Council welcomes the
holding in New York, on 16 November 2001, of
the fifth meeting of the United Nations-
ECOWAS-Sierra Leone coordination mechanism
and the progress made in the peace process in
Sierra Leone. It appeals to the international
community for substantial financial assistance for
the programme for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants and other peace-consolidating
activities in Sierra Leone.

"The Council welcomes the holding of the
twenty-fifth conference of heads of State and of
Government of ECOWAS. It pays tribute to that
organization for its major contribution to the
restoration of peace, stability, democracy and
development in West Africa.

"The Council will remain actively seized of
this matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol SfPRST/2001/38.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.25 pm.
