I would like to thank Germany for launching its presidency of the Security Council with an open debate via video-teleconference on the theme of "Pandemics and security". We also thank the Secretary-General, the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the African Union Commissioner for Social Affairs for elaborating on the interlinkage between the pandemics and peace and security in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We recognize that global health risks can undermine peace and security, in particular in regions already affected by conflicts and humanitarian crises. In 2014, resolution 2177 (2014) referred to the unprecedented extent of the Ebola outbreak in Africa, which constituted a threat to international peace and security and underscored that it could reverse the peacebuilding and development gains of the most affected countries and lead to a deterioration of the political and security climate. The unprecedented crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic is reported to be the biggest challenge humankind has faced since the Second World War. Evolving from a public health emergency into a global crisis with far-reaching humanitarian, socioeconomic and human-rights implications, the pandemic presents an immediate challenge to the multilateral system. Among the hardest hit are people trapped in conflict, and the lack of humanitarian access to the conflict areas further exacerbates their suffering, endangering the rights to life and to health of the affected population. The appeal of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for an immediate global ceasefire comes at a critical juncture, when the international community urgently needs to mobilize its efforts to fight the disease. Putting an end to ongoing hostilities and consolidating ceasefire regimes where they are in place is indispensable to ensuring safe and unhindered humanitarian access, with the aim of mitigating the impact of the pandemic and contain its spread. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) on | July, recognizing the efforts and measures proposed by the Secretary-General concerning the response to the potential impact of COVID-19, in particular his appeal for an immediate global ceasefire and demanding a general and immediate cessation of hostilities. Armenia fully and unequivocally supported the Secretary-General's appeal, stressing the importance of assistance and access of the United Nations specialized agencies to people residing in conflict-affected areas and its readiness to provide all necessary conditions for their unimpeded work. The authorities of Artsakh (Nagorno Karabakh) also extended their support to the Secretary-General's appeal, stressing that if it is to withstand the test with dignity, humankind will need to be guided by the principle of leaving no one behind. Confidence-building measures aimed at preventing and mitigating the spread of the disease can serve as an opportunity, including for parties to the conflict. Regrettably, Azerbaijan has been pursuing the approach of instrumentalizing the situation caused by the pandemic to raise the tensions in relation to Nagorno Karabakh. Armenia has stressed the inadmissibility of Azerbaijan's warmongering and unconstructive statements, which undermine the environment of the peace process and hinder the implementation of the commitment to preparing the populations for peace. The disruption of the activities of conflict-related field operations due to the pandemic is a matter of great concern, as it may create the temptation to take advantage of the temporary absence of the international presence, including monitoring mechanisms, and to resort to hostilities. Armenia and Nagorno Karabakh remain fully committed to the 1994 trilateral ceasefire agreement and 1995 agreement on consolidation of the ceasefire, which have no time limitation. Armenia has welcomed the appeal of the co-Chairs of the Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to the sides in the light of the suspension of monitoring activities by the Office of the Personal Representative of the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office due to the spread of COVID-19, to reaffirm their commitment to strictly observing the ceasefire and refraining from any provocative action that could further raise tensions. I want to conclude with a quote from the message that the Foreign Minister of Armenia, Zohrab Mnatsakanyan, delivered at the virtual ministerial meeting of the Alliance for Multilateralism on strengthening the multilateral health architecture and combating infodemics, held recently: "With or without COVID-19, Armenia is a staunch supporter of the multilateral, cooperative international system with effective and functioning global and regional institutions. The crisis of the global health system caused by the novel coronavirus is a call for action, a reminder that against the challenge of global problems recommitment to effective multilateralism is an imperative."
