Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I wish
first of all to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
and Assistant Secretary-General Mulet for their
briefings, and to reaffirm our full confidence in them
and our support for them and for all members of the
Secretariat and the Secretariat leadership.

My delegation regrets that it is obliged to note
once again that the situation in Georgia has
deteriorated. We are particularly alarmed by the
expansion of the conflict, both in intensity and in
geographical scope, including with continued air
strikes against targets outside the area of South
Ossetia, the presence of significant maritime forces
along the coast and the threat to the region of
Abkhazia.
According to the information we have received,
there have also been aerial attacks on the Kodori
Valley, a build-up of Abkhaz troops and military
equipment in the area of the line of demarcation

between Abkhazia and the rest of Georgia, and a threat
of major military operations by the Abkhaz side. We
are also gravely concerned at the consequences of this
deteriorating situation: an increasing number of
victims, refugees and displaced persons. In that regard,
the figures cited by Mr. Pascoe are particularly
alarming. We are also gravely concerned at the possible
implications of this deteriorating situation for the peace
and stability of the region.

Everything possible must be done to put an end to
this conflict. The priority is an immediate cessation of
hostilities. We have taken note of Georgia's
announcement of the withdrawal of its forces from
Ossetia and of Georgia's cessation of hostilities; that is
an important step. All parties must cease hostilities
immediately, and everything possible must be done to
achieve a lasting resolution of the situation.

I have already referred to the diplomatic efforts
undertaken by France, both in its national capacity and
as current President of the European Union. The
mediation mission undertaken by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union, with the participation of the United States, has
travelled to Georgia. The French Minister for Foreign
Affairs is to visit Moscow and Tbilisi, and the French
President has submitted a simple plan for emerging
from this crisis. It is based on three elements: an
immediate cessation of hostilities; full respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia; and
restoration of the status quo preceding the hostilities,
which would mean the withdrawal of Russian and
Georgian forces to their earlier positions.

We consider that those elements are the essential
parameters for resolving the crisis. Once we meet the
conditions for attaining those objectives, a plan for
international engagement could be put in place. It will
be necessary to fine-tune its modalities. There is no
doubt that the Security Council will be involved in that
exercise.

Before we get there, I would like to say that the
Security Council bears a significant responsibility that
it must shoulder: to support the ongoing diplomatic
efforts and to call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities, for a withdrawal of forces to their earlier
positions and for respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia.

Others have said before me, and I too would like
to emphasize, that it is important for the Security

Council rapidly to speak out on the basis of those
elements. France plans to work actively in the coming
hours to ensure that the Security Council is indeed able
to speak out in this manner. I think the time has come
for us all to shoulder our responsibility and to end a
deteriorating process that is likely to have serious
consequences for international peace and security.

