Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union (EU) to be
delivered later.

11-3390]
With regard to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
Germany remains committed to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. Germany supported the new resolution, 1977
(2011), as a sponsor because we are convinced that it
contributes significantly to efforts for the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is an important
non-proliferation tool. Importantly, in the new
resolution the Council also stresses the importance of
fulfilling commitments related to arms control,
disarmament and non-proliferation of all weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery. That is in
line with our firmly held conviction that disarmament
and non-proliferation are two sides of the same coin.

Germany is convinced that the creation of a group
of experts will prove to be helpful in guaranteeing
better coordination and proper implementation, thus
further deepening cooperation between the experts and
the Committee. In addition, Germany welcomes the
clear focus on assistance being channelled through the
Committee as a top priority in the Committee's future
work.

Germany will remain committed to the future
work of the 1540 Committee. Germany is ready to
support the Committee by facilitating the Working
Group on Monitoring and Implementation. The
Working Group is of particular importance to us, as we
believe that the full and effective implementation of
the obligations contained in the four pertinent Council
resolutions is key to achieving our common goal of
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors.

Germany will do its utmost to deliver a national
implementation action plan, as encouraged in
resolutions 1810 (2008) and 1977 (2011). We hope to
contribute to setting positive examples by moving
forward in that regard. We are currently giving
consideration to organizing a meeting related to
resolution 1540 (2004) in Germany next year, in
cooperation with the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs. The objective of the conference
would be to engage in outreach with international,
regional and subregional industry associations and
groups. We believe that they can play an important role
in complementing and supporting the work of States in

11-3390]
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) obligations. It
goes without saying that we will seek close
cooperation with the 1540 Committee in that regard.

Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee, we
remain convinced that all measures to combat terrorism
must be carried out in full compliance with
international human rights norms and standards. That is
indispensable to ensuring the efficiency and credibility
of counter-terrorism measures.

Regarding the 1267 regime, I would like to add
that Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Costa Rica on behalf
of the group of like-minded States during today's
debate. Since its establishment, the Office of the
Ombudsperson has made valuable contributions to fair
and clear procedures. Germany welcomes those efforts
and commends the Ombudsperson for her work. My
country is eager to continue supporting the Office of
the Ombudsperson in a constructive manner with a
view to strengthening the aspect of fair and clear
procedures in the regime and to ensuring that the
consolidated list remains a living document that
adequately reflects the present terrorist threat.

Before concluding, let me stress three areas
where Germany perceives the greatest need for
improvements. First, in order to provide for an
appropriate review mechanism, precise criteria for de-
listing should be conceived as a complement to the
ones applied for listing.

Secondly, the preventive character of the
sanctions should be enhanced by introducing a
limitation to the duration of listings. Any extension of
a listing should be based on solid information, as we
normally require for new listings.

Finally, adverse effects caused by fragmentary
and ambiguous listings must be avoided. Therefore,
special attention should be given to the submission of
precise and sufficient identifiers along with any
application for listing.

