Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Israeli armed forces dropped a laser-guided bomb
on a Palestinian residential area, causing many civilian
casualties, among them women and children. The
Chinese Government strongly condemned the atrocity,
which killed innocent people, committed by Israeli
forces in violation of international humanitarian law.
This new Israeli military action represents a vicious
development in the violent conflict between Palestine
and Israel, and it has seriously hampered the
international community's efforts to find a solution to
the Middle East question.

The Chinese Government believes that the crux
of the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, lies in Israel's prolonged and
renewed illegal occupation of the Palestinian
territories. In order once and for all to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, end the cycle of violence
and achieve peace in the Middle East, Israel must abide
by the relevant Security Council resolutions and
immediately withdraw from the occupied Palestinian
territories. We also appeal to the Palestinian side to
exercise restraint and to curb violence, including
suicide bombings, so as to avoid further complicating
the situation.

The escalation of violence between Israel and
Palestine in recent days further demonstrates that the
international community, including the Security
Council, needs to step up its efforts and to take
practical measures and actions to promote a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. Only when the ultimate goals of the peace
process - and the effective means of achieving those
goals - are in sight can there be mutual trust and
confidence. Only then can extremists who have blind
faith in violence be isolated, and only then can the
vision of the peaceful coexistence of two independent
States - Israel and Palestine - be transformed into
real action on the part of the majorities in Israel and
Palestine to put an end to decades of turmoil, violence
and terror.

