Mr. Williamson (United States of America): The
United States thanks Special Representative Steiner for
briefing us today, and we welcome the latest report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2003/ll3). Also, I would like to thank Mr. Steiner
for inviting the Security Council last fall to send a
mission to Kosovo in December and for the good work
of Mr. Steiner and his UNMIK colleagues in
developing a programme for the Council that proved to
be very informative and useful.

The United States continues to be committed to
UNMIK. We thank UNMIK for its good work.
However, the United States has some concerns,
including reports of parallel institutions. Such parallel
institutions will be an impediment, not a benefit, to the
future of Kosovo. Parallel institutions will be a
roadblock to reconciliation.

We share with others in the Security Council a
vision of an integrated multi-ethnic society in Kosovo
where quality education is available to all, where
people of all ethnicities are safe and have confidence in
a fair, professional judicial system, where the economy
is growing and creating jobs and opportunity and where
the people are empowered to run their own affairs.

We wish to call the attention of the Security
Council to certain elements of the Secretary-General's
report that we believe are of particular importance, and
also to express our views on the current situation in
Kosovo.

The United States agrees that the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government must do much more to
use authority already transferred under the
Constitutional Framework. The authorities are
significant, and the international community needs to
continue to stress the importance of this. We believe
that the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
should resist the domestic political pressures that cause
them to blame UNMIK for their own inability to use
their new authorities effectively.

The United States also is concerned with
infighting among the Albanian parties. This is a
growing problem, and it has a negative impact on the
prospects for passage of critically needed legislation,
on the economy, and elsewhere. The Security Council
should make clear to all parties that they need to work
together.

Regarding UNMIK's transfer of authority in
Kosovo, when Mr. Steiner was appointed Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, he put
forward a plan outlining eight goals or standards and a
series of benchmarks to gauge progress towards
meeting these standards. The United States
Government joined the international community in
stressing "standards before status", asking the
Kosovars to focus their energies on achieving the
Special Representative's benchmarks for sustainable
democratic self-government rather than on discussions
of final political status. Standards include the
establishment of functioning democratic institutions,
rule of law, and returns and reintegration of minorities
and others who have been displaced.

Because we believe that these standards, if
implemented, would establish a sound foundation for a
functioning multi-ethnic Kosovo, we continue to
encourage Special Representative Steiner to develop a
detailed work plan to guide the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government through the benchmarks process.
We are concerned by the Secretary-General's report
that some Kosovo Albanian cabinet members have
publicly distanced themselves from the benchmarks.

The United States believes that UNMIK has been
too reluctant to transfer authorities not reserved for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General under
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework. For example, the United
States expended a great deal of energy and political
capital in order to persuade UNMIK to agree in
December to fold UNMIK's central fiscal authority
into the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
Ministry of Finance and Economy. Unfortunately,
individual UNMIK advisers at the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government at municipal levels
appear to have been unwilling to cede real decision-
making authority in this area.

The United States welcomed Mr. Steiner's 20
January television address in which he articulated his
desire, as reflected in the upcoming presidential
statement, to hand over all competencies he legally can
to the Provisional Institutions by the end of this year on
the condition that they are prepared to work seriously.
We commend Mr. Steiner's intention to develop a joint
plan with Prime Minister Rexhepi to work out how this
can be accomplished smoothly and effectively. Our
understanding is that UNMIK will turn over a specific
number of powers on a monthly basis through the end
of the year. Such a transfer is extremely important. The
elected leaders in Kosovo must accept responsibility
for implementing the reforms necessary for a multi-
ethnic society to flourish.

We invite Mr. Steiner to clarify whether this
understanding is correct. Where are we on developing
and implementing an operational plan for standards?
Should financial aid be tied to conditionalities such as
performance on areas of education and health?

We believe that it is important for UNMIK to
work well with the Provisional Institutions, just as it is
for those Institutions to cooperate fully with UNMIK.
The United States continues to fully support "standards
before status", and we look forward to the Special
Representative's detailed worked plan for
implementing the related benchmarks for the standards.
This plan represents a major step forward in further
defining for the Provisional Institutions more
completely what it is they need to accomplish in the
exercise of their authority to create a multi-ethnic civil
society with a functioning economy.

We continue to find unhelpful all efforts to push
forward on final status. We have supported talks
between Belgrade and Pristina on technical issues.
Therefore, we welcome Special Representative
Steiner's ideas for more talks on technical issues
between Belgrade and Pristina. In fact, this has already
happened on environmental issues related to
contamination of the Ibar River. We support further
efforts in this regard, as long as UNMIK is careful to
manage the process carefully.

We believe that it is premature for Belgrade to
return any military or paramilitary presence to Kosovo.
The inter-ethnic situation continues to be very tense,
and such a development would be provocative and
unhelpful. We understand that the command of KFOR
is reviewing ways to enhance its efforts to provide
security at monasteries and other Serb cultural sites in
the north of Kosovo. We also have taken note of the
letter from Deputy Prime Minister Jovic. We believe
his claims reflect a certain frustration with the difficult
challenge of making progress in Mitrovica. UNMIK is
moving forward appropriately on this front, and we
look forward to more details on the decentralization
plan being worked out with the assistance of the
Council of Europe.

In the meantime, we urge Belgrade to play a
constructive role and comply with its own obligations.
More needs to be done to recognize UNMIK licence
plates and other documents as a way of helping Serbs
reintegrate in Kosovo.

The United States is concerned by reports of
rising acts of violence in Kosovo. We are especially
concerned about the cases of violence against minority
communities. There can be no environment of impunity
in Kosovo. We are concerned about reports of renewed
tension among the Kosovo Albanian coalition partners.
We are especially concerned also by the Secretary-
General's report that the Assembly continued to show
reluctance to accommodate minority community
demands.

While the Kosovo economy has improved, it is
still quite anaemic and needs help. There are too few
opportunities for the people of Kosovo.

In Kosovo, therefore, there is a great deal of work
ahead. At the same time, with the successful elections,
including at the municipal level; with a growing, well-
trained professional police force; and with improved
freedom of movement and progress elsewhere, there is
cause for appreciation for the contribution that Special
Representative Steiner and UNMIK are making in
Kosovo.

As I said at the outset of my intervention, the
United States thanks Special Representative Steiner
and UNMIK for their good work and reiterates our
strong support for UNMIK in its mission.

