Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
and welcome the three briefers to our meeting this
morning. We also thank the Russian presidency for its
initiative to convene this meeting in order to strengthen
the objectives of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations and coordination between the United
Nations and regional organizations, on the one hand,
and the various United Nations agencies, on the other.

Egypt believes in the noble mission of regional
and subregional organizations in connection with the
maintenance of international peace and security as
mentioned in the concept paper (S/2016/867, annex)
distributed by the President. The current challenges
pertaining to peace and security require meaningful
coordination between the United Nations and the
various groups and organizations, in particular those
that deal with the maintenance ofpeace and security. In
that regard, Egypt is a member of several regional and
subregional organizations through which it contributes
to the maintenance of peace and security, regional
stability and the promotion of good neighbourly
relations and mutual trust between the various parties.

Egypt is striving to strengthen is relations with
different parts of the world, including Eastern Europe,
Central Asia and the Far East. Egypt is also an observer
to the Shanghai Cooperation Organization because our
country is closely following its activities and working
towards exchanging information and experience at
all levels, including in the economic, strategic and
military areas, among others. We are pleased with the
work carried out by that organization, especially with
regard to combating terrorism, drug trafficking and
other cross-border criminal activities, such as illegal
arms trafficking, in particular small arms and light
weapons. Such weapons must not wind up in the hands
of armed terrorist groups. In that vein, we welcome
the efforts made by the organization to restore peace
in Afghanistan.

My country also supports the role played by the
Collective Security Treaty Organization in connection
with combating terrorism, drug trafficking and cross-
border organized crime. We are also a member of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
and want to strengthen cooperation with the Committee
and that organization. It is important to benefit from
sharing the experiences and opinions of the Committee
so that we can strengthen the efforts of the United
Nations in those two areas. We also believe that there
is potential for future cooperation in connection with
training for peacekeeping operations and peacekeeping
efforts in Asia or Europe.

As for the Executive Committee of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, Egypt maintains
programmes and initiatives aimed at strengthening
regional cooperation and sustainable development
in different areas, including in the humanitarian and
civilian areas, trade, development, direct investment,
the free movement of persons, migration and modern
technology and its uses. In that context, the role played
by the Executive Committee of the Commonwealth
of Independent States is one of complementarity
at the regional level, and one that also strengthens
peacekeeping and security promoted by the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization.

Lastly, we stress the importance of dialogue and
cooperation between the United Nations and these
regional and subregional organizations in Europe
and Asia. We recommend that the Council and the
Secretariat communicate directly and regularly
with these organizations through the convening of
debates, consultations, technical consultations and
annual consultations between the Secretariat and the
secretariats of the regional organizations.

