Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): At the outset, I personally
would like to extend my sincere congratulations to you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency for the month of
August. We have every confidence that under your wise
and able guidance, the issues before the Council will be
brought to a successful conclusion. Allow me also to extend
felicitations to your distinguished predecessor, Ambassador
Hasmy Agam, Permanent Representative of Malaysia, for
his skilful stewardship of the Council's activities last
month.

Let me begin by stressing that the East Timor question
has reached the current stage due to the series of bold and
far-reaching initiatives by the Indonesian Government under
President B. J. Habibie. First, on 9 June 1998 the
Indonesian Government formally expressed its readiness to
grant a special status to East Timor with wide-ranging
autonomy. Then, on 27 January 1999 it offered to part
ways with East Timor in a peaceful, orderly and honourable
manner if autonomy is rejected. It was these initiatives that
provided positive impetus to the talks that have been held
under United Nations auspices since 1983, culminating in
the 5 May Agreements. As a consequence of these
initiatives, we will witness the historic event in three days
time - the popular consultation in East Timor.

This meeting of the Security Council is being
convened against the backdrop of the approaching crucial
interim phase. It constitutes an important period between
the finalization of the holding of the popular consultation
and the commencement of the implementation of its
outcome. It is therefore most relevant and appropriate to
recall the positive developments leading up to the present
time.

For its part, the Government of Indonesia is
determined and committed to shoulder its responsibilities in
accordance with the 5 May Agreements. In particular, it has
exerted serious efforts to ensure that the security situation
is conducive to holding a free, fair and peaceful popular
consultation. This has been evident in the successful
conclusion of the registration process held from 16 July
until 6 August 1999, thereby completing the first
operational phase of the popular consultation. It is pertinent
to note that this was conducted in an orderly manner, as
acknowledged by the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET), which registered over 451,792 East
Timorese at 200 registration centres. My delegation is
pleased to report that to participate in this historic
process, eligible voters travelled in large numbers without
any impediments to the nearest location in order to
register. Likewise, it was gratifying that internally
displaced persons in East Timor and West Timor were
able to register.

Credit for the achievement of these endeavours is
largely due to the flourishing cooperation existing
between the UNAMET and the Indonesian Task Force for
the Implementation of the Popular Consultation in East
Timor, the Provisional Government of East Timor, the
Social Department and the Health Department, as well as
the police, the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF).

As we approach the final days leading to 30 August
1999, the situation on the ground has recorded remarkable
improvements. As a reflection of its seriousness to
enhance law and order in East Timor at this critical
juncture, the Indonesian Government has deployed some
8,000 police personnel to assure peace both before the
popular consultation and after its conclusion. This high
ratio of 1 policeman per 100 East Timorese attests to the
sincere willingness of the Indonesian authorities to
commit large numbers of law enforcement officials, as
well as resources, to maintain a tranquil and secure
environment. It is also expected that the number of police
will be increased if circumstances warrant. While it is
indeed unfortunate that some incidents have occurred in
certain places, attributable to the actions of both sides, in
each instance the Indonesian police acted promptly to
isolate them while carrying out the necessary
investigations. The allegations of impunity with respect to
the Maliana and Liquica incidents have been dealt with
by taking stern judicial measures against the perpetrators.
Concerning the most recent incident, which took place on
26 August 1999, in Dili, to which the representative of
Portugal referred, my delegation regrets the demise of
four persons, two supporters of the pro-integration group
and two from the pro-independence group. An
investigation into the causes of this incident by the police
is still under way. Therefore, the impartiality of the police
in investigating all cases referred to them by UNAMET,
whether committed by pro-integration or by
pro-independence groups, has instilled trust in their
professional abilities.

 

Following a relatively peaceful and orderly period of
campaigning that began on 14 August 1999, it is indeed
deeply regrettable that a crisis erupted yesterday when
members of the pro-independence group carried out acts of
provocation against the supporters of pro-integration. What
actually occurred was that pro-independence supporters
pelted pro-integration members with rocks. Thereafter,
tensions were heightened when two pro-integration
supporters, including a former district assemblyman, were
kidnapped and killed by members of the pro-independence
group. Subsequently, pro-integration members counter-
attacked the office of the CNRT in Dili, causing the deaths
of two pro-independence supporters. The police
immediately launched an investigation into the incident, and
the results are being awaited. In the final days leading up
to the popular consultations, my delegation sincerely hopes
that all sides will exercise restraint and contribute to a calm
and tranquil environment.

The adoption of the code of conduct for the campaign
by UNAMET and by East Timorese figures, in line with
the 5 May 1999 Agreements, to ensure an orderly
campaign, is also an encouraging factor. In view of the fact
that the campaign is being conducted in the presence of a
large number of observers from around the world - be
they parliamentarians, non-governmental organizations or
others - provides a degree of guarantee that the process is
conducted in a secure and safe environment.

Similarly, the steps towards the implementation of the
code of conduct on security by the Commission on Peace
and Stability to ensure disarmament by the contending
factions is a welcome development. It is pertinent to note
that more than 600 weapons have been turned over under
the Commission's supervision and witnessed by UNAMET.
Furthermore, the status-of-mission agreement has been
signed by the Government of Indonesia and came into
effect on 23 August 1999, containing provisions, inter alia,
on granting various privileges and immunities and providing
the necessary facilities for the functioning of UNAMET, as
well on the need for UNAMET to carry out its duties while
complying with the laws and regulations of Indonesia and
refraining from activities that are incompatible with its
duties.

Another development that the Government of
Indonesia welcomes wholeheartedly is the convening by the
United Nations of a meeting between the leaders of the
East Timorese groups in Jakarta on 22 August 1999.
Among the positive results reached at that meeting was that
each side submitted 10 names of those who would be
participating in the Consultative Commission which they
themselves had agreed to establish. It is hoped that at the
next meeting, both sides will come to an agreement on a
common position with regard to the cantonment of their
personnel.

My delegation welcomes all these notable
developments as reflections of concrete progress achieved
in accordance with the planned schedule, and also, despite
the constraints of time, of the determination of all sides
to fulfil their responsibilities and obligations. In this
context, my delegation recalls that during the holding of
national elections in June 1999, many international
observers expressed serious concern that such an event
was unlikely to take place at all in view of the fact that
the elections were held against the backdrop of the May
incident. In spite of this, the ardent desire and unswerving
commitment of the Government of Indonesia to lay the
viable underpinnings of a democratic process prevailed.
The elections of 7 June 1999 were widely considered by
the international community to be the most democratic
exercise ever held in Indonesia since 1955.
Notwithstanding the erroneous perceptions held by some
and the over-dramatization of the situation, the Indonesian
national election was brought to a smooth and effective
conclusion.

Bearing in mind this most recent experience in our
nation's history, it is imperative that perceptions be
accordingly adjusted and over-dramatization avoided if
the popular consultation in East Timor is to be
successfully implemented. These aspects were deemed
essential by my delegation by having promoted a
conducive atmosphere for the campaign period that was
completed today. This campaign has been of paramount
importance to the people of East Timor, for it offered
them historic political choices while placing on their
leaders the need to demonstrate a high level of wisdom
and sagacity. It affords a unique opportunity to bring to
an end differences between the pro-integration and the
pro-independence groups, thereby opening up a new era
in their lives, which is rendered even more essential as
they stand at the threshold of the next millennium. What
is needed now is deep reflection on the choices to be
made in the next few days that will profoundly impact
their lives forever. At this juncture, it is also important for
the people of East Timor to focus on tangible issues that
could affect their future - not only politically but also
economically, socially and culturally. And this historic
event will finally fulfil their deep aspirations and fervent
desires.

 

It would therefore be most helpful to the East
Timorese, as well as to Indonesia and the international
community, if distortion of facts were avoided. It is
unfortunate that misperceptions continue to be cultivated, as
though the majority of East Timorese were still living under
colonial domination and, given the chance, they would opt
to part ways with Indonesia. On the other hand, East
Timorese that have expressed their wish to remain part of
Indonesia are immediately and arbitrarily condemned as
"military-backed militias". This is completely contrary to
the practices of democracy, where tolerance as well as
freedom of opinion and expression are of paramount
importance. The fact remains that there are two groups in
East Timor, and neither could or should be dismissed out
of hand.

It is our earnest hope that the cooling-off period of 28
and 29 August 1999 will have a salutary impact in bringing
about an atmosphere of tranquillity, which is an essential
prerequisite for the holding of the popular consultation, on
30 August 1999. This is a critical moment for all concerned
parties to demonstrate a sense of impartiality in order to
earn the trust and confidence of the East Timorese in the
popular consultation, and during this entire process of
popular consultation should necessarily include a degree of
transparency.

The adoption of the draft resolution before the Council
today will have a significant impact on the interim phase of
the popular consultation. In this regard, my delegation
would like to acknowledge the report of the Secretary-
General and the recommendations contained therein, as
reflected in the draft resolution. Given its cooperation and
pragmatism during this entire process, commencing with its
initiative that led to the 5 May 1999 Agreements, Indonesia
has agreed to the expansion of various components of
UNAMET, based upon the principle of equitable
geographical representation, in the interim phase, in order
to maintain its international and impartial character.
Indonesia has shown yet again its flexibility, especially in
its acceptance of a police component of 410 and of another
50 personnel to recruit and train a new East Timorese
police force. Likewise, Indonesia has consented to increase
the military component up to 300 personnel. These United
Nations military liaison officers will continue to undertake
military liaison functions with the Indonesian Armed Forces
(TNI) and to be involved in the work of the East Timorese
bodies established to promote peace, stability and
reconciliation, as well as to provide advice to the Special
Representative for the East Timor popular consultation on
security matters, pursuant to the implementation of the
5 May Agreements.

With regard to UNAMET, my delegation notes its
serious efforts in discharging its tasks, as mandated by the
Council. We should therefore like to express our
appreciation to UNAMET and its personnel, who have
demonstrated the highest standard of impartiality.
However, from our observations in the field, other
individuals from among UNAMET personnel are not
adhering to this principle while carrying out their duties,
thus adversely affecting the process of popular
consultation on the ground. In View of this, my delegation
expresses its reservations concerning the sixth
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution
"commending UNAMET for the impartial and effective
implementation of its mandate".

Finally, in the search for a just, comprehensive and
internationally acceptable solution to the question of East
Timor under the tripartite dialogue, as well as the
implementation of the 5 May 1999 Agreements,
Indonesia's commitment has been unwavering. Over the
past 16 years, despite the obstacles and challenges strewn
along the way, Indonesia has held steadfast to its position
that if it stayed on the appropriate path, such a solution to
this long-standing issue would be attained. It is in this
spirit of optimism and hope that we face the popular
consultation on 30 August 1999. My delegation therefore
hopes that the draft resolution before us is a step in that
direction.

Last but not least, I would be remiss if I did not take
this opportunity to express my Govemment's sincere
appreciation to those countries and personnel that have
contributed civilian police and military personnel to
UNAMET, thereby enabling it to undertake this difficult
yet very important responsibility.

