Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
We thank you, Sir, for having convened this debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Given that
the Council is once again taking up this question in the
course of six months, the importance of the issue is
evident. We also thank Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his briefing on this matter.

Despite the recommendations emanating from the
debate held in January 2009 on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, civilian populations
unfortunately continue to be the victims who suffer the
most in conflicts - sometimes due to deliberate acts
and often through such heinous and barbaric acts as
sexual violence, assassination, suicide attacks,
massacres of entire populations and the use of
sophisticated weapons. All of that takes place in
violation of international humanitarian law, Security
Council resolutions and other relevant international
legal instruments, as well as without regard for the
principle of the responsibility to protect, which was
adopted by the United Nations in 2005.

Parties to conflict should therefore be reminded
of their obligations to respect the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions and their two Additional Protocols,
especially that which establishes a clear distinction
between civilians and combatants. As parties to armed
conflict, non-State actors are under the same obligations
to protect civilians. It is therefore crucial that such
groups be fully aware of their responsibility.

In addition, we agree with the Secretary-General
that it is important to maintain an ongoing dialogue
with such groups in an effort to educate them as to
existing legal norms, while avoiding the perception
that doing so legitimizes their existence. That approach
has already made it possible to convince some armed
groups to release child soldiers.

Because the protection of civilians is a
multifaceted undertaking, the scope of peacekeeping
operations has been expanded to take into account
concerns associated with fully protecting civilians.
Nevertheless, in order to increase efficiency and
eliminate persisting ambiguities in peacekeeping
operations, it is important that the Security Council set
out realistic and robust mandates that include clear
rules of engagement. That task is both a challenge to
and a responsibility of the Security Council and troop-
contributing countries. In that regard, we await with
great interest the completion of the joint independent
study on the implementation of the mandate to protect
civilians, which is being carried out by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations with the
purpose of making a contribution to better addressing
the issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict.

Protecting civilians also means ensuring that
there are no obstacles to humanitarian access, as so
aptly noted in the annex to the Secretary-General's
report (S/2009/277). We condemn all such restrictions.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
collective and shared responsibility that requires all
concerned parties to display true political will and firm
commitment. However, States bear the primary
responsibility for this and must take all measures
necessary to create an enabling security environment
and to meet the fundamental needs of civilians,
displaced persons and refugees. This involves strict
respect for the principles of international humanitarian
law, in particular by facilitating the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and ensuring respect for the
humanitarian nature of camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons. The protection of
humanitarian personnel must therefore also be fully
ensured as they struggle side by side with populations
in distress, sometimes even giving their own lives.

To strengthen the protection of civilians, we
believe that creation of national complaint mechanisms,
together with the total independence of the judicial
systems to which victims have access, could also
contribute to efforts to combat impunity, which is
unfortunately still thriving. Subregional, regional and
international organizations must also shoulder their
responsibilities in this area, while fully respecting
States' sovereignty and territorial integrity.

With regard to the Security Council, as the
guarantor of international peace and security, it must
contribute to strengthening the rule of law and ensure
the implementation of existing judicial mechanisms,
such as the International Criminal Court, with complete
impartiality and in accordance with the fundamental
principles of the United Nations Charter and human
rights.

As weapons are the root cause of the tragedies,
atrocities and horrifying events witnessed in armed
conflicts, we encourage all States to join the efforts
under way to draw up and adopt an arms trade treaty.

Finally, the Council is duty-bound to ensure the
implementation of the various arms embargos
stipulated in the context of the Council's own
sanctions.
