Mr. Lewicki (Poland): I thank all oftoday's briefers
for their presentations. It is indeed really depressing to
hear about the sufferings of the Yemeni people again
and again in this Chamber. I would also add that it is
becoming increasingly frustrating, because what is
really at stake here are human lives that will be lost if
this conflict is not stopped. The numbers presented by
Mr. Mark Lowcock speak for themselves. That is why
we have to do our utmost to redouble our efforts to break
this deadly cycle of violence, suffering and ongoing
hostilities. In that regard, the United Nations continues
to play a crucial role. I therefore want to echo the words
of other delegations - in fact, every delegation that
has taken the floor so far today - by expressing our
full and unwavering support, first to Special Envoy
Griffiths but also to Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
and the World Food Programme. I would also like to
take this opportunity to express our deep appreciation
to all the United Nations workers providing life-saving
assistance on the ground in Yemen.

During the previous briefing on the situation in
Yemen (see S/PV.8525) we welcomed the initial progress
towards the first phase of the redeployment of forces
in Al-Hudaydah. We strongly believe that this positive
development must be swiftly followed by the fulfilment
of the remaining stages of redeployment. We urge
the parties to engage constructively with Lieutenant
General Lollesgaard to finalize the outstanding
negotiations and enable the full implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah agreement. It is time for the parties to
demonstrate their commitment to the outcomes of the
talks in Stockholm by delivering on their obligations
and then advancing the redeployment of forces.

In our view, as we await further progress in
Al-Hudaydah it is of the utmost importance to increase
the efforts to find a comprehensive political solution
to the conflict in Yemen, and as we understand it,
the Stockholm Agreement is a step towards that. The
resumption of consultations with the participation of
all sectors of Yemeni society, including women and
young people, is the only way to bring about an end
to the crisis. I want to repeat that we strongly support
Special Envoy Griffiths in his efforts to pave the way
for the resumption of formal negotiations, and we call
on the parties to engage constructively with him. We
are also very encouraged by the Security Council's
continued unity in supporting the Special Envoy, as has
been clearly highlighted during today's meeting. In that
context, we urge all the parties to refrain from taking
any action that threatens to undermine the United
Nations-led political process. Poland strongly condemns
all attacks on the territory of Saudi Arabia, which pose
a serious national security threat to the Kingdom and
have a negative impact on broader regional stability.

Advancing the political process in Yemen and
finding a broad political solution are particularly
pressing and necessary if we are to finally put an end to
the extreme suffering of the Yemeni people. The security
situation across the Yemeni governorates continues to
deteriorate due to the widespread escalation of military
operations, which are causing mass displacement and
high numbers of casualties among civilians. As the
humanitarian situation remains catastrophic, the lives
of millions of Yemenis, including millions of children,
depend upon the accessibility of humanitarian
assistance. Therefore, we urge, and reiterate our
call to, all parties to allow and facilitate the flow of
humanitarian and commercial imports, including
in-country shipments of fuel, and lift all bureaucratic
restrictions, in order to ensure free, unimpeded access
for humanitarian assistance and personnel to all parts of
the country. Any form of denial of humanitarian access,
diversion of resources or interference in humanitarian
operations is unacceptable.

We are also very troubled by Mr. Beasley's
statement that food assistance does not go to the
neediest people but is instead diverted by some parties.
That is unacceptable and must stop. It violates both
international law and the resolutions of the Council,
which also constitute international law. To echo other
delegations, all people responsible for such violations
should be identified and held accountable.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that all parties must
first and foremost ensure the protection of civilians,
including the most vulnerable groups, such as children
and persons with disabilities, and fully comply with
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

