Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I welcome the new
Special Envoy and thank him for his briefing. I also
thank Mr. Lowcock for his assessment and welcome
our Yemeni colleagues.

It is a desperate situation and it is clear, as the
Special Envoy set out, that it can be resolved, ultimately,
only through a political solution. I think we all agree
on that. I think what the Under-Secretary-General said
about the humanitarian consequences - particularly
8 million people being close to starvation and 1 million
people at risk of cholera and similar illnesses - is
absolutely shocking and ought to be a spur to action
for the Council. I think the international community
must do whatever it can to enable the Special Envoy to
develop his plan at the pace that he has just outlined to
us. I welcome the clarity and the elements ofthe plan he
set out. I hope we can, as an international community,
pool all our influence and urge the parties to engage in
good faith with the United Nations process. Although
the conflict has some quite desperate humanitarian
consequences, it is a solvable conflict.

The Under-Secretary-General said that if we took
swift and joint action, then we could make some very
good progress. That is absolutely where we should
put our efforts. As a Council, I hope that we can
encourage people to grant full and unhindered access
to Yemen for the Special Envoy, for his team and for the
humanitarian actors. In that respect, the meetings that
the Envoy laid out in the region, including in Sana'a
with senior Houthi leaders, are extremely welcome. I
would like to highlight a couple of areas for specific
immediate action.

The Under-Secretary-General mentioned financial
pledges, and I agree that the scale of the generosity from
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait
are all quite remarkable. We ourselves, as the United
Kingdom, have provided $250 million for this year
and next. I think we all know that money alone will
not be enough. We need to do more to get commercial
supplies in. I was concerned about the foreign exchange
problem, because in Yemen a lot of the food and
supplies that go in need to come from commercial
sources. Humanitarian assistance cannot manage the
scale required. Commercial shipping needs to be able
to go in as it is vital to water and sanitation systems. I
do hope we can all find ways to urge collaboration in
that regard.

My second point is about access to Houthi-
controlled areas where we see many severely
malnourished children. The presidential statement
adopted in March (S/PRST/2018/5) highlighted the
importance of vaccination campaigns, as the Under-
Secretary General said.

Thirdly, I want to echo the call about paying
non-military public workers. Families do not have the
means to buy food. They do not have the means to buy
medicine and half of the health facilities have closed.
That is all contributing to a more desperate situation in
Yemen than needs to be, objectively, the case.

I would now like to turn to regional stability. The
conflict's impact on regional stability is growing and it
is dangerous. It puts Saudi Arabia at risk and puts Saudi
citizens at risk. The continued Houthi missile attacks,
including the use ofballistic missiles, at civilian targets
in Saudi Arabia attract our outright condemnation. The
deliberate targeting of civilian areas is abhorrent. It
is against international law and against international

humanitarian law. We call on all parties involved in the
conflict to abide by their international humanitarian
law obligations. And as the Under-Secretary General
set out, that is still not being done to a sufficient degree.

I also want to stress that it really is a national
security threat to Saudi Arabia and that, in turn, is
driving renewed conflict on the ground. So it is vital
and I hope the Council can help ensure that all Member
States fully implement the arms embargo that the
Council has imposed.

In particular, the Panel of Experts on Yemen
mandated by resolution 2342 (2017) has concluded
that missiles and related to material of Iranian origin
was introduced into Yemen after the imposition of the
targeted arms embargo. That, in turn, means that Iran
is in non-compliance with resolution 2216 (2015). We
strongly urge Iran to desist from destabilizing activity
and we encourage all Member States to use whatever
influence they have to ensure that the supply of missiles
fuelling the conflict inside Yemen stops.

I want to stress the Special Envoy's remarks
about it being possible to make progress. We have
within our grasp the ability to do something to help
bring this conflict to an end. That is a very important
contribution that the Council can make for regional and
international peace and security at a time when we see
so many problems on so many other issues. I would like
to conclude by urging all members of the Council to
put our shoulders to the wheel to support the United
Nations and to try to bring peace to Yemen.

