Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
Poland on its accession to the presidency of the Council
this month and commend it for convening today's
important debate. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba, for her briefing
at the beginning of the meeting. I take this opportunity
to reiterate the deep appreciation of the United Arab
Emirates for her important mandate. Finally, we thank
the representative of UNICEF and the other briefers for
their presentations today.

My country takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/509), introduced by the
Special Representative on the current status of children
and armed conflict. We are deeply concerned about the
gravity and scale of the threats faced by children in
the Middle East - from the ever-increasing violations
committed in Syria, to the killing and detention of
Palestinian children by Israeli forces, to the recruitment
of children in Yemen by Houthis and in Iraq and Somalia
by terrorist groups, such as Da'esh and Al-Shabaab.

The United Arab Emirates adds its voice to that
of the international community and reiterates its full
commitment to alleviating the suffering of children
through the provision of humanitarian assistance.
The United Arab Emirates has demonstrated the great
importance it attaches to the needs of children by
providing more than $5 billion to Yemen and its people
over the past four years, including, most recently,
through our joint pledge with Saudi Arabia of an
additional $240 million in funding for the operations of
the World Food Programme (WFP).

Our humanitarian efforts are also directed towards
the long-term interests of children threatened by
conflict, such as their education. The United Arab
Emirates firmly believes that education is not only
the right of every child, but also an essential tool for
uplifting entire communities in order to mitigate
conflicts and the exploitation of children therein. To
that end, we have provided educational assistance for
more than 270,000 students through the WFP, built the
equivalent of 150 classrooms as temporary education
spaces and provided UNICEF with $35 million to pay
teachers' salaries.

Given our emphasis on the importance of education,
we are deeply concerned by the Houthis' exploitation
of children, schools and educational centres in Yemen
and the damage and destruction they have wrought
on facilities. In particular, we deplore the Houthi
militias' use of schools as centres for storing arms and
for recruiting, training and detaining children. Such
actions demonstrate total disregard of their obligations
under international law. In that connection, we urge the
Security Council to hold the Houthis accountable for
their grave violations.

The United Arab Emirates, as a member of the
coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen, formed at
the request of the legitimate Government of Yemen,
takes this opportunity to once again reaffirm our
commitment to complying with our obligations under
international humanitarian law. The coalition takes its
responsibility to protect all civilians in armed conflict,
particularly children, very seriously. The coalition also
continues to work closely with the United Nations and
other international partners to enhance the protection
of children in Yemen, as reflected in the memorandum
of understanding the coalition signed in March with the
Office of the Special Representative.

We believe that the coalition's efforts contributed
significantly to the decrease, in the last quarter of
2018, in incidents reported by the Secretary-General.
Ultimately, however, the best way to protect Yemeni
children is through peace and stability. In that regard, the
United Arab Emirates supports the full implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement and the United Nations-
led political process.

We all must do more to ensure that children in
conflict areas receive the special protection to which
they are entitled under international law. Accordingly,
we call on Member States to utilize the relevant
platforms to discuss evolving challenges and short-
and long-term needs for reintegration, and to generate
recommendations to address funding gaps.

In conclusion, we urge both the Council and the
States Members of the United Nations to study and
adopt innovative responses to sexual and gender-
based violence in armed conflict, including by
strengthening engagement with local women and girls
as active partners in the design and implementation of
humanitarian action.

