Mr. Scheffers (Netherlands): Like previous
speakers, I would also like to thank Mr. Annabi for his
briefing and the Secretary-General for his report. Let

me also state that my delegation has listened with great
interest to the statement of the Yugoslav Foreign
Minister. I fully associate myself with the statement
just made by the representative of France on behalf of
the European Union. However, since this will probably
be the very last opportunity for my delegation to
express its views on Kosovo as a non-permanent
member of this Council, I would like to make some
additional remarks. The Netherlands also wishes to
welcome the appointment of Mr. Hans Haekkerup as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the head of the United Nations Interim Administrative
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

The Netherlands notes with appreciation the
arrangements for the Serb parliamentary elections to be
held on 23 December without the involvement of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in its organization, but with the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) providing additional measures
to ensure safety and security. It is the feeling of my
delegation that the concerns of all parties are being
adequately met in this way.

Like Mr. Annabi and other Security Council
delegations, the Netherlands remains seriously
concerned about the developments in the Presevo
Valley. The perpetrators of the ongoing violence are
playing with fire. This cannot be condoned and is
strongly condemned by the Netherlands and also
rightly so in the presidential statement we are about to
adopt.

We fully support the measures taken by KFOR in
this respect. At the same time, it is essential that the
Kosovar Albanian leadership should call on the rank
and file to exercise restraint and for the international
community to continue to pressure them towards that
end.

While tensions in the area prevail, it is of vital
importance that all channels of communication be kept
open and used to best effect. KFOR is keeping in
constant touch with the Yugoslav Army and police and
it is equally important for KFOR and UNMIK to be in
touch with the Belgrade leadership. Good
communications may prevent small incidents from
escalating into events that are difficult to control.

Finally, the fate of the Kosovar Albanian political
prisoners incarcerated in Serbia remains a matter of
grave concern to the Netherlands, and it should remain
high on the international agenda. The new Government

S/PVAZA')

 

in Belgrade has announced new amnesty legislation,
but in the meantime these prisoners are still being held
hostage to a political resolution of the Kosovo
question. Continuing pressure should be brought to
bear on the Yugoslav authorities to release all political
detainees.

