Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Allow me to begin
by thanking the briefers for their comprehensive
update on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We commend their tireless efforts, and
we express our full support for their challenging and
important tasks ahead of the 23 December presidential,
legislative and provincial elections.

We welcome the progress made in the technical
preparations of those elections. The registration of
candidates was an important milestone, and we note
the list of approved presidential and parliamentary
candidates presented by the Independent National
Electoral Commission over the weekend. The
announcement by President Kabila Kabange that he
intends to abide by the Constitution and not to seek
another term is particularly welcome.

The remaining technical challenges must now be
addressed in a timely manner. In that regard, efforts
to ensure women's full and equal participation in
the political processes must be stepped up. It was
disappointing that only a small number of women
were registered as candidates for the provincial and
legislative elections. While lessons for the future
should be drawn from that failure, we now need to
focus on supporting the candidates who are registered
and on providing conditions that allow for women to
actively participate in the process ahead and to cast
their votes in a free and secure manner on election
day. Such efforts should include support, encourage
women in the voter registration process and guarantee
voting free from pressure, such as ensuring individual
access to voting cards, informing individuals of their
voting rights and guaranteeing safe access to polling
stations. With regard to supporting women candidates,
initiatives should be supported so as to prevent sexual
attacks, sexual harassment and gender-based sabotage
of the campaigns of women candidates. To that end,
we encourage the authorities and the United Nations
to coordinate closely with the relevant civil society
organizations, including in order to better understand
the issues as they arise and to make sure that citizens
are well informed.

Technical preparations are not enough to secure
free, fair and credible elections. The current security
situation, with the continued high levels of violence,
including sexual and gender-based violence, and other
human rights violations and abuses, must also be
addressed. There is an urgent need to ensure the opening
of political space for parties and civil society and to
respect freedom of speech and peaceful assembly. In
that regard, the implementation of confidence-building
measures, as per the December 2016 agreement, remains
of critical importance. Trust in the electoral process
among all stakeholders will be key to the credibility of
the elections.

The joint communique of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations Security Council of July (SC/13430), as well
as the joint communique of the AU, the Southern
African Development Community, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region of Africa and the
United Nations on the Peace and Security Cooperation
Framework, demonstrates the firm international
consensus on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The message is clear: the world expects the holding of
credible and inclusive elections in December, leading to
a democratic and peaceful transfer of power. It is now
important that the Council continue to work closely
and actively with the region to ensure that that common
objective is achieved.

United Nations support to the electoral process is
critical. The continued active engagement of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui,
making full use of her good offices, will be essential,
and we should give the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General our full support. We note the
ambitious intentions of the Independent National
Electoral Commission to provide logistics, and
we encourage the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to continue to prepare for assisting the
authorities in that massive undertaking, if needed.
Support from the United Nations should, however,
always be dependent on national efforts so as to ensure
the credibility of the process.

Finally, the Ebola virus outbreak in North Kivu
last week is deeply concerning. As we know, the
security situation in that region is dire, providing a
very complex operating environment for the needed
response. Given that it is also a populous region,
hosting more than 1 million internally displaced
persons, with international borders, it is a situation
that deserves our full attention. We painfully learned
from the outbreak in West Africa in 2014 that such
epidemics can also risk having implications for peace
and security. Sweden has therefore requested an update
by the World Health Organization on the situation in
the Security Council tomorrow, and will continue to
follow the situation closely.

