Mr. Merores (Haiti) (spoke in French): I am very
grateful to you, Sir, for having organized this meeting
of the Council to hear the very edifying briefings of
Mr. Holmes and Mr. Le Roy, which, in the View of the
Haitian delegation, reflect the tireless commitment of
the entire international community to the ongoing
effort to assist, re-establish and rebuild my country.

The woes unleashed upon Haiti on 12 January
have given the international community an opportunity
each day to express its great solidarity and compassion
for a wounded people that continues to be battered by
fate. It is also another opportunity for me and for
President Preval, as he has done many times, to
sincerely thank the great comity of nations and to
express the gratitude of the Government and people of
Haiti for the overwhelming generosity exhibited in this
tragic situation. I take this opportunity to once again
convey the condolences of the people and Government
of Haiti to the United Nations and the families of staff
members of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) who have been so sorely tested.

The Haitian delegation welcomes resolution 1908
(2010), adopted last month, endorsing the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to increase
the overall force levels of MINUSTAH. We welcome
that timely decision and, on behalf of the Government,
thank the troop-contributing countries and through
them their Governments that promptly acceded to that
request.

In spite of improved conditions on the ground, as
today's speakers have noted, the situation remains of
great concern. The humanitarian needs are immense,
and urgent action must therefore be taken to meet the
requirements of the population. The heavy toll is
known to all - more than 270,000 deaths, more than
250,000 public, commercial and residential buildings
destroyed, and more than 1 million people living in the
streets or public areas. These figures speak for
themselves, and have also been reflected in televised
images.

Until the situation is stabilized, and given the
urgent need to prepare for the coming rainy season,
assistance and recovery activities must be strengthened
10-24612
quickly and extended to people and places throughout
the country that have yet to receive them.

Thus, the revised $1.44 billion flash appeal
launched yesterday by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, which will assist 3 million
people gravely affected by the catastrophe by the end
of the year, comes at the right moment. As we know,
more than 1.2 million people require emergency
assistance in terms of shelter and sanitation needs. At
least 2 million people require food assistance. The host
families and communities assisting displaced persons
who have fled the most heavily impacted cities are
bearing that weighty burden with virtually no help, and
they need assistance as well. At the same time, the
Government needs assistance to re-establish the
agricultural sector as the hurricane season approaches.

A significant problem mentioned by Mr. Le Roy
is public security. It is important to note that, although
the security situation has remained relatively stable
since 12 January, there have been various instances of
banditry not only in the capital but also throughout the
country. Over 4,000 escaped prisoners, including some
of the most dangerous criminals, are still roaming the
streets and beginning to resume their activities. They
pose a potential threat to life and property, and the
Government is in the process of tracking them down.
With the assistance of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, the Haitian National Police is
working to apprehend them to ensure that they can do
no further harm.

The Government continues to mobilize itself to
prepare for the ministerial meeting on Haiti's
reconstruction to be held on 31 March. A
comprehensive reconstruction plan will be presented to
our various partners that will cover all the basic
elements necessary to the Viable reconstruction and
sustainable development of the country. It will be an
arduous task. International solidarity allowed us to
quickly address the situation in the first few hours
following the quake. The conference will be another
step in the enormous effort of building the new Haiti
sought by the Government and people of our country.
That cannot be done without the support of the
international community. I should like in advance, on
behalf of the Government and people of Haiti, to thank
the international community, which has always stood
by us.
7

