Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Ihave the special honour
and privilege to speak on behalf of the 11 States members
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC): Angola, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique,

 

Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe and my own country,
Botswana.

Let me first extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Leonardo Santos Simao, Minister of
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Republic of
Mozambique. It is fitting that we should be graced by his
presence in this historic Chamber as we celebrate the
momentous changes that have taken place in his great
country.

It is with immense joy that we salute the people of
Mozambique and all their political leaders for doing what
is right for their country. We salute their determination and
strong commitment to fostering national reconciliation,
peace and democracy. We especially admire their tenacious
adherence to the General Peace Agreement signed on 4
October 1992, the orderly manner in which they conducted
the elections and the respect they so clearly demonstrated
for the verdict of the people of Mozambique. This has
given Mozambique the best hope for durable freedom,
democracy and peace. We have every confidence that the
newly elected leadership will rise to the challenge and put
the country on a firm footing in the furtherance of the
aspirations reposed in them by the electorate.

The success story of Mozambique cannot be told
without acknowledging the pivotal role played by the
United Nations and the international community as a whole.
The patience and goodwill so amply demonstrated by the
Security Council over a period of two difficult years have
enabled the people of Mozambique to sustain the peace
process to its logical conclusion. The 10 resolutions adopted
by the Council, as well as all presidential statements issued
subsequent to the signing of the General Peace Agreement,
contributed in no small measure to the success of the peace
process.

We also owe a debt of gratitude to the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, Mr. Ajello, for the
tireless efforts they deployed to ensure that the United
Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ) would
achieve the glorious success it has achieved. The devotion
and sacrifices of the men and women who served with
ONUMOZ deserve our special appreciation and applause.
The ONUMOZ success story is the story of the productive
quality of their professionalism, which has crowned the
United Nations peacemaking and peace-keeping exertions
with success stories elsewhere.

The recurring theme of post-conflict peace-
building - that there is an inexorable link between peace
and development - has great significance and relevance
for Mozambique. The daunting task of reconstruction and
rehabilitation in Mozambique has begun. A durable basis
for peace and security in that war-ravaged country lies in
the social and economic uplifting of its people; and the
international community is called upon to assist. The end
of the mandate of the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique (ONUMOZ) and its complete withdrawal
should not signal the end of this assistance. Continuous
support should be given for social and economic
development to ensure that there is no reversal of the
gains made so far.

The response of the international community to the
reintegration support scheme has so far been positive, and
we hope that the momentum can be maintained, even
accelerated. There is clearly an urgent need for enhanced
cooperation with the Mozambican authorities in the
reintegration of ex-combatants into civilian life. We trust
that existing pledges of assistance will be honoured so
that the Government can commence in earnest the process
of training and equipping these men and women with
technical skills for alternative employment.

In addition, as in many other areas recovering from
the vicissitudes of armed conflict, the territory of
Mozambique is littered with anti-personnel land mines.
The idea that the mine-clearing equipment currently in
use in Mozambique should be left behind when
ONUMOZ finally withdraws is most welcome, and we
hope that it will find favour with the relevant organs of
the United Nations. Land mines, as we all know, are a
menace to humanity. Mozambique needs to be rid of
these indiscriminate tools of war so that its people can go
about their daily lives and enjoy their new-found
democratic rights in total freedom.

The leaders of southern Africa are working very
hard to ensure that our region is not subjected to another
war, or wars, after the resolution of conflicts in
Mozambique, South Africa and Angola. The attainment of
peace and democracy in Mozambique has consolidated
the fundamental political changes which have swept the
subregion in the past five years. It is our hope that the
people of the sister Republic of Angola will soon see the
end of the conflict that has marred their lives for so long
and will join the people of Mozambique in celebrating the
onset of real peace.

 

In this regard, we humbly request the Security Council
to take a decision for the early deployment of a third
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). The countries of southern Africa have had more than
their share of conflict and suffering. It is time we enjoyed
peace and democracy so that we can reconstruct our
regional economy.

The solidarity and partnership of the peoples of the 11
members States of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) in the pursuit of peace and
development is clearly recognized. Collective and individual
efforts exerted by the various member States in the search
for peace in Angola, Mozambique, Lesotho and South
Africa bear clear testimony to this solidarity and
partnership. We are now in the process of developing
permanent mechanisms for preventive diplomacy and
collective security based on a regional commitment to a
system of shared democratic values.

Let me conclude by daring to hope that peace and
democracy will flourish in Mozambique and that the
destructive conflict from which the Mozambican nation has
just emerged will be banished for ever.
