Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Your
presence, Mr. Minister, underlines the importance of
this subject and of today's debate; you are very
welcome here. I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2005/72), our three briefers
for their opening statements and United Nations
partners and civil society organizations for the
important contributions they are making to tackle this
issue.

The United Kingdom associates itself with the
statement to be delivered later by the representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.

We have come a long way since Graca Machel's
landmark 1996 report on the impact of armed conflict
on children. The achievements made so far are covered
in the Secretary-General's report. But, despite our best
efforts, children remain vulnerable to forced
recruitment and abuse by armed groups. So making the
"era of application" a reality must be our top priority.
Resolution 1539 (2004) laid out three key elements:
the production of action plans; the monitoring and
review of the implementation of those action plans and
of violations more generally; and, finally, what we
should do when plans are not made or action is not
taken.

The first element, time-bound action plans and
the nomination of country-level focal points, has seen
some progress, but more needs to be done to ensure
full implementation. The Secretary-General has
highlighted the difficulties and the constraints to
effective implementation; we now need to overcome
them.

The second element concerns the establishment
of a monitoring and reporting mechanism. Like the
Special Representative, my Government regards that as
critical in making the "era of application" a reality. The
proposed mechanism should be practical and realistic;
it should be clear about what will be monitored; it
should protect those involved; and it should be
adaptable in the light of experience.

Finally, monitoring and review is not an end in
itself. It must lead to action - and effective action at
that - when progress is inadequate. The Security
Council will now consider how best to extract
compliance from parties to armed conflict who
continue to recruit children and violate their rights. The
aim is real improvement on the ground, and the
approach must not just make us feel good; it must also
do good. Success will require the right institutional
framework, as proposed in the Secretary-General's
report on the comprehensive assessment of the United
Nations system and its response to children and armed
conflict. So we very much welcome the Secretary-
General's determination to implement his
recommendations without delay.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) is a vital element of post-conflict
peacebuilding. We therefore welcome the best-practice
guidelines set out in the Secretary-General's report.
There is a clear need for effective DDR of all children
associated with fighting forces, both combatants and
those in ancillary roles, especially girls. That must not
be dependant upon formal peace processes. The
recruitment and use of children is illegal under
international law anyway and should be a priority
separate from DDR of adult soldiers.

The United Kingdom welcomes and encourages
the steps taken to tackle illicit cross-border activities,
particularly the trafficking of small arms and light
weapons, which serve to fuel and prolong armed
conflict, where children always end up suffering
disproportionately.

Like others who have spoken, the United
Kingdom is deeply concerned by the allegations of
sexual misconduct by civilian and peacekeeping
personnel, especially in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, where the allegations are particularly
disturbing. We welcome the recent statements by the
Secretary-General on this matter. Like others, we urge
the United Nations to investigate all allegations fully
and to report the outcomes to the Council. We also
look forward to the report of the Secretary-General's
special Adviser, Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein,
which should contain wide-ranging recommendations
for radical reform within the United Nations to tackle
abuses. Meanwhile, however, I want to be absolutely
clear: there should be no misunderstanding that the
Security Council expects those in charge of both
civilian and military personnel to ensure that command
arrangements in all theatres preclude the opportunity
for such abuse and to impose much-needed discipline.
The Council must hold to account those who do not
fulfil that simple obligation.

Some of the countries listed in the Secretary-
General's report are already on the Council's agenda,
so I would like to confine my remarks, briefly, to the
situations in Myanmar, Nepal and northern Uganda.

Last year, I expressed concern about the plight of
child soldiers in Myanmar. Since that time, we have
noted and welcomed the establishment of the
Committee for the Prevention of Military Recruitment
of Under-Age Children and its recently adopted plan of
action. We now call on the Myanmar authorities to
implement that plan of action.

Last year, I also expressed concern about the
plight of children in northern Uganda, one of the
gravest humanitarian crises in Africa. Recent efforts to
find a peaceful solution to the conflict are encouraging
and represent perhaps the best opportunity for peace in
more than a decade. So we urge both sides to engage in
dialogue, to sign a cessation-of-hostilities agreement
and to follow the path to peace. The international
community must be ready to support the consequent
reconciliation and rehabilitation efforts.

With regard to Nepal, the British Government is
deeply concerned about the abduction, use and
recruitment of child soldiers by the Communist Party
of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M), as well as the violence
reportedly carried out against children by both Maoist
and Government security forces. We therefore urge
both parties to halt such practices and to find a
peaceful solution to the conflict through dialogue.

The United Kingdom will continue to work hard
to support this agenda at all levels in the United
Nations system and beyond. Nationally, we are
supporting a variety of projects in several African and
Asian countries, mainly in the area of DDR; we are
also supporting civil society networks in the area of
monitoring, reporting and advocacy; and we continue
to support the agenda through the actions of the
European Union.

In terms of making the "era of application" a
reality, Security Council and United Nations action
helps, and we can have - and indeed should have - a
moral obligation to respond. But much more depends
on the will and actions of national Governments and
armed groups that continue to subject children to
forced recruitment and abuse. We must therefore
strengthen our resolve to hold accountable those who
commit such intolerable acts and who thereby deprive
children of the most important years of their lives.

