Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to join others in echoing the
expressions of gratitude that we have heard today and
conveying our best wishes to our colleague Francois
Delattre, the Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, with whom we have had the honour
of working for the past five years. We wish him every
success in his new, high-level post.

The Russian delegation supported the adoption
of resolution 2480 (2019), which extends the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We
support the peacekeepers deployed in the country,
who are making a major contribution to ensuring
stability and security in Mali. Given the discussions
we have had and the provisions in the document we
have just adopted, we want to once again underscore
that the Mission's main priority continues to be helping
Malians to implement the 2015 Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and restoring a full State
and military presence throughout the country. These
measures are fundamental prerequisites for normalizing
the situation in the country and preventing inter-ethnic
violence in central Mali.

We believe that a Security Council tool such as
sanctions should be used with a great deal of caution
and consideration and only in the most extreme cases.
In our view, the existing restrictive measures have
to prove their effectiveness and be subject to regular
independent review by the Panel of Experts. We also
hope that Mali's law-enforcement agencies will take
a more active role in curbing the illegal activities of
both sanctioned individuals and other spoilers of the
political process.

We would like to recall that general questions of
peacekeeping that have an impact on all United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be discussed in the
General Assembly Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, with the participation of troop-contributing
countries. Such issues also include the Secretariat's as
yet unfinished strategy for improving peacekeeping
performance, which is mentioned in the resolution. We
are puzzled by the attempts to actively integrate it into
every mission's mandate even before its content has
been presented to Member States. Circumventing the
Special Committee is unacceptable. Unfortunately, our
arguments in this regard, which other delegations also
raised during the process of the negotiations on today's
resolution, were only partially taken into account. We
believe that a useful tool for correcting the so-called
penholders' misuse of their role as curators of dossiers
would be a Security Council presidential note aimed at
the fair distribution of those responsibilities among all
the States members of the Council.

