Mr. Strommen (Norway): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing and the
Secretary-General for his report on the work of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) over the last three months. Let me
also express my Government's gratitude to Hans
Haekkerup for his leadership and tireless efforts to
improve the situation of all the people of Kosovo.
Norway also looks forward to working closely with the
next Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

The election on 17 November and the inaugural
session of the Assembly on 10 December last year
were important milestones in the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). The newly elected Kosovo
representatives now find themselves faced with the
realities and challenges of a multiparty democracy.
With no party large enough to govern alone,
compromise and coalition-building across political and
ethnic divisions will be key to the success of the new
Assembly. The current deadlock regarding the election
of a provincial President shows that there is an urgent
need for all political leaders to demonstrate
reconciliation and responsible self-government.

We welcome the preparations made by UNMIK
for a gradual transfer of administrative authority to the
provisional self-government institutions. Experience at
the local level, after the municipal elections in 2000,
indicates the challenges that lie ahead. Elected
representatives and civil servants must now prepare
themselves to take over responsibilities from UNMIK
with professionalism and efficiency.

In accordance with the Constitutional Framework,
UNMIK and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General will continue to fulfil vital functions
in Kosovo. We expect the elected representatives and
self-government officials to recognize the necessity
and benefit of close cooperation with UNMIK and the
Special Representative.

Despite a decrease in the number of serious
incidents over the last months, security and freedom of
movement for minorities remain unsatisfactory. No
large-scale return of displaced Kosovo Serbs can be
expected unless the security situation is considerably
improved. UNMIK and KFOR must do what they can,
but, as the Secretary-General indicates in his report, if
we want to improve the still serious security situation,
people's attitudes must change. And in this, the newly
elected political leaders have a primary role in
promoting tolerance towards minorities and in making
it clear to the people of Kosovo that creating security
and reconciliation is their own responsibility.

Norway supports the establishment of an Office
of Returns and Communities within UNMIK, but return
is another issue that cannot be left only to the
international community. An important measure of the
success of the new institutions of self-government in
Kosovo will be whether larger-scale return can be
facilitated.

Norway welcomes the formation of a High-
ranking Working Group on cooperation between
UNMIK and Yugoslav authorities, as foreseen in the
Common Document of 5 November 2001. This must
not be perceived as a channel only between UNMIK
and Belgrade. A main objective must be to promote a
constructive and direct dialogue between the
democratically elected leaders of Kosovo and
Yugoslavia. A pragmatic, solution-oriented approach
should guide this cooperation.

We are encouraged by the progress made to date
as regards missing persons, as well as on Kosovo
Albanians detained in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Further progress on these issues can and
should be made without delay under the auspices of the
joint Common Document. This will help turn the page
from conflict to reconciliation in Kosovo.

We welcome and fully support the measures taken
by UNMIK to strengthen its capacity to counter
terrorism and organized crime. In addition to the
concerted efforts of UNMIK and KFOR, the newly
elected Assembly members must take the lead in
openly rejecting hate speech, ethnically motivated
violence, terrorism and organized crime. The killing of
a Kosovo Assembly member last week reminds us of
the challenges still facing us.

We have taken note of the decision of the Kosovo
Supreme Court to release from custody three Kosovo
Albanians suspected of involvement in the bombing of
the Nis Express Bus in February 2001. We urge
UNMIK police and KFOR to make all efforts necessary
to bring to justice those responsible for this terrorist
act.

