Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): On 31 December, the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) will
come to an end on a positive note. We are certain that
its activities will have set a good example for other
peacekeeping operations - and not only those in the
West African region - in terms of creating the
conditions necessary for the achievement of long-term
stability and the development of democracy in
countries that have endured many years of bloody
conflict.

Over the past several years, the Government of
Sierra Leone has achieved significant success in post-
conflict recovery. A stable security situation has
evolved, the restructured Sierra Leone armed forces
and police have been operating with increasing
effectiveness throughout the country, and control has
been asserted over the diamond industry. An important
criterion for assessing the Government's efforts will be
the, we hope, successful conduct of the national
elections to be held in 2007. Here, the United Nations
must provide the necessary assistance.

Naturally, the long-term prosperity of the people
of Sierra Leone will to a large extent depend on the
Government's ability to meet complex social and
economic challenges: building a new justice system,
rooting out youth unemployment, creating new jobs,
reintegrating former combatants into civilian life and
dealing with overall complex socio-economic
problems. The implementation of all such programmes
will require additional support from the donor
community, international financial institutions and
development partners.

We agree with the Secretary-General that
UNAMSIL was a pioneer in a number of important
areas of United Nations peacekeeping. With
UNAMSIL participation, coordination was established
among United Nations presences in West Africa,
including the United Nations Mission in Liberia and
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, and we
saw the implementation of the concept of a complex
United Nations mission designed to consolidate the
efforts of the organizations and specialized agencies of
the United Nations system and other international and
humanitarian organizations.

Beginning on 1 January 2006, UNAMSIL will be
handing over to the United Nations Integrated Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL), whose establishment is
another important precedent in peacebuilding. We will
all help facilitate its productive work.

I wish in conclusion to associate myself with
other members of the Council in expressing gratitude
to all the present and former international civilian staff
and military personnel of UNAMSIL, and to the
successive Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General, in particular Mr. Mwakawago, who is with us
in the Chamber today. It was their selfless endeavours
that made possible the successful completion of the
Mission's mandate.

