The Secretary-General (spoke in French): It is
an honour for me to welcome you to the United
Nations for this historic meeting of the Security
Council. You have come to New York to participate in
the Millennium Summit, during which we will
endeavour to give fresh impetus to the United Nations
Organization for the century that is now beginning.

(spoke in English)

To say that the eyes of the world are upon us is
both too little and too much. Too little, because the fate
of future generations could be affected by the decisions
of this Security Council Summit. Too much, because
many in the present generation are losing confidence in
the ability of the United Nations to make the difference
between war and peace.

This contradiction reflects what I believe to be a
crisis of credibility facing the Council and the
Organization in discharging its gravest responsibility:
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Too many vulnerable communities in too many regions
of the world now hesitate to look to the United Nations
to assist them in their hour of need. No amount of
resolutions or statements can change that reality; only
action can: prompt, united, effective action pursued
with skill and discipline to halt conflict and to restore
the peace. Only such determined action can restore the
reputation of the United Nations as a credible force for
peace and justice.

Nowhere, members of the Council, is your
commitment more urgently needed than on the
continent of Africa, where millions are suffering daily
from the ravages of war. I am therefore pleased that
Africa will be a focus of your deliberations today.

Whenever possible, we must summon the will to
act preventively, before a crisis reaches the point of no
return. When that fails and the Council resorts to
sanctions, it must summon the will and the wisdom to
ensure, on the one hand, that those sanctions are
effectively enforced and, on the other, that they reach
their intended target without inflicting unnecessary
hardship on innocent people.

When we are asked to deploy a peacekeeping
operation, we must ensure that it has a clear, achievable
mandate and the strength and authority to defend itself
and its mandate.

When all else fails and only armed intervention
can save large numbers of people from genocide or
crimes against humanity, there too the Council must
summon the will and the wisdom to confront the
agonizing dilemma which such cases pose to the
world's conscience.
Yet, in all these cases, summoning the will to act
is only the essential first step; having the ability to act,
and to act effectively and decisively, is the other
imperative. We all recognize that too often in the
peacekeeping operations of the past the path to failure
was paved with good intentions and inadequate
mandates. We all agree that, often, peacekeepers were
asked to take on complex missions without the training,
equipment, force structure or authority necessary to
succeed.

We all know that the time has come to truly
enable the United Nations to succeed in its missions for
peace. Last March, I asked a Panel of distinguished
veterans of peacekeeping and peace-building missions
to provide frank and realistic recommendations to
assist the Council and the larger membership in
fulfilling that urgent task. Their report is before the
Council in document S/2000/809, and I have already
committed myself to implementing those changes for
which I am responsible. It is my sincere hope that the
Council will do the same.

The United Nations and its peacekeepers cannot
be the answer to every crisis, and every conflict, and
every threat to human life. Nor can United Nations
peacekeeping be a substitute for the political will of the
parties to achieve a peaceful settlement. But where we
are the answer, where only our unique universality and
legitimacy can help a wounded and abandoned people
return to a life of peace and dignity, we must be given
the means to make the difference between life and
death. The world looks to you, members of the
Council, for an answer.

Allow me to close by reiterating to the Council
what I told the larger membership yesterday: that the
safety of United Nations personnel, in both
peacekeeping and humanitarian missions, is a matter of
vital concern. Yesterday's fatal attacks on United
Nations staff working in West Timor highlight again
the dangers faced by men and women, military and
civilian, who venture into the field for the United
Nations, that is, on assignments and missions decided
upon by the Council. I would like to stress the
responsibility of the Council to focus on this matter.
Let us together ensure that staff have the safety and
security they need to do theirjobs.

