Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, allow me to join in the
expressions of solidarity and condolences with respect
to the tragedy that has struck Haiti, the people of that
country and United Nations personnel there.
We welcome the representatives of a number of
leading regional organizations and have carefully
listened to their assessments of such a compelling
subject. The issues being discussed today are of key
importance to the maintenance of international peace
and security. The global nature of today's challenges
and threats and the formulation of collective
approaches necessary to address them effectively
require an enhancement of United Nations cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter, above all
its Chapter VIII.

The United Nations and regional organizations
ought to harmoniously complement each other,
bringing to bear their objective comparative
advantages. For the United Nations, this is above all its
universal membership, the nature of its activities and
its universally recognized legitimacy. The regional
organizations, in turn, have a better awareness of
situations within their own areas of responsibility and
in many instances have targeted preventive and
peacekeeping mechanisms.

Given the growing need for the effective division
of labour between the United Nations and regional
organizations, the leading role of the Security Council,
as enshrined in the United Nations Charter, remains
inviolable in issues related to the maintenance of
international peace and security. This holds true above
all for the mandate authorization and oversight of
regional or coalition peacekeeping operations that
allow for the use of force.

We favour regular meetings between the
Secretary-General and the heads of regional
organizations. The United Nations cooperation agenda
with regional partners is growing in scope.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions have been
complemented by efforts to deal with the spread of
weapons of mass destruction and the illegal trafficking
of small arms and light weapons, to address other
destabilizing transboundary problems, and to counter
drug trafficking and organized crime.

There is great potential in the growing
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO). The
core areas of CSTO activities today were laid out by its
Secretary General, Mr. Bordyuzha. It is important that,
within the CSTO, intensive work is under way to
develop its own peacekeeping capacity, including for
involvement in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In addition, the CSTO is making
considerable contributions to international efforts for
the post-conflict rehabilitation of Afghanistan and
addressing the drug threat emanating from that country.

A serious contribution to ensuring stability and
security in the Eurasian region is being made by the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, as reflected
specifically in the statement of its Secretary General,
Mr. Imanaliyev. Its members have made clear their
readiness to develop cooperation with the United
Nations in a number of key areas, including in
countering international terrorism and the illicit spread
of drugs and assisting in the post-conflict rebuilding of
Afghanistan.

We must continue to build upon the experience of
positive cooperation between the United Nations and
its Security Council with regional and subregional
partners in Africa, including the African Union. An
excellent example of such cooperation is the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

An important role in finding peaceful ways to
address the myriad problems of their respective regions
is also being played by the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
Organization of American States.

We would also like to see further development, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter, of the cooperation between the United Nations
and such structures as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the European Union and
NATO.

We are certain that the growing cohesiveness
between regional partners and the United Nations will
continue. On the one hand, regional and subregional
organizations must more actively offer their help in
terms of providing resources and comparative
advantages. On the other hand, the United Nations
should give further attention to maximizing
coordination and interaction with these structures while
reasonably dividing the labour and maintaining the
prerogatives of this universal Organization and its
Security Council.

In conclusion, I would like to thank you, Mr.
President, and the entire Chinese delegation for
organizing this meeting and for preparing the excellent
draft presidential statement that will be adopted today
with our full support.

