Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Honore Braithwaite for her
briefing, which together with the Secretary-General's
report (8/2017/604) clearly outlines that the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
is successfully on the path to closing and that the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) is on track to replace it by 16 October.

I would like to begin by recognizing Special
Representative Honore Braithwaite, as well as the
troop- and police-contributing countries, for their
support to the United Nations mission over the past 13
years. Thanks to their leadership and the dedication of
the men and women serving in MINUSTAH, Haiti has
made strides towards democracy and stability.

First, I would like to underscore the importance
of a smooth transition between the two missions,
MINUSTAH and MINUJUSTH. We are pleased to hear
that good progress had already been made. To date,
half of the military component and one of the 11 police
units have withdrawn from Haiti without incident. In
fact, there has been a reported decrease in the levels of
criminality and civil protests. We applaud the transfer
of tasks from the military to the Haitian National Police
in the northern part of the country and in some of the
most security-sensitive areas ofPort-au-Prince. We also
commend the transfer oftasks from MINUSTAH to the
host Government and the United Nations country team.

Secondly, I want to emphasize that the work
begun by MINUSTAH is not over yet. MINUJUSTH's
core mission will include the rule of law and police
development, as well as human rights. The entirejustice
system, including corrections and the judiciary, needs
significant reform, and focusing on the rule of law is
especially critical at this juncture. As the police and the
judiciary go hand in hand, strengthening the capacity
of both sectors is necessary to entrench the rule of law
in Haiti and to address such urgent challenges as high
pre-trial detention rates and prison overcrowding. We
also call for increased attention to Haiti's economic
situation and challenges related to humanitarian and
disaster preparedness, which should be prioritized so
that Haiti is prepared for the next crisis.

The United States stands ready to assist however it
can. We have been one of Haiti's strongest international
partners for more than 30 years. Together with the
Government of Haiti and the international community,
we continue to support the strengthening of Haiti's
overall security, democratic development and economic
growth.

