The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

Today we are participants in one of the strangest
scenarios in the history of the Security Council. We are
about to vote on two draft resolutions (S/2016/846 and S/2016/847), and we are all perfectly aware that neither
of them will be adopted. Considering that the crisis in
Syria is going through an agonizing stage that demands
the greatest possible political cooperation on the part
of the international community, such a waste of time
is unacceptable.

We all know the background to the Syrian crisis.
After destroying Libya and considering that a great
success, the troika of the three Western permanent
members of the Security Council turned on Syria. And
this time, most unfortunately, Paris - which in 2003
joined with Moscow and other clear-thinking capitals in
an effort to deter the United States and United Kingdom
from an opportunistic invasion of Iraq - has become
one of the loudest promoters of an ill-conceived policy
of regime change in Damascus.

It grieves us to point out that in all the years of
the Syrian crisis, the French delegation in the Security
Council has never once made any constructive
proposals, with its rare initiatives clearly calculated
for propaganda effect and doomed to failure. And that
is what happened this time. Our French colleagues
approached us about a week ago, informing us that they
wanted us to support a draft resolution on Syria, and
emphasizing that Paris did not want a Russian veto.
On 6 October, those assurances about the desire to
avoid a Russian veto were confirmed at a higher level.
But 24 hours later, after only one round of serious
consultations, a draft resolution, doomed to receive
the Russian veto that we had repeatedly and justifiably
discussed, was put in blue and submitted for a vote.

We should point out that Spain - which was
specifically invited to be a member of the International

Syria Support Group by Russia - has continually
reminded us of its co-authorship of the draft resolution.
The Spanish diplomatic efforts are disappointing. In
particular, the French-Spanish draft resolution features
a ban on all military flights over Aleppo, and not only
over the eastern part of the city but also the west, which
has been continually under fire from fighters from the
eastern side. In September alone, according to United
Nations data, more than 80 civilians were killed and
170 wounded. Moreover, the concept of banning all
military flights has not been thought through at all. To
the question of whether that also meant a ban on the
reconnaissance drones tracking fighters" movements,
there was no answer. To the question of why it also
applies to the western part of the city, which the
Government controls, the anwer was that it was more
convenient. Is that what you call a serious discussion?

Another main point is that there has never been an
instance in the entire history of the Security Council
when a permanent member was allowed to adopt a
resolution that directly or indirectly predetermined
its course of action without prior discussion of the
matter. I do not think we will see any such cases in
future - unless France, having renounced the right
of veto, is then controlled by a majority of Security
Council members. Whatever the restrictions, they can
be considered only in the context of compliance with
the ceasefire, which terrorists and other illegal armed
groups are routinely violating. Another basic flaw in
the French-Spanish draft resolution is that instead of the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) monitoring
mechanism provided for in resolution 2268 (2016), it
proposes a duplicative plan pulled out of thin air. We
regard this as an attempt to do away with the existing
collaborative architecture.

In the circumstances, yesterday afternoon we
took the unusual step of drafting a resolution intended
to demonstrate that a reasonable course of collective
action does exist whereby we can build on all the
positive things that we previously worked out so
painstakingly. Our draft includes a provision relating to
the still-relevant parameters of the Russian-American
agreement of9 September, emphasizing the importance
of ensuring immediate and unhindered humanitarian
access, specifically via weekly 48-hour humanitarian
pauses. The text of the document is annexed to the
draft resolution.

The draft resolution includes a provision on the
importance of ensuring that the ceasefire is adhered
to by every side in Aleppo and affirms the existing
monitoring arrangement involving the ISSG ceasefire
task force. It establishes the fundamental priority of
distinguishing the moderate opposition from Jabhat
Al-Nusra and urges ISSG members to require all
parties to cease conducting joint combat operations
with terrorists and to separate from them and officially
adhere to the cessation of hostilities. It points out that
in order to make progress with humanitarian efforts,
the fighters should stop blocking traffic on the Castello
road, in accordance with the 9 September agreement.

The draft resolution welcomes Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura's initiative of6 October aimed at normalizing
the situation in Aleppo. It requests that the Secretary-
General submit a detailed plan for its implementation
for the Security Council's approval. Incidentally, in
another of its major shortcomings, the French-Spanish
draft resolution completely ignores Mr. de Mistura's
initiative. Our draft resolution emphasizes how crucial
it is to achieve full, unconditional compliance with
resolution 2254 (2015) on every front - political,
humanitarian and counter-terrorism. We continue to
believe that we should work to make progress in all
those directions simultaneously, with no attempts at
mutual coordination or preconditions. The inter-Syrian
political process, which the radical opposition, with
the direct connivance of its foreign sponsors, has
been blocking since May, must be relaunched as soon
as possible.

We realize that our draft resolution will not
get enough votes today. Some will be guided by
anti-Russian sentiments, others by false notions of
prestige, and some will simply not have the courage.
Russia will nonetheless continue to work to achieve a
settlement in Syria with all interested international and
regional stakeholders. The amount of fighting overall
in eastern Aleppo has been falling. Yesterday, for
example, almost no combat missions were flown. We
hope that trend will continue.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall first put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2016/846, submitted by
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine,
the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Senegal, Spain, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America and Uruguay

Against:
Russian Federation and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

Abstaining:
Angola and China

The President (spoke in Russian): There were 11
votes in favour, 2 votes against and 2 abstentions. The
draft resolution has not been adopted, owing to the
negative vote of a permanent member of the Council.

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make a statement after the voting.


