Mr. Nesho (Albania): The moment that we are going
through is a historic moment for the future of the Balkans,
as the international community is intervening in order to
stop the humanitarian catastrophe and the tragedy of a
nation whose people have been tortured, killed and buried
in common graves, a nation that is justly demanding its
legitimate rights to freedom and to its very existence -
undeniable rights for all peoples. The Albanians of Kosovo,
despite all this, made an exemplary decision by respecting
the will of the international community and signing the
Rambouillet agreement.

For more than 10 years the international community
did not succeed in organizing a common action such as the
one undertaken today in order to stop the Belgrade regime
from creating a new and dangerous crisis in the heart of
Europe. The previous inaction was made possible by
prolonged discussion as well as by claiming respect for
principles - while in reality Europe at the end of the
twentieth century witnessed the massacre of Bosnia, of
Racak and other places, and more than 300,000 killings and
the creation of millions of refugees.

The Republic of Albania totally supports the military
action by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and we
consider it an action in support of peace and stability in the
region. My country strongly supports today's action, just as
we were in favour of a peaceful solution, which did not
seem to come.

Today the international community did not declare war
on Serbia, because war had existed there for a long time.
But the international community did achieve the first step
towards peace, security in the region and the re-
establishment of human values and of the principles that are
so well expressed in the Charter of the United Nations -
principles in which we all believe.

No country that tried to bury the basic Charter
principles of peace, security and cooperation, and that
committed genocide and crimes against humanity, can
expect to receive the protection of the United Nations and
the Security Council.

