Ms. Cubrilo (Serbia): Unfortunately, the
Permanent Representative of Serbia was unable to join
us this evening, so I shall deliver the following
statement.

My country strongly condemns the terrible attack
in Abuja and extends its deepest condolences to the
families of the victims, the people and Government of
Nigeria, and the whole United Nations community.

The Republic of Serbia welcomes the holding of
this open debate in the Security Council on the subject
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, believing
that the Council can only benefit from such a debate.
We thank the delegation of India for preparing the
concept note (S/2011/496, annex), which will certainly
help steer today's discussion on the subject.

Serbia has aligned itself with the statement of the
European Union. In addition, I would like to make a
few remarks.

Serbia attaches great importance to the United
Nations role in promoting and maintaining
international peace and security and, as a responsible
member of the international community, is committed
to playing an active role in the United Nations
peacekeeping activities, demonstrating thereby its
commitment to the goals of the Organization.

Peacekeeping operations are among the most
important aspects of the capacity of the United Nations
to safeguard international peace and security, and a
unique and valuable tool in assisting countries to make
the transition from conflicts to durable peace in an
effective and sustainable manner. In addition to the
necessary political support, the effective matching of
human, financial and logistical resources with priority
needs is essential to ensuring that there is no
discrepancy between the identified objectives and the
practical achievements on the ground.

While United Nations peacekeeping operations
continue to evolve into multidimensional undertakings
designed to provide a stable and secure environment
for smooth peace processes, it is necessary to ensure
the maximum optimization of the existing resources of
the United Nations system. It is also of particular
importance to mobilize additional capabilities in order
to minimize gaps and improve performance in the
field, bearing in mind that the absence of critical assets
hampers missions' ability to implement their mandates.
Addressing these challenges in a comprehensive and
proper way requires the coordinated and energetic
response of all the Members of the United Nations.

Successful peacekeeping is a shared
responsibility, so the continued engagement,
commitment and dedication of all actors involved are
needed in order to improve the ability of United
Nations peacekeeping to deliver concrete results at the
field level in complex and fragile situations. This
requires a broader, holistic strategy that synergizes
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts to address the
interlinked issues of security and development in a
comprehensive manner as the best way to prevent the
resurgence of conflict. If these efforts are to be
productive, all involved actors should make their
contribution within the framework of the enhanced
peacekeeping partnership between the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the host country and
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and police-
contributing countries (PCCs).

The increasingly difficult operational
environments and the multiplicity and complexity of
demands and challenges require continuous dialogue
and coordination among all involved stakeholders
throughout the whole lifecycle of a mission. The active
involvement of troop- and police-contributing
countries in all stages of United Nations peacekeeping
operations has proven to be an important contribution
to their smooth functioning and the successful
implementation of their ever-diversifying tasks. Tens of
thousands of men and women serving all around the
world under the flag of the United Nations make TCCs
and PCCs an essential source of credible and useful
information on field developments and operational
challenges.

In that context, the expertise of those countries
should be incorporated into the planning and
policymaking processes early on, especially prior to
the Security Council's decision-taking on the renewal
or appropriate adjustments of mission mandates. The
field experience of TCCS and PCCs is also relevant in
the process of the reconfiguration of missions, the
generation of required capabilities and developing or
modifying mission-specific rules of engagement,
operational concepts and command-and-control
structures.

The Republic of Serbia considers that the
consultations between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and TCCS and PCCs can play an
indispensable role in assessments of the
implementation of the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and opportunities to improve
arrangements for their management and oversight. The
meetings of the Security Council with TCCs and PCCs
and the ongoing practice of inviting them periodically
to the meetings of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations are very welcome. These practices are
important mechanisms for ensuring the greater
involvement of those countries in an open and
inclusive dialogue with the Security Council members
on peacekeeping-related issues.

Yet there is still space for improvements in this
regard. In particular, it would be beneficial if troop-
and police-contributing countries could be informed
about those meetings and their agendas well in advance
in order to have sufficient time to prepare and
coordinate with their respective capitals and national
contingents on the ground. This would enable them to
optimize their contributions to the discussions and
improve the overall quality of their interactions with
the Security Council members.

These meeting are of particular importance in the
case of new peacekeeping operations. It would be
advantageous to convene them at an early stage in
order to incorporate the views of TCCS and PCCs in
the planning processes. This would also help the
Security Council to have a clear insight into available
resources to be engaged by those countries in specific
missions in order to avoid future serious capability
gaps that could jeopardize the implementation of the
missions' mandate.

In closing, I would like to pay tribute to all
United Nations peacekeepers who risk their lives for
the noble cause of peace. I would also like to reiterate
the readiness of my country to engage constructively
and in close cooperation with other Members of the
United Nations in advancing the objectives of United
Nations peacekeeping. With that in mind, we stand
ready to significantly increase our participation in
United Nations missions in the coming period.

