The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Manongi
(United Republic of Tanzania) took a seat at the
Council table.

Expression of sympathy to the Governments and people
of Kenya, the United Republic of Tanzania and the
United States in connection with the bombings of the
United States embassies in Nairobi and Dar-es-Salaam

The President: I should like, on behalf of the Security
Council, to express deep sympathy to the Governments and
people of Kenya, the United Republic of Tanzania and the
United States of America in connection with the great
tragedy they suffered as a result of the bombings of the
United States of America embassies in Nairobi and Dar-es-
Salaam on 7 August 1998, in which several United Nations
staff members were also injured. The members of the
Council condemn the terrorist acts against innocent civilians
and request the representatives of Kenya, the United
Republic of Tanzania and the United States of America to
convey to their Governments and people, and to the
bereaved families, their profound condolences. The
members of the Council express the hope that the injured
will make a rapid and full recovery.

I request the members of the Council to stand and
observe a minute of silence in memory of those who so
tragically lost their lives.

The members of the Council observed a minute of

silence.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/1998/748, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to vote on the draft resolution (S/1998/748) before
it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1189 (1998).

I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Kenya.


