I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, Director-General Qu Dongyu and Executive Director Beasley for their briefings. I also thank the Secretariat for the update it provided on food security risks with regard to resolution 2417 (2018). According to the update, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Yemen, north-east Nigeria and South Sudan the food crisis remains dire, affecting millions of people. The grave humanitarian situation in those countries deserves serious international attention. As a matter of fact, the situation in those countries represents only a small fraction of conflict-induced food insecurity problems worldwide. Armed conflicts and violence pose a serious threat to food production infrastructure, force people to leave their homes and cause labour shortages. Obstruction and damage to humanitarian operations and facilities result in food crises, in which large numbers of civilians suffer malnutrition and famine. Meanwhile, food crises always lead to rising discontent and provide breeding grounds for violence and extremism, thus exacerbating volatilities and conflicts. Food insecurity in conflict areas not only impacts international and regional peace and security but also the national development and livelihoods of people in affected countries. The Security Council should continue to play an important role in finding a solution to this problem and breaking the vicious cycle of conflict, violence and food insecurity. We should promote the political settlement of conflicts and do our best to reduce food security risks in conflict areas. China supports the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire and calls for all relevant parties to ensure the full implementation of resolution 2532 (2020), comply with international humanitarian law, agree to a ceasefire and cease all violence. The Council should undertake its primary responsibility of maintaining international peace and security. It should work for the political settlement of disputes through peaceful and diplomatic means in order to maintain peace and stability in affected regions. It should make every effort to guarantee humanitarian access and strive to mitigate humanitarian disasters, including conflict-induced food insecurity. We should promote sustainable development and food security so as to address the root causes of conflict. This year kicks off the decade of action to deliver the Sustainable Development Goals. We must focus on areas of common concern for developing countries, such as food, agriculture and poverty reduction. More resources should be mobilized to support developing countries through funding, technology and capacity-building in order to achieve better economic and social development and create the necessary conditions for food security. Development should always be at the centre of international cooperation, and the default critical solution for the settlement of conflict. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to spread across the world. The trade restrictions imposed during the pandemic are hindering food transportation and interfering with global food industrial and supply chains. Food prices are being pushed up by unstable supply chains and market panic. Cross-border travel restrictions are resulting in labour shortages in some areas, thus disrupting the seasonal production cycle. The combination of all these challenges could aggravate food insecurity and exacerbate the humanitarian crisis in affected countries and regions. Under these circumstances, the international community should strengthen its cooperation in fighting COVID-19, build back the economy and minimize the impact of the pandemic on food security. We should ensure the stability of global food industrial and supply chains by resuming production, while taking all the necessary epidemic-related preventive measures. We should give special attention to developing countries, especially African countries, and provide them with targeted humanitarian assistance. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Food Programme and other international agencies have a key role in that regard, and we should support them. As the largest developing country, China takes food security as a governance priority. In response to COVID-19 challenges, China launched a nationwide campaign to prevent food waste. We also work closely with the FAO and are actively engaged in international cooperation, thus contributing to the stability of the global food supply. In addition, we are helping other developing countries tackle the COVID-19 pandemic and locust infestations through information-sharing and technical assistance. China is ready to work with all parties in order to end armed conflict, maintain food security and make unremitting efforts for global peace and development.
