Mr. Elbakly (Egypt): I would like personally to
welcome you, Madam, to New York, to preside over
this important meeting. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Adada, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Congo, as
well as the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union.

(spoke in Arabic)

The Security Council is meeting today to discuss
ways to enhance cooperation between the United
Nations and international organizations in order to
strengthen the international collective security system
and the United Nations capacity to resolve conflict and
to achieve peace and stability, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter on
the role of regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, provided that that role
is consistent with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. Chapter VIII also provides that the
Council shall encourage the pacific settlement of
disputes through regional organizations, either on the
initiative of the States concerned or by reference from
the Security Council.

There can be no doubt that the current increase in
the number of peacekeeping operations and the
growing role played by regional organizations in
dealing with the root causes of conflict make it
necessary for the United Nations to step up its efforts
to create much-needed mechanisms for cooperation and
coordination with such organizations - whether in
Africa, where the African Union (AU) plays a leading
role, or in other areas of the world - with a View to
integrating their actions and objectives and to
promoting efforts aimed at stabilization and sustainable
development.

Concrete measures have been taken in recent
years by several regional organizations to develop their
capacities and mechanisms in the field of conflict
resolution so as to address challenges to peace and
security and to keep up with the evolving role of the
United Nations in this field.

Acknowledging that evolution, the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/ 1)
recognized the contribution of regional organizations
to peace and security and supported a stronger
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations. Furthermore, Security Council
resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1631 (2005) highlighted
the importance of strengthening the effectiveness of the
Security Council's role in conflict prevention,
particularly in Africa, and the need to develop an
effective partnership between the Council and the
African Union and other regional organizations, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter.

In addition, a presidential statement issued by the
Security Council on 19 November 2004 in Nairobi
(S/PRST/2004/44) recognized the importance of
strengthening cooperation with the African Union in
order to help build its capacity to deal with collective
security challenges.

On the basis of those considerations, Egypt has
worked to consolidate the pillars of cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and the
African Union, especially with regard to the problems
faced by the African continent. In December 2006,
Egypt presented to the AU Peace and Security Council
an initiative that aims to enhance the existing
relationship between the two organizations through the
creation of a coordination and cooperation mechanism
for the relevant peacekeeping and peacebuilding
structures in the AU and the United Nations, focusing
on building African capacities in order to increase the
continent's ability to deal with African problems in all
their dimensions. Such a relationship should be based
on mutual respect, not domination. This initiative was
endorsed by the AU Peace and Security Council, which
also welcomed, in a decision dated 14 December 2006,
the concept paper submitted by Egypt at Addis Ababa
and the ideas it expresses regarding such cooperation.

Therefore, we reiterate our call for the
establishment of a better relationship of cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU in the areas of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, in accordance with
the proposals contained in the Egyptian concept paper,
at three levels of coordination and consultation. The
first level is between the United Nations Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council,
through intensifying the meetings between the
councils. The second level is cooperation between the
relevant departments of the United Nations Secretariat
and its counterpart, the African Union Commission,
similar to that which has developed in addressing a
number of African problems. The third level of
cooperation is between the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission and the AU Peace and

Security Council, in keeping with the provisions of
Chapter VIII and the principles and objectives of the
Protocol Relating to the Establishment of the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union, which
authorized the Peace and Security Council to promote
and develop a strong peace and security partnership
with the United Nations through efforts to promote
peace and development in Africa.

We stress that, in order to ensure the attainment
of those objectives, it is essential that the Security
Council send a clear political message reaffirming its
willingness to revitalize joint cooperation frameworks
with regional organizations in the areas of conflict
prevention and resolution, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. That should be carried out within clear
parameters and in a way that keeps options open for
establishing a mechanism to that end, in consultation
with the relevant regional organizations and United
Nations Member States. In that regard, we must take
into consideration the relevant provisions of Chapter
VIII of the Charter and the guiding principles for
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We reaffirm
the importance of adhering to those principles in any
joint cooperation framework between the United
Nations and regional organizations, whether with
regard to the consent of the parties before
implementation, impartiality, non-interference in
States' internal affairs or respect for their territorial
integrity and political independence.

Egypt, as a member of the AU Peace and Security
Council and in accordance with the main features of its
initiative, is willing to cooperate fully with Security
Council members, including the States representing
Africa in the Council, to promote that initiative and all
other ideas that will help to achieve a permanent
framework for cooperation and consultation between
the two councils.

