I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. I also thank Ms. Wafa Mustafa for her briefing on the vital work done by Families for Freedom. We remain deeply concerned by the situation in north-western Syria. Although Russian and Turkish patrols have now succeeded under constant threat over the full distance of the M4 highway, reports of recent Russian air strikes on Al-Bab, as well as increased shelling and terrorist attacks, are a real potential for a slide back to the levels of conflict that we saw at the start of this year. We know what the humanitarian impact of the breakdown of the ceasefire in the north-west would be. Indeed, we have yet more evidence through the recent report of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic (A/HRC/44/61), released on 7 July, and, as the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights puts it, unfathomable suffering endured by Syrian children, women and men during the military campaign launched on Idlib in 2019 and the start of this year. This includes indiscriminate attacks on civilians, hospitals and schools by pro-regime forces, backed by Russia, the killing and injuring of thousands, arrests, torture, probable war crimes by extremist forces and dire displacement conditions at the border. This is made clear in the Commission of Inquiry's report, which finds that 47 attacks that were investigated in Idlib were conducted by the regime's ground and air forces and were assisted by Russian air forces. The Commission also finds reasonable grounds to believe that war crimes had been committed by the regime and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. It is the task of the United Nations and its Member States, in particular all members of the Council, to ensure that this does not recur. If the ceasefire breaks down, two additional factors are likely to exacerbate the suffering. First, cases of the coronavirus disease have now been confirmed in the north-west, and the numbers are beginning to increase. Tackling a widespread outbreak in the north-west would in any case be achallenge, but further conflict would likely render this task impossible. Secondly, Russian and Chinese politicization of humanitarian access means that it is much more difficult for the 1.3 million people who had previously received aid through the Bab Al-Salam crossing to receive that aid. The consequences of a further outbreak and violence would be catastrophic. The United Kingdom therefore once again calls for an immediate cessation of hostilities in support of the requests of the United Nations Special Envoy and the Secretary-General. This call is now as urgent as ever. We call on all parties to work with the Special Envoy towards a nationwide ceasefire. We welcome the attendance and briefing of Wafa Mustafa today and commend her vital work and that of Families for Freedom, her bravery and her fighting for young girls, women and families who have been impacted by the detentions. We call on the Syrian regime to engage with the United Nations Special Envoy to discuss this critically important issue. There needs to be widespread releases of political prisoners and vulnerable people in line with what we all agreed in resolution 2254 (2015). Medical care must be available to those in detention. We were moved by Ms. Mustafa's own story about her father. Indeed, there remain an estimated 120,000 persons missing as a result of this conflict. These include persons missing as a consequence of summary executions, arbitrary and incommunicado detention, kidnapping, abduction, enslavement, sarin gas attacks and other human rights abuses, as well as combatants and civilians missing as a direct result of fighting in the day-to-day ravages of war. We recognize the psychological trauma of those left behind. The United Kingdom is proud to provide financial support - $1.6 million from 2019 to next year - for the efforts of the International Commission on Missing Persons (ICMP) towards the immense task of accounting for missing persons in Syria. We wholly support the ICMP's role as the holder of an impartial missing persons database, and we stress the need for a process for missing persons that accounts for all missing persons regardless of their role in the conflict or their origin, in accordance with international human rights and the rule of law. This work is vital for the rights of families of the missing to justice, truth and reparations. Any credible peace process has to address the issue of missing persons and detainees. In order for this to happen, the Syrian regime must properly and genuinely engage with the Special Envoy and the other parties on the peace process. We take note of the parliamentary elections held in Syria on Sunday. Resolution 2254 (2015), which we adopted unanimously, remains unequivocal regarding expectations for elections in Syria. They needed to be free and fair, administered under the supervision of the United Nations, and meet the high standards of transparency and accountability, with all Syrians, including members of the diaspora, being eligible to participate. Sunday's parliamentary elections clearly did not meet these requirements. There were no independent observers and nearly half of Syria's population, including 6 million refugees, could not even vote. The way in which these elections were conducted sends a clear message that the Syrian regime has not really been interested in inclusion, fairness or a political process that is owned and led by all Syrians or that allows all Syrians a role in deciding their own future. Finally, I would just like to address the comment made by the Russian representative about the White Helmets. The United Kingdom is proud of its support for the White Helmets and its life-saving search and rescue operations and activities in Syria alongside other donors. The organization is estimated to have saved over 115,000 lives and provided essential services to more than 4 million Syrians.
