Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I should like to join others
in warmly welcoming to this Chamber Her Excellency
Ms. Dora Bakoyannis, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Greece and the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2009.

My delegation thanks the Foreign Minister for
her informative briefing, which serves as further proof
that our collective security and defence mechanisms
need to be not only maintained but further strengthened
and invigorated if we are to successfully address the
challenges facing us.

The tools and expertise of the OSCE have been
effectively utilized by many Central and Eastern

European States, as well as States in the Caucasus and
Central Asia. The OSCE's unique role, based on its
comprehensive security definition that includes
military, political and economic dimensions, is based
firmly on transatlantic cooperation and on the OSCE'S
well-known democratic credentials. Furthermore, the
OSCE's economic and environmental dimensions is
again becoming increasingly relevant to us, due not
only to the important topic of climate change but also
to the various and visible problems of energy delivery
that were felt once more this winter in Europe. The
comprehensive approach that the OSCE takes is clearly
the logical one to pursue, as we are reminded at this
moment by the dark clouds of global recession.

As a participating State of the organization,
Croatia sees and supports the OSCE's beneficial role in
the further democratization of its entire area, as well as
the benefit it brings to the people caught in conflict in
its area, in Kosovo and in Georgia. We echo the words
of the Foreign Minister and encourage the OSCE to
export its rich expertise to Afghanistan and to
cooperate with other international organizations,
including the United Nations and its missions.

We also see the issues of terrorism, cross-border
migration and climate change as other areas in which
United Nations-OSCE cooperation could be further
strengthened. In tackling these issues, the resources
and experience of both organizations should be pooled
in order to help ensure the greatest degree of success.

We thank Her Excellency once again for her
statement and wish Greece a successful and efficient
chairmanship.

