Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's debate,
which demonstrates the commitment of the Security
Council to strengthening the links with the African
Union (AU). I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for briefing us on his report (S/2010/514) and
to welcome the important interventions from His
Excellency the Foreign Minister of Nigeria and from
Mr. Lamamra.

The African Union's designated year of peace and
security is an appropriate time to take stock of the
United Nations-AU relationship. The African Union
has made constructive and significant engagements on
peace and security challenges in Somalia, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Madagascar, Mauritania, Niger and the
Sudan. As we discussed yesterday, the joint AU-United
Nations activity to support the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) is an example of the vital
cooperation between the two organizations. We
commend Uganda and Burundi for their continued
commitment to AMISOM.

Yesterday's meeting showed how central the
relationship is to achieving our shared peace and
security objectives. But we should acknowledge that
we are only just starting to develop the truly strategic
relationship that we all want to see. There has been
practical progress in three areas.

The first was the launch of mechanisms to
promote a more structured relationship between the
two organizations. We welcome this. The United
Nations Office in Addis Ababa should improve the
effectiveness of United Nations engagement with the
African Union. We also welcome the launch by the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission of the Joint Task Force on Peace
and Security to review immediate and long-term
strategic and operational issues.

Secondly, work on the institutional development
of the African Union is under way. We look forward to
the November review of progress made so far in the
United Nations Ten-year Capacity-building Programme
for the AU. We welcome the African Union's
framework to finance the recruitment of staff to work
on peace and security. We will contribute to the joint
salaries fund that will facilitate this. We encourage
others to do the same.

Thirdly, we welcome the progress made in
African Union financial management capacity over the
past 12 months. Building AU management capacity,
including resource management, is essential, not only
to manage immediate and future peacekeeping
operations but also to enable a more effective
partnership between the African Union and donors. We
need to build on this progress as part of a transition to
a more predictable funding process.

The United Kingdom welcomes the financial
support provided by all the African Union's current
partners. European Union assistance to the AU on
peace and security issues, which totals €l billion, is a
major source of predictable and sustainable funding.
The African Peace Facility supports the costs of
deploying United Nations-authorized AU peace-
support operations. The United Kingdom itself remains
a key donor to African Union peace and security efforts
in its own right, including through the training of
peacekeepers and support for mediation and peace-
support operations.

We recognize, however, as the Secretary-General
pointed out this morning, the need to work towards
longer-term and more predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing for African Union-led operations
under a United Nations mandate. Sustained
engagement and commitment from a broader base of
donors is essential. As we noted yesterday, AMISOM
in particular urgently needs more support from a wider
range of donors, and with fewer caveats.

These are all important practical steps, which are
concretizing the relationship. We are beginning to see
some practical impact. I was encouraged by the
discussion this past summer between the Council and
the African Union's Peace and Security Council. But I
would highlight three areas that need particular
attention as we move forward.

First, we need to establish a broader strategic
framework for the African Union-United Nations
relationship. I welcome the Secretary-General's
intention to define his strategic vision of cooperation in
his next report, which should provide a good
foundation for establishing a clearer idea of what we
want to achieve together. Without that overarching
framework, the debate over financing risks becoming
an obstacle to the future deepening of our cooperation,
which we all want to see.

Secondly, we need to be more frank with each
other about what works and what does not work. There
are many lessons to be learned - for example, from
the experience of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. We have at times appeared
to be talking past each other on Somalia, particularly
with regard to military strategy. We need to do better at
focusing on concrete plans for addressing specific
conflict situations.

Thirdly, we both need to do a better job on
conflict prevention. Again, this requires a frank
dialogue and a determination to take the difficult
decisions necessary to address emerging conflict
situations. We want to see the Security Council devote
more attention to conflict prevention, including in
Africa. The African Union's partnership will be
essential in achieving that.

We look forward to working closely with the
African Union on all these important issues, including
through next year's meeting of the two Councils, and
we look forward to the Secretary-General's next report.

I can fully support the draft presidential statement
that has been negotiated.

