Mr. Prosor (Israel): 1 stand before the Council
as a man who has seen and experienced war - as a
soldier, as a diplomat and as the father of children
who themselves have been sent to war. I speak to the
Council today drawing from those experiences and as
the son of a man who fled Nazi Germany to escape the
annihilation of his people.

Two days ago, the United Nations recognized its
International Day of Commemoration in Memory of the
Victims ofthe Holocaust, commemorating the 6 million
Jews, including one and a half million children, who
were murdered by the Nazis.

The Holocaust may have reached its barbaric
climax in Auschwitz and Treblinka, but signs of the
impending catastrophe were evident years earlier. Jews
were systematically demonized: robbed of their dignity,
then robbed of their possessions, and, finally, robbed of
their lives.

In the last century, this pattern of defamation,
degradation and bloodshed has been the hallmark of an
impending atrocity. Despite the pledges - even in this
Chamber - of "never again", we have seen the pattern
repeat itself over and over again.

War does not begin with the firing of weapons or
the deployment of troops. War begins when the seeds
of hatred and intolerance are sown in the hearts of
ordinary men and women.

This April will mark 20 years since the Rwandan
genocide - a genocide characterized not only by
unspeakable brutality, but by the fact that it was
entirely preventable. In the months leading up to the
genocide, General Romeo Dallaire, commander of
the United Nations peacekeeping Mission in Rwanda,
warned that Hutu extremists were planning a campaign
to exterminate the Tutsis.

He knew what was coming, because the warning
signs were evident. The radio waves were filled with
ugly messages demonizing and dehumanizing the
Tutsis. Vulnerable members of society became targets;
children were conscripted and women were assaulted.
A list was drawn up detailing the names of people to be
killed. General Dallaire tried to warn the world, but his
warnings fell on deaf ears.

As photos and stories of the genocide emerged, the
world was haunted by the atrocities it failed to prevent
and once more pledged "never again." Just a few years
later, it ignored the lessons of history, and the cycle of
defamation, degradation and bloodshed was repeated in
Darfur,

From Cambodia to Bosnia to Somalia, the
international community has failed and failed again to
prevent the killing of innocent people. Each of us has a
role to play in the struggle for human rights and human
dignity. We cannot tolerate Governments brutalizing
their people. We cannot rest while barrel bombs are
falling on Syrian citizens, executions are on the rise
in Iran, and sexual violence is rampant in the Central
African Republic.

We must break down the wall of silence. We must
overcome indifference. We must know what we stand
for and then stand up for what we believe in: never
indulge racism; never ignore incitement; never be silent
when confronted with the warning signs of war.

In schools, mosques and media across the Middle
East, people are being taught to hate, vilify and
dehumanize Israelis and Jews. Even as we speak, a
generation of Palestinian children is being taught
that murder is moral, racism is righteous and terror is
tolerable. Palestinian Authority media quotes Hitler,
describes Jews as less than human and displays maps
that erase Israel's existence.

Today we are witnessing State-sanctioned
incitement in Iran, where Ayatollah Khamenei corrupts
the English language by describing Israel as a "cancerous
tumor" and demanding our eradication "from the face
of the Earth". This is a regime that has stood in this
very institution and threatened Israel with annihilation.
To all those who say "that was in the past", I answer
that just two months ago, tens of thousands of people
took to the streets of Tehran and chanted, "Death to
America" and "Death to Israel".

Even in Egypt, after 35 years of peace, the
Government has failed to educate against incitement.
In 1979, President Sadat stood courageously in the
Knesset to forge a historic peace agreement between
our two nations. But today, from the corners of Cairo to
the archways of Alexandria, hatred is systemic: official
media outlets advertise anti-Semitism; movie theatres
frame Israel as the enemy; and maps eliminate Israel.

It is not enough to have peace between Governments.
We need genuine reconciliation between people. It is
Governments' responsibility to educate their citizens
towards tolerance, justice and mutual respect.

It is not enough to claim that war is intolerable. It is
not enough to pledge "never again". We must heed the
warning signs and take action, beginning by uprooting
incitement and hatred. The horrors of history are too
often met with silence. Many members of this institution
called the United Nations have failed to speak out in a
united fashion and collectively condemn those who call
for the annihilation of other Member States.

From this Chamber, I want warn the people of the
world not to close their eyes to the atrocities around
them, nor turn away from the animosity that ensues. It
is our responsibility to speak out against hatred clearly
and unequivocally. Let us equip the next generation
with words and not weapons; arm them with ideas and
not radical ideologies; teach them tolerance and not
terrorism.

War is not inevitable. It is not a force of nature.
Nor is it part of human nature. It can be prevented, but
only if we stand together to denounce indifference and
defend peace.

