Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): In addressing
the Security Council this morning, I am aware of what a
privilege and great honour it is for me and for the
Republic of Mali to express our views on the situation in
Burundi. But what more can be said after the enlightening
statement of the Secretary-General and the great and
inspired statement of President Mandela? I shall therefore
confine myself to making just a few observations.

First of all, I should like to say how grateful my
delegation is to you, Mr. President, for having organized
this important meeting. I should also like to welcome the
presence with us today of President Nelson Mandela, and
I should like to thank him for his important statement. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement.

The situation in Burundi is certainly a difficult one.
Violence and insecurity are continuing, as reflected in
resumed attacks against the civilian population and
against humanitarian organizations by armed groups,
particularly around Bujumbura.

Moreover, the humanitarian situation is catastrophic.
Right here, just a few days ago, Mrs. Ogata, the United

 

Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, gave us an
overwhelming account of the large number of Burundi
refugees and displaced persons fleeing constant fighting
between rebel groups and Government forces. How can we
fail to mention the human rights violations that accompany
these renewed tensions? Mali is concerned by this situation.

However, there are some encouraging prospects for a
settlement of the crisis in Burundi. They are based, as we
have just seen, on the following steps: first of all, the
reactivation of the Arusha peace process, seen as the most
viable basis for a settlement of the conflict, along with
efforts still being made to set up an internal political
partnership in Burundi; secondly, the designation of
President Nelson Mandela as Facilitator of the Arusha
peace process by the Eighth Arusha Regional Summit;
thirdly, the coordination of the implementation of the
Lusaka process and the reactivation of the Arusha process;
and lastly, the commitment of the international community
to provide assistance for reconciliation, reconstruction and
democratization.

The draft resolution that we will adopt at this meeting
is to be seen precisely from this standpoint, and that is why
my delegation fully supports it.
In conclusion, I would like to fulfil a duty of
conscience and my brotherhood. The duty of conscience is
to pay tribute to the memory of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere
and express appreciation for the valuable contribution he
made to peace and national reconciliation in Burundi. The
duty of brotherhood is to renew to President Nelson
Mandela the constant, total and resolute support of the
Republic of Mali for his work, particularly in facing this
new challenge that the Council is considering today.

