Mr. Vieira de Mello (Spoke in French): The
briefing that I am presenting today complements that
just provided by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno and
responds to a press statement by the President of the
Security Council dated 15 January 2003 (press release SC/7634), in which Council members condemned in
the strongest terms the massacres and systematic
violations of human rights perpetrated in the Ituri area.
That very same day I was completing my own mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and I asked
my office in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
colleagues in the human rights section of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to ensure immediate
follow-up of the Council's request, through continued
observation of the situation in that region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Beyond the brief comments that I will be making
on the human rights situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, my Office has also prepared a
more detailed report on the matter, and I will be
pleased to share it with members if they so wish.

In general, the Government and other parties to
the conflict continue to commit grave violations of
human rights. This is alarming, and as my colleague
just said, could be a threat to the peace process, which
remains fragile. The Government and the leaders of
rebel groups, have admitted that there are massive
violations of human rights. Nonetheless, the impunity
with which these grave violations are committed, in
particular by high officials of the Government army
and commanders of the various rebel forces, represent
a major obstacle to promoting human rights and lasting
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The humanitarian situation, which is already very
difficult, is deteriorating further because of the many
obstacles to access by humanitarian workers to
impoverished populations, many of whose members
have been forced to flee their villages and seek refuge
in inhospitable forests in the eastern part of the
country. As members know, those regions are under the
control of rebel groups. The warring parties are not
allowing humanitarian organizations to enter the areas
under their control. It is therefore vital to facilitate
access and to provide the assistance that humanitarian
workers provide to the populations displaced by the
conflict.

The economic interests which are at the root of
the continued plundering of natural resources and of
State revenues remain a factor of destabilization and
are contributing to conditions of anarchy and grave
violations of human rights in the eastern part of the
country. The rapid deterioration of the economy,
exacerbated by the continuation of the conflict, is
another real concern. The sharp reduction in household
income has lead to widespread corruption within the
judicial system, the armed forces and the police, and
among teachers, heads of schools and members of
medical services, making the public administration as a
whole ineffective, as I have been told by the President
of the Republic, Mr. Joseph Kabila, himself.

As members are aware, at the end of last year
MONUC dispatched a team to the Beni region to
conduct an inquiry into allegations of serious violations
of human rights - summary executions, rape, torture,
forced disappearances - reported to have been
committed in Mambasa and in villages between
Mambasa and Mangina and between Mambasa and
Erengeti. The team confirmed the use of plundering,
murder and rape as premeditated instruments of war by
the forces of the Mouvement de liberation du Congo
(MLC) and the Rassemblement congolais pour la
democratie-national (RCD-N) in October 2002 and
during recent clashes in December 2002 with the
support of soldiers of the Union des patriotes congolais
(UPC). The Nande ethnic group were targeted for
summary execution as well as certain pygmies who
were forced to flee into the forest for the first time,
accused of collaboration with the RCD-
Kisangani/Mouvement de Liberation (RCD-K/ML).

Victims and witnesses have described many cases
of mutilation followed by acts of cannibalism. The
special MONUC investigation team interviewed more
than 500 persons who had fled to Beni, Butembo,
Mangina, Oicha and Eringeti. The most shocking
violations of human rights described in that testimony
include 220 arbitrary executions, 95 cases of rape, 122
cases of forced disappearance, 102 unaccounted-for
family members including children, 32 cases of torture
and abuse and more than 100 cases of kidnapping for
forced labour.

(spoke in English)

The systematic looting of all buildings, including
hospitals, churches and individual homes, was also
confirmed during the visit of the team to Mambasa and
Mandima and to me, during my visit to Kisangani,
where I met with representatives from different parts of
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The planned military operation carried out by
forces of the MLC was called in code "Effacer le
tableau". My written report provides more details on
this. The MLC leader has admitted to the veracity of
the charges and promised to prosecute those suspected
of having committed these crimes. According to
reports, 27 officers have been arrested, and their trial is
scheduled to take place starting on 18 February 2003.
While welcoming the fact that there is at least
acknowledgement of responsibility, which is fairly
unusual in this kind of situation, I have not agreed to a
request that my office in Kinshasa observe these trials,
as the rebel military judicial system lacks legitimacy
and does not conform to international legal and human
rights standards, as far as we can tell. In my opinion,
such crimes should fall within the jurisdiction of the
transitional justice mechanism that will be put in place
in accordance with the Pretoria Agreement of 16-17
December 2002.

The crisis around Beni/Mambasa, apart from
these horrendous and systematic atrocities, has led to
the displacement of well over 100,000 people. In early
January 2003, in close partnership with non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World Food
Programme and MONUC participated in humanitarian
assessment missions to the area. By mid-January, many
of the displaced had begun to return towards Mambasa
and Eringeti, but large numbers had dispersed into the
forest where access is difficult, if not impossible. Food
insecurity was a predominant concern. The assessment
of humanitarian teams was that if the security situation
did not improve, displaced persons would be unable to
tend their crops, and longer-term food availability
could be even more difficult and could have tragic
consequences for those people.

A recent mission to Bunia confirmed gross
violations of human rights, including group rapes of
women, extrajudicial executions and the looting and
burning of homes. In Nyakunde, well over 2,000
killings were reported, and the population has again
fled into the forest. Similar atrocities have been
reported in Kindu, and group rapes appear to have been
frequently carried out in the Kivus.

In the areas controlled by the UPC since August
2002, the human rights situation has also deteriorated
significantly. Information gathered reveals that
persecution on ethnic and tribal grounds, extortion of
property, rape and other forms of sexual violence
against women, extrajudicial executions and the forced
recruitment of children are being committed by
military personnel of the Union des patriotes
congolais-reconciliation et paix (UPC-RP). This
situation has caused thousands of civilians again to flee
south from Bunia to Irumu, Mambasa and Beni,
thereby increasing the number of internally displaced
persons in that region. Following the December 2002
events in Mambasa, these internally displaced persons
had to flee southwards for a second time towards the
towns of Eringeti and Oicha in the Beni region. Mass
graves have also been identified in several places in
Bunia.

The past months in the district of Ituri have also
been marked by massive human rights violations. In
the Bunia area, manhunts and reprisals on ethnic
grounds continue to be reported. It is alleged that the
UPC-RP is fuelling this crisis. It should be noted that,
as pointed out by Jean-Marie Guehenno, the UCP-RP
did not participate in the inter-Congolese dialogue,
which took place in Sun City.

In conclusion, my overarching and pressing
recommendation to the Security Council is that there is
an imperative need to continue to monitor closely and
report on the human rights situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo because of the implications the
situation is having and, if unchecked, will continue to
have on efforts to restore peace and security in the
country.

The Council may wish to demand again that the
belligerents and their foreign supporters put an
immediate end to human rights violations and to the
culture of impunity, and that those responsible for such
crimes, including those who continue to exercise
military command functions, be immediately arrested
and eventually brought to justice. Likewise, I expect
that the Commission on Human Rights, through its
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, will continue to
monitor the situation closely. The Special Rapporteur
will shortly be visiting the Democratic Republic of the
Congo before reporting to the Commission at its
upcoming fifty-ninth session.

In my written report, I have named three senior
officers of the RCD-Goma who are alleged to have
been involved in the 14 May 2002 massacres and who
have not been brought to trial. Indeed, two of them
have since been promoted, and I have raised this with
senior RCD-Goma leaders who met with me in
Kisangani last January. As regards the MLC military
officers involved in the crimes referred to earlier, their
names should be obtainable as their leader has
reportedly placed them under arrest. I also named the
commander of the Government forces allegedly
involved in human rights violations during the incident
which took place in Ankoro in the province of Katanga
on 10 and 11 November 2002, as well as leaders of
rebel groups who should be held responsible for gross
violations which have been committed by officers and
men under their control. Efforts must be made to
prevent their integration into the Pretoria Agreement
transitional mechanisms until their names have been
cleared through a credible judicial process or enquiry.

The Council might also wish to ensure that the
Pretoria peace process is based on solid human rights
grounds and that, concurrently, effective judicial and
national human rights protection systems are created or
strengthened in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
so as to assure the success and sustainability of that
process. In this regard, consideration should perhaps be
given to the establishment of an international
commission of enquiry to look into all serious human
rights violations committed by all sides. It is critical
for the future peace of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that those responsible for these acts be held
accountable.

I would urge the Council, finally, to call for the
effective implementation of the sections of the Pretoria
Agreement calling for a national observatory on human
rights and a truth and reconciliation commission, not
least in order to ensure that the voices of the victims
are fully and loudly heard.

To conclude, my Office stands ready, as is the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, to continue to
assist - needless to say, in close partnership with
MONUC - in strengthening our monitoring and
reporting capacity in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as in expanding its support and
activities during the transitional process in those areas
with a human rights dimension. Perhaps all of them
have such a dimension, and a clear mandate from the
Security Council would undoubtedly strengthen my
officers' and MONUC's ability to play fully their role
in bringing about, in a Democratic Republic of the
Congo which is at peace, democratic institutions that
are solidly grounded in the rule of law, accountability
and human rights for all.

