Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Spain and Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) for his briefing and for his astute
leadership of the Committee.

Nigeria notes that no new incidents were reported to
the Committee in the period covered by the report. We
commend the Committee for its continued assistance to
States and international organizations in implementing
the relevant Security Council measures under the 1737
sanctions. Indeed, that aspect of its work remains
crucial to maintaining the integrity of the decisions
taken by the Council and ensuring that States do not
unknowingly violate the 1737 sanctions regime. We
encourage States to seek the Committee's guidance on
proposals for technical cooperation with Iran in matters
that fall within the Committee's purview.

Nigeria is concerned about the fact that Iran has
not responded to the Committee's requests about two
incidents investigated by the Committee's Panel of
Experts. We urge the Iranian authorities to facilitate
the Committee's work by responding to those requests
without delay. We commend the Panel of Experts for its
efforts, which have made a significant contribution to
the Committee's work. We note that the Committee has
concluded its consideration of the recommendations, as
reflected in the final report of the Panel of Experts.

Nigeria has been following with keen interest the
ongoing negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran on
finding a comprehensive solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue. We support the use ofnuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. We urge the Iranian authorities to continue
to negotiate in good faith with a view to assuring the
international community of their peaceful intentions
for their nuclear programme. We look forward to the
successful outcome of the negotiations, as well as to
receiving guidance from the Committee on the possible
implications for the relevant Security Council measures
in the event that the parties reach an agreement.

