Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
join others in thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Salame, and Ambassador
Skoog for their informative briefings.

Seven years ago, the Libyan people initiated change.
There was hope - hope for a prosperous, safe and
democratic future for Libya. However, the past years
have shown the fragility of the situation and the many
impediments to real progress towards that aspired future
for Libya. That was confirmed once more today by
Special Representative Salame in his sobering briefing.
Because of the many challenges, and despite spoilers
who prevent smooth progress, we need to remain united
in supporting United Nations-led efforts in Libya. We
need to do that for the Libyan people, because they have
had enough of the political crisis and the uncertain and
unsafe conditions of daily life.

In that regard, the current situation in Tripoli, where
militias have been fighting at the cost of civilians, is
especially concerning. We urge all sides to continue to
cooperate with the United Nations and fully adhere to the
ceasefire brokered by the United Nations. Differences
need to be settled through peaceful dialogue, and the
security situation has to improve, as a prerequisite for
progress on other tracks as well.

I will focus on three elements in more detail: ending
the political crisis; the economic situation and the need
for transparency and coordinating international efforts;
and the humanitarian and human rights situation.

On the need for progress on the political process,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands recognizes Libya's
extremely complex political and security situation. That
serves to highlight the need for an inclusive Libyan-
owned and Libyan-led political process. Therefore, we
confirm our full support for the efforts of Mr. Salame
and his team to that end. That important works needs
to continue, including the full implementation of the
United Nations action plan.

Libya needs a democratic political transition
that fosters peace and stability. New elections should
be held, if the right conditions are met. Technical,
legislative, political and security conditions have to
be in place for elections to be credible, peaceful and
inclusive. Moreover, the meaningful participation
of women as voters and as candidates is crucial. The
elected institutions of Libya should work constructively
on a new constitutional framework and inclusive
Government, and political spoilers should be held
accountable for their actions.

Secondly, on the economic situation and the need
for increased transparency, the present state of the
economy contributes negatively to the complexity of
the political situation. There are parties benefiting
from maintaining the status quo, while the population
and country as a whole struggle. Businesses, services
and households cannot function normally with only
a few hours of electricity a day. The economic crisis,
including the depreciation of the national currency,
price hikes and a liquidity crisis, has a devastating
effect on the livelihoods of Libyan citizens. Therefore,
more efforts are needed to improve Libya's economy.

The financial management of the country needs
urgent repair. That includes establishing transparency
in Libya's economic and financial institutions and the
unification of the Central Bank. We therefore thank the
Special Representative and the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) for their timely response
to the Security Council's request for financial review
and audit options. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
continues to support efforts to broaden transparency on
a multilateral and bilateral basis. We value the role of
UNSMIL in that regard.

My third, and final, point is on the humanitarian and
human rights situation. We remain deeply concerned
by ongoing serious human rights violations across
Libya, as documented in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/780). A few examples are: the high number
of civilian casualties due to fighting and violence;
migrants and refugees who remain vulnerable to the
risk of arbitrary detention, torture, sexual violence,
abduction for ransom and unlawful killings; and the
forced eviction of displaced Tawerghan families from
the Tariq al-Matar Camp. That serves to underline
that we need to establish the rule of law in Libya, and
we call on all Libyan parties to respect applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Moreover, strengthening donor coordination in the
areas of humanitarian aid, security and human rights
remains vital.

In June, the Council took the courageous step of
targeting human traffickers and smugglers through
sanctions. Implementing the sanctions measures
diligently should remain our priority. Pending criminal
investigations into such crimes, the Council should
stand ready to consider additional listings, in order
to dismantle destabilizing criminal networks that
profit from the climate of impunity in Libya and its
bordering region.

In conclusion, the human rights situation is not
some additional aspect of the crisis in Libya; rather,
it is the yardstick for progress and how the human
rights of all Libyans can be guaranteed. In that light,
we welcome the progress made towards the finalization
of the United Nations strategic framework for the
period 2019-2020 and the launch of the human rights
working group, co-chaired by the Ministry of Justice
and UNSMIL, under the coordination framework for
international assistance.

