Mr. Keita (Mali) (spoke in French): First, I wish
to express to the Secretariat my delegation's great
appreciation for the information provided and to
reiterate our support for the efforts made by the
Secretary-General in the context of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).

At the briefing on East Timor on 27 April, we
were able to find out about the development of the
situation in the country, which was generally positive.
Nevertheless, questions such as the return of refugees,
border security, the reconstruction of the country and
employment were urgent challenges for UNTAET.

The information provided today on what has
happened since 27 April shows that once again
UNTAET is moving on the right path and has
embarked on a gradual process. At the economic level,
my delegation welcomes the increase in the number of
private companies, which today has reached a total of
2000. This favours the decline in crime, which was a
result of people being out of work. At this security
level, we welcome the establishment of a Joint Border
Commission and encourage UNTAET to pursue the
training of local police to cope with persistent crime
and to maintain law and order.

At the political level, Mr. Annabi mentioned
earlier the creation of political parties and the
beginning of political activities. My delegation,
therefore, would like Mr. Annabi to give us more
information on these two points. What do the Timorese
think about these political parties, and how do they see
independence in general? We feel that it is not
superfluous to have public awareness campaigns
directed towards the population in order to avoid
passions or violence related to such events.

UNTAET is arriving at a crossroads. Apart from
the reconstruction and stabilization of East Timor and
establishing security there, it must resolutely embark
on the process of establishing the various institutions
so as to place the country on the path of independence.
The involvement of the Timorese people at this point
should be decisive.

