Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, the
delegation of Kazakhstan would like to express
appreciation to the Kingdom of the Netherlands for
convening today's briefing. We are particularly pleased
to see you, Minister Kaag, presiding over today's
meeting. We would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Mark Lowcock and the Executive Director of
the World Food Programme, Mr. David Beasley, for
their very insightful briefings on the stark and painful
reality of the suffering caused by conflict and hunger.

The statistics we are hearing today are shocking
and should awaken our conscience, because what we
witness today is the worst food security crisis since
the end of the Second World War and the founding of
the United Nations. After a prolonged decline, world
hunger appears to be on the rise again, leading to
the re-emergence of famine. According to the latest
edition of the Global Report on Food Crises, published
yesterday, the vast majority of the chronically food
insecure and malnourished live in countries affected
by conflicts. The 11 per cent increase in the number
of food-insecure people in 2017 is largely attributable
to new or newly intensified conflicts combined with
droughts and floods. Ongoing armed conflict and
violence impede livelihoods and access to markets
and create widespread displacement, which is further
aggravated by climate change. Moreover, it is obvious
that unemployment, poverty, underdevelopment, the
unsustainable use of land and water and the exploitation
of natural resources further escalate the potential of
widespread food insecurity. While we express grave
concern, we need to go beyond expressions of solidarity
and immediately address the problem with the following
workable strategies.

First, it is clear that the response to food insecurity
and hunger requires strengthened connections between
political solutions and long-term development strategies.
We need to strengthen the security/development nexus
through implementation of development programmes
in conflict areas, including making major investments
in rural development and agriculture, natural-resources
management and social protection.

Secondly, we must strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations in preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention and resolve situations of conflict, including
through the implementation of the proposals set out in
the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace (S/2018/43). Instead of having
to respond to crises, we need to greatly increase our
investments in prevention. The Security Council
underlined the importance of that principle by
adopting, last August, a presidential statement that
reiterates the Council's commitment to working with
the Secretary-General to pursue all possible avenues
to end conflicts, including through addressing their
underlying root causes in an inclusive and sustainable
manner (S/PRST/2017/14).

Thirdly, it is of vital importance that the Secretary-
General and the Secretariat alert the Security Council
on worrying levels of food insecurity and hunger,
including through existing reporting mechanisms.
Because of the Secretary-General's early warning
in February 2017 and a swift humanitarian response,
famine was averted in Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia
and the north-east of Nigeria.

F ourthly, we must enhance coordination both within
the United Nations and with regional and subregional
organizations and financial organizations, in order to
address immediate needs, the recovery stage, long-term
development and sustaining peace in a comprehensive
and sustainable manner. All those institutions have
different tools and expertise that should be used in a
complementary way to achieve desired outcomes.

Fifthly, we need not only to respect, but also ensure
respect for, international humanitarian law by providing
full, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access. This is
a process to be engaged in by the entire United Nations
system, in particular its peacekeeping missions and
country teams, working with both Governments and
armed groups. We should also seek the support of
neighbouring countries with influence for their timely
interventions, along with donors, partners and, most of
all, civil society and local populations.

Last but not least, we cannot tolerate or consider
the food-insecurity and hunger situation with an
attitude of business as usual. Urgent collective efforts
are needed if the international community wants to
achieve the ambitious goal of a world without hunger
and malnutrition by 2030.

