Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I would like to thank you for convening
today's debate, and to welcome all the ministers and
other representatives who spoke before me. I would
also like to welcome the new Permanent Representative
of the United States, even if my time here at the United
Nations has been brief. Finally, I note that France aligns
itself fully with the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union.

As I was said, I would like to thank you, Madam,
for convening this debate since it allows us to consider
a key issue of great importance to France - the
contribution of regional and subregional organizations
to the maintanence of international peace and security
and the pomotion of the rule of law.

The severity and number of conflicts in the world
require us to resort to all the means at our disposal. In
this context, the contribution of regional organizations
to maintaining international peace and security is
crucial. That contribution is provided for under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and responds
to several objectives. It allows regional organizations
working under the auspices of the United Nations to
enjoy strong political legitimacy. In return, it allows
the United Nations to draw on the know-how and
operational methods of regional organizations. We have
seen a fine example of this in Mali, where cooperation
between the United Nations and the relevant regional
organizations - the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States - have made
it possible for the country to emerge from the recent
cr1s1s.

Like some speakers before me, I wish briefly to
mention the European Union. The European Union
plays a major role within the international community.
I recall that peace and security are at the heart of the
European project, which arose in the wake of the Second
World War, like the United Nations. Among regional
organizations, the European Union stands out because
of its advanced level of cooperation with the United
Nations and other regional organizations. Its operational
capacities give it the ability to support diverse activities
and to develop institutional mechanisms for funding
and participating in peacekeeping missions authorized
by the Security Council, and to contribute to crisis
prevention and post-conflict stabilizaton. Today, this
cooperation extends to all continents.

In order to faciliate peace in Africa, since 2004 the
European Union has allocated €740 million in a variety
of modalities. It responds to urgent needs through its
rapid-response mechanism, and to longer-term needs
through peace-support operations that allow for
predictable financing. The mechanism has also enabled
the European Union to finance the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia since 2007, a good
example of cooperation among the European Union, the
African Union and the United Nations. The European
Union has also contributed significant support to the
deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali, on the same basis. It also supports
strengthening the capacities of the African Union and
subregional African organizations.

Similarly, the European Union is coordinating its
intervention in Libya with the United Nations through
its European Union Border Assistance Mission for
border surveillance, just as it works actively with the
United Nations in Kosovo. Concerning Georgia, for
instance, the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations have participated jointly in the discussions
in Geneva, and the European Union is financing the
confidence-building measures between Abkhazians
and Georgians that are being implemented by the
United Nations Development Programme. Lastly, one
of the chief goals that the European Union and the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
set themselves at their summit in Santiago in February
was to contribute actively and jointly to international
peace and security.

The role of regional organizations is only
going to grow, in response both to the principle of
subsidiarity and to the mentality that encourages
regional stakeholders to assume responsibility and
ownership. France is contributing to that effort through
organizations ofwhich it is a member, as well as through
its support for the establishment of a regional security
architecture. While we should continue our support for
that cooperative trend, we must continue to be wary
of the danger of a fragmentation of collective security.
The Security Council, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, is still the body with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, acting on behalf of the Members of
the United Nations as a whole to that end.

Dialogue between the United Nations and other
organizations often raises complex questions resulting
from a shortage of resources in the area of troops, for
example, but also in equipment, military expertise,
civilian know-how and funding; the implementation of
predictable and reliable financing; and the issue of the
degree of control that the Council can exercise over the
operations it authorizes. That should not, however, be
seen as an obstacle. On the contrary, it illustrates the
vitality of the relations between the United Nations and
such organizations. Responding to those issues quickly
and effectively is a challenge we should all address.

In conclusion, I would like to touch on one last
topic, which is dealt with in the presidential statement
adopted today (S/PRST/2013/12), namely, that your
country, Madam President, has decided to highlight
the fight against impunity and the historic importance
in that regard of the International Criminal Court, the
promotion of human rights and the rule of law, and the
role that regional organizations play in that area, for
which we are grateful. That is another demonstration
of your country's unwavering commitment to such
matters, within the Security Council in particular and
the United Nations in general. France knows something
about that topic, since our two countries, together
with Morocco, promoted within the Organization the
International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Here we are
again, in the Security Council, some of the founding
countries of the International Criminal Court, of which
your compatriot, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, was the first
Prosecutor. The reference to the International Criminal
Court and the fight against impunity in a text on United
Nations cooperation with regional organizations is
therefore a welcome precedent, for which we are in
your debt.

It is also a useful reminder that the principles of
justice and the defence of human rights are founding
principles for many regional organizations. The
European Union and the Organization of American
States were built on the rejection of conflict and around
the goal of ensuring peace and security, and they have
developed basic mechanisms for promoting the rule of
law and defending human rights. The principles of the
Charter of the African Union enshrine the rejection of
impunity and the Union's right to intervene in a country
where serious crimes, genocide, war crimes or crimes
against humanity have been committed. It is high time
to recognize the importance of such subjects in the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations. Cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
for peace and security is therefore a matter of political
and operational necessity and must continue, in line
with the relevant stipulations and provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and under the auspices
of the Security Council. It is in that way that we will
simultaneously ensure consistency in international
action, transparency in United Nations activities and
respect for the Organization's values.

