Mr. Prica (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I have no doubt whatever that,
thanks to your experience, outstanding qualities and
competence, the Council's work will continue to be
successful. I should also like to thank Lord Paddy
Ashdown, High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his comprehensive and eloquent report on the
situation in my country.

In less than a week we are going to mark the
tenth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement. That
will be a perfect opportunity to step back and re-
evaluate the progress we have made and the goals we
have achieved during the last decade. Indeed, they are
tremendous. Frankly speaking, even at the fifth
anniversary, while discussing the progress we had
made, there were not many optimists ready to predict
that, just five years later, Bosnia and Herzegovina
would be ready to begin negotiations with the
European Union on a stabilization and association
agreement.

The report of the High Representative covers the
period from 1 January to 1 July 2005. Therefore, as
Lord Ashdown has rightly pointed out, it does not
include the most recent development of significant
importance that has occurred in the last four and a half
months. I am pleased to say that Bosnia and
Herzegovina now has succeeded in fulfilling all the
conditions required by the European Commission's
Feasibility Study. We therefore expect to start
negotiations with the European Union on a
stabilization and association agreement early next
month. We consider that particular moment to be the
most important in our post-Dayton history.

Beginning negotiations with the European Union
on a stabilization and association agreement will mark
another very important change for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, namely, our institutions will have to start
taking full responsibility for the future of the country,
while the role of the Office of the High Representative
will gradually change. With further progress on the
ground, we hope that after 2006 the item entitled "The
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina" will no longer be
on the Council's agenda.

It is not my intention to go into the details set out
in the report of the High Representative. Nevertheless,
I would like to take this opportunity to mention some
of the most remarkable achievements during recent
months.

The defence reform has virtually been completed,
with great efforts having been made by our experts
from the Ministry for Defence and representatives of
the international community.

Agreement has been reached on one of the most
sensitive issues, that of police reform. Cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) by the authorities of Republika
Srpska has become concrete and fruitful, even though
there is more to be done. We have great hope that the
last seven indictees will be brought to justice by the
end of this year, which will enable the ICTY exit
strategy to become effective.

Judiciary reform is under way in order to
strengthen the rule of law and to build the capacity of
courts to take on the most difficult cases, especially
those relating to organized crime and corruption.

Economic reforms are also well under way. We
will launch the value added tax from January 2006. We
expect that measure to have a significant impact on
eliminating the grey economy and on increasing the
budget.

The privatization process must be accelerated as
the main generator for overcoming the legacy of the
State-controlled economy. Completing privatization
and engaging young, educated and skilled
professionals capable of improving management is the
only long-term solution for economic transition and
recovery. On the positive side, it is important to
underline that the country has a very low inflation rate,
a stable currency, rising foreign currency reserves and
a very favourable foreign debt to gross domestic
product (GDP) ratio. Even the high trade deficit, which
continues to be a long-term threat, is still being offset
by remittances from abroad. Moreover, there are some
signs that exports during this year rose more robustly
than imports. In the last five years, our country has
enjoyed significant GDP growth, one of the highest in
the region.

Furthermore, it is very important to mention that
regional cooperation in the Balkans continues to
strengthen, with particular emphasis on our good
relations with neighbouring countries. Our prospects
with the European Union are boosting confidence in
peace and prosperity throughout the region. Bosnia and
Herzegovina stands ready to support the development
of good relations between neighbouring and other
countries in the region on the basis of sovereignty,
mutual respect and non-interference in internal affairs,
thereby contributing to the overall stability of the
region.

Finally, on the eve of the tenth anniversary of the
Dayton/Paris Peace Accords, I wish to take this
opportunity to thank the entire international
community for the enormous support and assistance
provided to us during the last decade. It is obvious that
without its help and decisive action no significant
progress would have been possible.

