Mrs. Martinic (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I thank Italy for its invitation to participate in
this open debate on trafficking in persons in situations
of conflict.
Argentina views trafficking in persons as a
complex and very serious form of exploitation and
abuse that violates its victims' human rights. Similarly,
Argentina believes that combating trafficking must
be carried out in a holistic manner and involve the
many relevant stakeholders within the framework of
defending and promoting human rights. It is therefore
fitting that the issue be addressed as a priority matter in
the General Assembly.

Argentina recognizes that the crime of human
trafficking is a global problem, and, as such, the
international community must confront it in a
coordinated manner. In that context, it was important
for the issue to gain visibility in the Security Council
as the vulnerability of the victims is increasing
in conflict situations, in particular with regard to
women, children, people with disabilities, lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex persons, internally
displaced persons and refugees. We currently see how
terrorist groups are using trafficking in persons and
sexual violence as weapons of terror and as a means of
financing their activities. It is imperative to help and
protect victims and combat the financing of terrorism
through trafficking. In that regard, the United Nations,
in particular the General Assembly, plays a fundamental
role in supporting States in that endeavour.

At the multilateral level, Argentina maintains its
firm commitment to combating human trafficking, the
most extreme form of violence, through the adoption of
national policies aimed at eliminating that scourge in
our country. At the national level, combating trafficking
in persons is being addressed horizontally through
Argentina's executive committee on combating the
trafficking and exploitation of persons and protecting
and assisting the victims, which coordinates the work
of various ministries through the federal council on
combating trafficking and exploiting persons and
protecting and assisting victims, which is aimed at
developing a federal strategy to combat trafficking
in persons.

The Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of
National Security have mainstreamed the promotion
of a gender perspective within the national security
and armed forces. They conduct training activities and
prevention exercises in the area of gender violence and
trafficking in people, including for the early detection
of human trafficking situations at border crossings.
The Argentinian Joint Peacekeeping Operations
Training Centre trains all national units deployed in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, guided by the
principle that conflicts can only be effectively addressed
when respect for international humanitarian law and
international human rights, including those of women
and children in conflict, is ensured. In particular, the
Centre's annual International Women and Peace and
Security seminar includes a specific module on human
trafficking so as to provide tools to prevent, detect and
combat it in conflict situations.

Argentina reiterates its renewed commitment to
combatting human trafficking in all contexts, including
in the context of conflict situations, and reiterates
the need to continue discussing this issue within the
General Assembly.

