Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I am
very pleased to deliver to the Security Council the
seventeenth 90-day report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in
accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of the resolution.
The report covers the period from 10 December 2010
to 22 March 2011, during which time the Committee
held two informal consultations - on 10 December
and 4 March - and conducted additional work using
the silence procedure.

On 10 December 2010, under the chairmanship of
my predecessor, Ambassador Tsuneo Nishida, the
members of the Committee met for the first time with
the Panel of Experts appointed under paragraph 29 of
resolution 1929 (2010). The Coordinator of the Panel,
Ms. Salome Zourabichvili, introduced the Panel's
provisional programme of work, including travel plans,
following which members of the Committee outlined
their expectations of the Panel's future activities. The
members of the Committee expressed their support for
the Panel and its work.

On 4 March 2011, under my chairmanship, the
members of the Committee received an oral briefing
from the Coordinator of the Panel, in which she
summarized the key points of the Panel's interim report
of 4 February, which was submitted to the Council, with
a copy to the Committee, in accordance with paragraph
29 (d) of resolution 1929 (2010). In the report, the Panel
2

referred to the first eight weeks of its activities, during
which it, first, held a series of consultations in Vienna,
London, Brussels, Paris and Tokyo to discuss its
programme of work and to receive information relevant
to its mandate; secondly, investigated a reported
violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007),
which imposes a ban on the export of all arms and
related materiel from the Islamic Republic of Iran; and,
thirdly, conducted an assessment of Member States'
implementation reports under paragraph 31 of resolution
1929 (2010), which had previously been circulated to
the Committee on 1 February.

In the course of the discussion that followed the
oral briefing by the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts
and in the light of the recommendations made by the
Panel, the members of the Committee agreed to
consider, among other actions, disseminating additional
optional guidance on submitting implementation
reports, possibly via a note verbale and/or through the
Committee's website, and to periodically organize open
briefings at United Nations Headquarters for interested
Member States.

In following up on the implementation of its own
programme of work of 23 July 2010, the Committee
agreed to request from Member States additional
information about the individuals and entities on the
Committee's consolidated list and to work on updating
its guidelines for the conduct of its work.

Previously, my predecessor informed the Council
of two new cases of reported violations of paragraph 5
of resolution 1747 (2007), one of which the Panel of
Experts had already investigated and independently
confirmed with the exemplary cooperation of the
reporting State. I would like to inform the Council of
two additional reported cases of alleged violations, this
time of paragraph 3 of resolution 1737 (2006), which
imposes a ban on the export to and procurement by
Iran of items that could contribute to enrichment-
related, reprocessing or heavy water-related activities
by Iran, or to the development of nuclear-weapon
delivery systems. These cases are being examined by
the Committee and its Panel of Experts.

While the increase in the number of reported
sanctions violations is a matter of serious concern,
Member States' continuing readiness to report these
violations is positive and should be encouraged.
Reports of sanctions violations by Member States
represent an important source of information regarding
11-27294
patterns of procurement and means of circumventing
sanctions.

During the current reporting period, the
Committee received three notifications - namely,
from a Member State with reference to paragraph 5 of
resolution 1737 (2006), concerning the delivery of
items for use in the nuclear power plant in Bushehr,
Iran; from the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) pursuant to paragraph 13 (d) of resolution 1737
(2006), which provides for an exemption to the assets
freeze for activities directly related to the items
specified in paragraphs 3 (b)(i) and 3 (b)(ii) of the
resolution; and from a Member State pursuant to
paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006), in connection
with the receipt and/or unfreezing of funds in order to
make a payment due under a contract entered into prior
to the listing of an entity.

The Committee answered a query from a Member
State that sought information on the reasons for the
designation of an entity as subject to the assets freeze,
as well as clarification on the scope of the finance-
related measures, particularly as contained in
resolution 1929 (2010). The Committee will shortly
answer another query of a similar nature.

In accordance with paragraph 18 (b) of resolution
1737 (2006), the Committee has sought certain
information from the IAEA.

Finally, the Committee concluded the process of
consideration of a request for de-listing submitted by
an entity through the focal point process outlined in
resolution 1730 (2006). The Committee decided that
this listing remains appropriate and that therefore the
entity remains on the Committee's consolidated list,
and thus remains subject to the assets freeze.

That concludes the submission of my report to the
Security Council.

