Mr. Jallow: I am pleased to present once more to the
Security Council my six-monthly report (S/2015/883, annex II)) and assessment on the work of the Office of
the Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals and for the last time in respect of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
Permit me to begin with the Residual Mechanism.

With the imminent closure of the ICTR, the
Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism has taken
over the functions of the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICTR and continues to do so gradually in
respect of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). Activities have been intensified on
tracking the three fugitives earmarked for trial by the
Mechanism. We are deploying considerable efforts to
secure their arrest and trial before the Mechanism or in
Rwanda, as appropriate. In this respect, I am pleased
to inform the Council that Ladislas Ntaganzwa, one
of the six indictees whose cases have been referred
by the ICTR to Rwanda for trial, has been arrested in
the past 24 hours and is currently in the custody of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo police. Ntagazwa,
the former mayor of Nyakizu commune in Butare, was
indicted on charges of genocide and crimes against
humanity in respect of the killings of thousands of Tutsi
in the parish of Cyahinda in Butare, of having ordered
the rape of several women, and of inciting the killings
of Tutsi.

We wish to thank the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and several other countries for
their cooperation in this particular operation, and at the

same time urge the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo to
make the necessary arrangements to ensure the transfer
of the accused to Rwanda for trial without delay, in
accordance with the order of the referral chamber of
the ICTR. The Council is requested to urge all States
to cooperate fully in the arrest and transfer of the
remaining eight fugitives. That is absolutely essential
to supplement our internal measures in tracking ifthese
are to yield dividends.

With regard to judicial activities, there has
recently been a significant increase in motion practice
in the Mechanism. In the past six months alone since
June, both the Arusha branch and The Hague branch
have been engaged in litigation in 23 cases. As the
Tribunals have downsized, the staff of the Mechanism
have increasingly been called upon to multi-task
in order to maximize the use of the resources of the
Prosecutor's Office, provide for greater flexibility, and
fulfil the mandate of the Mechanism in respect of both
its core and ad hoc functions. We have also adopted
other strategies to maximize efficiency, including by
delaying recruitments in order to adapt to changes in
the ICTY trial schedule. With the staff now in place in
The Hague - 10 continuous posts and 26 ad hoc staff
members - intense preparations are already under
way for possible appeals in the cases of Vojislav Seselj,
Radovan KaradZic' and Goran Hadzic' in the months
ahead.

Assistance to national jurisdictions continues to
be an important part of the work of the Mechanism
Office of the Prosecutor. In the past six months, we
have handled some 135 requests for assistance from
eight Member States and international organizations,
bringing the total of requests over the past 12 months
to 343. That represents a significant workload, which,
I am pleased to report, the Mechanism Office of the
Prosecutor continues to manage efficiently, through
the multitasking of staff, as well as other measures. In
that regard, I have promulgated several guidelines and
protocols in order to streamline procedures regarding
the provision of assistance to national jurisdictions.

The Mechanism Office of the Prosecutor has
also now taken over the bulk of investigation and
prosecution records and material from the ICTR Office
of the Prosecutor. The remaining items are scheduled
to be transferred after the delivery of the Butare

judgement on 14 December and will complete the
transfer of all ICTR Office of the Prosecutor records
to the Arusha branch of the Mechanism. The ICTR
evidence collection database, the shared network drives
and equipment, as well as the vault containing the
physical evidence of the ICTR Office of the Prosecutor
have now been fully transferred to and are managed by
the Office of the Prosecutor of the Arusha branch. The
Hague branch continues to work with the ICTY Office
of the Prosecutor to prepare for a gradual handover of
the ICTY records to the Mechanism in tandem with the
completion programme of the ICTY.

The Mechanism is also monitoring the cases
transferred by the ICTR to Rwanda and France. The
investigation phase of the Munyeshyaka case in France
has now been concluded and, following the dismissal
of the case by the juge d'instruction, as recommended
by the French Prosecutor on 5 October, the case is now
on appeal in France. The Bucyibaruta case, also before
an investigating judge in France, is expected - I am
advised - to be completed by the first quarter of 2016
with trial, if any, anticipated to commence by the end of
2016, in which case a final decision is not likely before
mid-2017. The Uwinkindi case in Rwanda, following
closing arguments in November, is now scheduled for
judgement in December, whereas the Munyagishari
case is scheduled for 7 January 2016 for commencement
of trial.

Permit me to now turn to the ICTR. Just over a week
ago, on 1 December, the ICTR held its official closing
ceremony in Arusha to mark the conclusion - save for
the judgement in the Butare case - of its work and
mandate. We are expecting the judgement in the Butare
case to be delivered on 14 December. It has been a long
and challenging journey for all involved in ensuring
accountability for the crimes committed in Rwanda in
1994 and in bringingjustice to the community subjected
to one of the most horrendous humanitarian tragedies
of modern times.

The case statistics are fully set out in the report (see S/2015/884) before the Council, as well as the overview
of the execution of our mandate, and I need not repeat
those details. Through those cases the Tribunal has
established, in a fair and transparent judicial process,
the account of what transpired in Rwanda in 1994.
It has held to account those who committed serious
violations of international humanitarian law. It has
contributed significantly in the development of the
jurisprudence and of good practices in the investigation
and prosecution of international crimes. The work
of the ICTR, including its jurisprudence, practices
and procedures, provides, I believe, some significant
lessons, learned from the challenges that we faced
in trying to respond to them, for national courts and
international tribunals in carrying forward the task
of the investigation and prosecution of international
crimes. The documentation of such lessons and
practices, which has already commenced in the closing
years of the ICTR, should be continued by others for the
benefit of future generations.

A debt of gratitude is owed to the many whose
support has been indispensable and critical to the
execution of the ICTR mandate. The Security Council,
the Secretary-General, the Secretariat * particularly
the Office of Legal Affairs and its leadership - and
the other organs and States Members of the United
Nations for their cooperation in tracking and arresting
fugitives and in all the other aspects of our operations;
the Government and people of Rwanda, whose support
and cooperation have been critical in assisting our
investigations, in accessing witnesses and other evidence
and in the implementation of our strategy for referral
of cases to national jurisdictions; the Government and
people of Tanzania, who have been our gracious hosts
for over two decades; the thousands of witnesses - for
both the prosecution and the defence f who have had
to travel to Arusha to testify and have recounted and
relived their often traumatic experiences in order to
provide the Court with the relevant evidence; the entire
staff of the Tribunal, in the Chambers, the Registry
and the Office of the Prosecutor, including the judges,
who have all given the best of their time and skills with
dedication and commitment.

I pay particular tribute to my predecessors,
Prosecutors Richard Goldstone, Louise Arbor and Carla
del Ponte, each of whom made a lasting and valuable
contribution to the work of the Office of the Prosecutor
and of the Tribunal; President Vagn J oensen, Registrar
Majola and their predecessors; and also, of course, our
colleagues for the defence, who are an indispensable
element of any fair judicial process. For in the end, the
legacy ofajudicial process is perhaps determined more
by its fairness than by its jurisprudence or statistics.

Much has been accomplished in bringing justice
to the victims and the survivors and in bringing
accountability to the perpetrators of the genocide,
but work still remains to be done. Current gaps in
impunity need to be closed with proper accountability.
Member States need to give maximum cooperation
to the Mechanism to secure the arrest and trial of the
remaining eight fugitives. Hundreds of other suspected
genocia'aires must be tried in their countries of refuge
or be extradited to Rwanda for trial. The acquitted and
released persons currently under the Mechanism in
Arusha need to be relocated to where they can resume
their lives. The closure of the ICTR, the first ad hoc
tribunal of its kind to complete its work, is a momentous
event. But it is merely the end of a chapter. The global
struggle for justice and accountability must continue
and must be intensified, building on the legacies of the
ICTR, the ICTY and, indeed, of the hybrid tribunals.

Finally, I would like to place on record my
appreciation to the Security Council and to the
Secretary-General for having given me the opportunity
to serve as Prosecutor of the ICTR, and in that way,
to take leadership of the investigation and prosecution
process at the peak of the Tribunal's workload, during
the implementation of the completion strategy, and
through the transition phase as we establish the
Residual Mechanism. I am indeed immensely grateful
to everyone for that honour.

