Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Let me also
like to thank Nickolay Mladenov and Stephen O'Brien
for their briefings.

This is the final Middle East open debate of New
Zealand's current Security Council term. We think
it appropriate, therefore, to reflect on the Council's
collective response to the grave and intensifying
peace-and-security challenges confronting the region.
Over the past two years, New Zealand has sought to
challenge the passivity that has often characterized
the Council's response to these problems. We have
encouraged Council colleagues to focus on identifying
practical contributions to preventing and resolving
these conflicts, and we have put forward our own ideas
for action to support progress. Frankly, it has been an
uphill battle.

The forces that gave rise to these conflicts are
complex and intractable. And often, the Council has
allowed itself to outsource to other players the role
envisaged for it in the Charter of the United Nations
as the principal international organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Today
I will focus on three specific situations where we need
to make progress.

First, on Syria, after more than five years of brutal
conflict and intolerable suffering for the Syrian people,
it is shocking that those with the power to halt the
war continue to delay, equivocate and escalate, rather
than genuinely pushing for a political solution. As my
Prime Minister underlined to the Council last month
(see S/PV.7774), the key steps needed are clear to all:
a nationwide ceasefire, negotiations on a meaningful
political transition and a united front for fighting
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other
terrorist groups.

We were deeply disappointed that the efforts by the
United States and Russia to chart a way out of the Syrian
crisis broke down. We were appalled that the breakdown
was followed by a devastating escalation in bombing,
particularly of eastern Aleppo. We were outraged that
the alleged pursuit of terrorists was used to justify
large-scale indiscriminate attacks, for which civilians
have paid the price. And in the face of all of that, the
Council has been unable to act, as was demonstrated
so clearly 10 days ago. We therefore welcome the
resumption of diplomatic efforts in Switzerland last
weekend and are encouraged those discussions are
continuing. Those taking part in the Lausanne process
have the opportunity and responsibility to translate
these talks into making a meaningful and sustained
difference for Syrians. But so too does this Council.

As is widely known, New Zealand has, with the
active support of a number of other Council members,
made an effort in recent days to promote a new approach
to a possible Council resolution. Our immediate
priority has been to de-escalate the current Violence,
particularly in eastern Aleppo, which could be achieved
by ending attacks against civilians. We also wanted to
take steps to build trust, for example, through medical
evacuations and pauses for humanitarian access.

We have been encouraged that all Council
members have been prepared to engage in discussions
on our draft resolution. But it has also been apparent
that the level of distrust between key players is high,
as is scepticism about the prospects for a meaningful
outcome. We find that very sad. If we can do nothing,
we will only confirm the view prevalent in many of our
populaces that the Security Council is not capable of
fulfilling its responsibilities under the Charter.

Secondly, with respect to Yemen, 18 months after
the actions of the Houthi and their allies tipped Yemen
into conflict, all sides to the conflict now need to do
much more to pursue a sustainable peace. As in Syria,
civilians on both sides have borne the brunt of this
conflict. Thousands have been killed. Most Yemenis
are now in need of humanitarian assistance. Millions
are at risk of famine. And there is an increasingly
serious risk of economic collapse, which would further
exacerbate the suffering.

Like others, New Zealand was shocked by
the coalition air strike against a funeral in Sana'a
on 8 October, which resulted in significant levels
of civilian casualties. We are encouraged by the
Coalition's response in moving quickly to acknowledge
its responsibilities and investigate the circumstances of
this tragic event. Urgent steps are now needed to ensure
such incidents do not happen again and that those
responsible are held to account.
But our central focus on the Council must be
on ending the fighting. We welcome the ceasefire
announced by the Secretary-General's Special Envoy
and due to begin later today. We urge all involved
to respect its terms and use this opportunity to
commit i genuinely and fully - to achieving a
political solution. We extend our strong support to the
ongoing efforts by the United Nations Special Envoy,
the Quad countries, Kuwait and others in the region to
maintain momentum towards a political solution to this
crisis. The Council must be ready to act in support of
their efforts.

Thirdly, with regard to Israel and Palestine, it has
been deeply disappointing to witness the continued
stagnation of efforts to resolve the decades-old conflict
between Israelis and Palestinians. During our time
on the Council, we have seen several initiatives to
encourage progress, including by my delegation. None
has borne fruit in the continued absence of a genuine
will by leaders on both sides to make the hard decisions
and tough compromises necessary to break the current
deadlock and put peace ahead of short-term thinking
and self-interest.

I would draw on Amos Oz's recent eulogy for
Shimon Peres - where now are the brave leaders who
recognize that peace is not only possible but necessary,
because the Israelis and Palestinians have nowhere
else to go? Instead, what we have seen has been the
continuation of actions and trends that take us further
and further away from the possibility of a negotiated,
two-State solution.

Israel's continuedpoliciesofsettlementconstruction
and demolitions are particularly concerning, as last
Friday's Arria Formula meeting underlined. As my
Minister stressed to the Council last month, no amount
of spin or any criticism of well-intentioned Israelis and
others can hide the fact that these settlements are a
violation of Israel's international obligations and have
profoundly negative implications for the peace process.
The significant expansion of these settlements deep
into the West Bank increasingly calls into question the
continued viability of any future Palestinian State. We
call on Israel to stop the settlements and the demolitions.

Continued inflammatory rhetoric, incitement
and acts of violence are also profoundly damaging
to prospects for peace. We continue to see attacks on
Israeli security and civilians, at times with the tacit
acceptance or outright encouragement of elements of
the Palestinian leadership. This is unacceptable and is
further eroding what trust remains between the parties.
The Palestinian Authority must do all it can to prevent
and condemn such attacks.

The only alternative on offer to a two-State solution
is a future of perpetual occupation, characterized by
endless violence and increasingly brutal oppression.
This scenario should provide a compelling rationale for
engagement and action by the Security Council. And
yet it has been almost eight years since the Security
Council last passed a resolution on the issue. In July, the
Council was unable even to acknowledge the Quartet's
latest report (S/2016/595, annex). We fervently hope
that Council members will commit themselves to
supporting action to reaffirm the need for a two-State
solution and enable practical steps towards making it
a reality.

