Mrs. d'Achon (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting, and to thank Sir Kieran
Prendergast for his very useful briefing.

It is clear from Sir Kieran's briefing that, after the
encouraging progress in the first half of this year, the
peace process in Bougainville has recently experienced
delays and difficulties. We see three reasons for this.
First of all, delays in the weapons collection plan could
delay the peace process as a whole. Completion of
stage II was scheduled for September and that has been
extended to 24 December. Secondly, there is the
fragility of the mechanisms for compensation and
reintegration, which has led to some frustration. The
Governments of Papua New Guinea and Australia have
promised sizeable sums for the parties and this is an
element that is vital to the success of the process. We
hope that these amounts will soon be able to be used in
a balanced way for disarmament, compensation and
also development purposes.

Thirdly, there have been weapons stolen for
compensation purposes. This causes delay in the arms
collection. We share the analysis of the Secretariat that
this is not a sign that the fighting will resume, but
rather a sign of a wish to obtain funds and that wish
should not be encouraged.

The period that lies ahead will be decisive. The
deadline of 24 December for weapons collection is a
date that must be respected if we are not to see the
peace process endangered and the two other sectors at
an impasse. In this respect, Sir Kieran mentioned the
prospect of elections in the second half of 2003 and I
would like to take up a question that was raised by the
Ambassador of Mexico in this regard. In Sir Kieran's
opinion, will the time periods be met for stage III and
what could the Political Office do so that the elections
can be held as scheduled?

There are other elements besides the peace
process. Prospects have improved somewhat with the
establishment of a weapons collections system by the
Alpha Company based on the Bougainville Agreement.
But many problems remain. As many delegations have
said, there is the refusal of Francis Ona to come back
into the peace process.

And lastly, and here again I am repeating what
other speakers have said before me, the economic
situation is still serious on the island and this could
jeopardize the prospects for lasting peace. The
mobilization of the international community remains
more necessary than ever. It is in this context that the
Security Council must consider the question of
mandate renewal for the Political Office.

The French delegation feels that two elements
need to be taken into account. First, the Political Office
is playing a major role in the peace process. Given the
important deadlines coming up in the first half of 2003,
it seems hard to imagine that the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville should not be present
at that time. On the other hand, we do not want to
encourage extensive delays in the process. The
mandate was to come to an end at the end of 2002,
according to the original agreement, so we would like
to see the extension of the mandate accompanied by
important progress to make up for the delays.

