Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The international community has recently made efforts
to halt further escalation of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, as demonstrated by the three Security Council
resolutions and the statement by the "quartet".
Additionally, United States Secretary of State Powell
went to the region to carry out mediation activities.
Many countries, including China, have in their own
fashion called on the parties to implement the
Council's resolutions.

However, to our regret, there has not been any
satisfactory change in developments in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The Israeli army still refuses to
withdraw and has intensified its siege of the Palestinian
leader, Mr. Arafat, and of the Church of the Nativity.
Bloodshed among innocent civilians continues.

The immediate withdrawal of troops by Israel is
the deciding factor that will determine whether there
can be a real change of course in the conflict. We
support all efforts urging Israel to withdraw its troops.

The escalation of violent activities has created an
extremely grave humanitarian situation. We find
Israelis and Palestinians, as well as Chinese nationals,
among the victims of the suicide bombs. Such acts of
violence must be condemned. However, to the world's
great dismay, the humanitarian tragedy caused by the
Israeli army's brutal military attacks continues. We
favour an investigation of the humanitarian situation in
Palestine, particularly of what has actually occurred in
the Jenin refugee camps. The United Nations
Commission on Human Rights has already adopted a
resolution on this issue and has created an inquiry
commission. We call upon Israel and Palestine to assist
the work of that group. We express our deep concern at
the plight of the Palestinian civilians. We call upon the
international community to increase its humanitarian
assistance. We call upon Israel to provide assistance
and to facilitate the work carried out by international
humanitarian relief agencies.

The international community has reached
agreement that third-party involvement is necessary to
end the vicious cycle of violence. We appreciate and
support the efforts made in this regard by the
Secretary-General, Kofi Annan. Yesterday, he put
forward a proposal for the deployment of a
multinational force. China will thoroughly study that
proposal. We hope that Israel, Palestine and the
international community will respond positively and
constructively to the Secretary-General's proposal and
will establish without delay a third-party mechanism to
create conditions favourable to the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002).

