Mr. Taiana (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, let me congratulate you and your delegation,
Madam President, for taking the initiative to hold an
open debate on a partnership with regional
organizations. I also express my Government's
satisfaction for the presence of the distinguished
representatives of regional and subregional
organizations, and the Secretary-General.

Over the past 15 years, there have been initiatives
aimed at establishing a partnership between the United
Nations and the regional organizations. They include
high-level meetings under the leadership of the
Secretary-General, adoption of Security Council
resolution 1631 (2005) and publication of the
Secretary-General's report on a regional-global
security partnership: challenges and opportunities
(S/2006/590). We have seen the strengthening of
operational cooperation between the United Nations
and the associated organizations in the areas of
peacekeeping and international security. This
cooperation has covered conflict prevention, where we
consider ensuring respect for human rights in all its
aspects to be a basic tenet of our foreign policy.

In the recent past, most of the conflicts on the
Security Council's agenda have essentially been the
result of civil wars, often caused by political
dictatorships, blatant Violations of human rights,
religious and ethnic persecution and economic
exclusion.

Quite often, internal conflicts have expanded to
whole regions. For this reason, we support the creation
of a regional capacity for the protection of human
rights through strong institutions. We share the
Secretary-General's strategic vision that building
institutional capacity is one of the goals of the
partnership with regional organizations as a tool for
preventing conflicts.

Today more the ever, the regional organizations
must play a major role both in the prevention and
solution of conflicts and in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Close geographical proximity and close
historical and cultural ties among their members give
the regional organizations comparative advantages for
better understanding the root causes of regional
conflicts and finding peaceful solutions to these
problems.

Recent United Nations peacekeeping operations
have taken place in close cooperation with regional,
subregional and intergovernmental organizations. An
example in Latin America is the case of Haiti, where
the Organization of American States (OAS) has entered
into a strategic partnership with the United Nations,
facilitating the fulfilment of the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
through the leadership and experience accumulated
during voter registration. That has been essential for
the free and fair elections that led to the current
democratic Government of Haiti.

The Charter of the United Nations confers
primary responsibility for peacekeeping and
international security on the Security Council. Chapter
VIII of the Charter specifies the role of regional
organizations for resolving conflicts. The recently
created Peacebuilding Commission should be
incorporated into this framework. That could
contribute to increased coordination among regional
organizations and the United Nations through the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, thus creating in the
post-conflict phase synergies that would help construct
the basis of a cooperation which, by taking advantage
of existing complementary elements, would avoid
unnecessary duplication of effort.

Systematic cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, with a clear
distribution of functions and appropriate capacities,
will increase the effectiveness of the international
community in preventing conflicts, allow them to
respond rapidly when conflict breaks out and provide
solutions for a lasting peace. To that end, as the
Secretary-General has suggested in his recent report,
balanced distribution of capacities and resources is
needed in all regions, so that the knowledge of regional
organizations may be used, in the event of conflict,
under the legitimate authority of the Security Council.

At the same time, given the existing fink between
security, peace and development, we believe that the
specialized knowledge of regional organizations,
whose original mandates were focused on promoting
economic integration and trade, may also be useful for
guaranteeing the success of strategies for economic
growth and stability.

The Outcome Document of the 2005 World
Summit stressed strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter. In order to accelerate this process, it will be
necessary not only to eliminate discrepancies between
the capacities of the subregional, regional and global
organizations, but also partner organizations must
define themselves in terms of the Charter provisions
under which they operate.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
support for the draft presidential declaration presented
by the delegation of Greece, which, together with
implementation of resolution 1631 (2005) and the
current debate, may engender solutions for the
operational problems identified by the Secretary-
General in his report of 28 July so that strengthened
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations may help us to deal with
the new challenges and threats of our age.
