Mr. Shen Guofang (China)(spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation is very appreciative to you, Mr.
President, personally and to the United States delegation
for all the arrangements you have made. At the same
time, we wish to thank the Vice-Minister of External
Relations of Angola, Mr. Chicoti, for attending our
meeting today and for his statement. We also wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Prendergast and Mr.
Fowler for their briefings.

Through Mr. Prendergast's briefing, we are able to
ascertain very clearly that the humanitarian situation in
Angola is far from optimistic and remains extremely
serious. We hope that the international community will
respond positively to the Secretary-General's appeal,
made in his report (S/2000/23 of 14 January 2000, to intensify international support to Angola and to actively
respond to the 2000 United Nations Consolidated Inter-
agency Appeal for Angola.

It is well known that UNITA should bear the main
responsibility for the situation in Angola. UNITA has
long refused to fulfil its commitments under the Lusaka
Protocol and defied the resolutions of the Security
Council. It has used the diamonds produced in the area it
controls to engage in illegal arms trade, constantly creates
trouble and attacks innocent civilians, having gone as far
as attacking United Nations humanitarian personnel. All

 

these actions should be condemned and sanctioned by the
international community. We strongly appeal for the
relevant parties to abide earnestly by the resolutions of the
Security Council and cease the provision of weapons and
any other form of support to UNIT A.

The Chinese delegation highly appreciates the
excellent effort of the Chairman of the sanctions
Committee, Ambassador Fowler, and his colleagues to
improve the sanctions system against UNITA. Ambassador
Fowler's work has yielded great results. We were happy to
learn that the international community has recently reached
a higher degree of consensus and has adopted increasingly
concerted measures with regard to sanctions against
UNITA. These sanctions are yielding unprecedented results.
We hope that the expert panel of the Security Council
Committee will yield practical results in its work and will
present a satisfactory report to the Security Council as early
as possible.

We have repeatedly emphasized in various forums that
sanctions against UNITA are not an end in themselves, but
a means to create the necessary conditions for reaching a
lasting political resolution of the Angola problem. We hope
the international community will take concerted action so
that UNITA will lay down weapons, cease hostilities and
take the path of national reconciliation as soon as possible.
We support the role played by the United Nations, on the
basis of Security Council resolution 1268 (1999), in setting
up a new Office in Angola. We hope the Secretariat will be
able to complete the Status-of-Mission Agreement with the
Angolan Government and that the mission will be able to
start its work as soon as possible.

Lastly, I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
the Secretary-General on his appointment of Ambassador
Gambari as his Special Adviser on African issues. We hope
that this nomination will infuse new vitality into the cause
of peace for Angola.

