Mr. Koenigs: First of all, I would like to thank
Council members very much for the continued support
that they have expressed, unanimously, for the peace
process in Afghanistan and for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. On a personal note,
I would like to thank the Council very much for the
warm welcome and the support expressed for me in
meeting the difficult challenges of the job that I have
taken on.

I appreciate very much the suggestion of the
representative of Japan regarding a visit by the
Security Council to Afghanistan, which would express
once again the commitment of the Council, and we will
do everything to prepare ourselves for such a visit.

All speakers expressed - and we share -
concerns about the security situation, violations of
human rights, the inequality with regard to women's
rights and issues relating to poppy cultivation and drug
trafficking. Be assured that this is a major challenge for
the Afghan Government, for the donor community as a
whole and for the United Nations and all of its funds
and agencies, including UNAMA.

We will continue to develop our activities on the
basis of the principle of Afghan ownership with regard
to all development in Afghanistan. We will step back,
behind the leadership of the Afghan Government, in
each and every operation. In addition to the briefing
that I gave, I was asked to explain some of the
questions posed by the representative of Denmark, and
I would like to respond. Yes, we will continue the
active dialogue with the Government institutions at the
national level and, particularly, the provincial level.
Some speakers commented on our proposal for the
enlargement of the UNAMA presence in the provinces.
After the election, some of the locations were vacated
by international assistance personnel, so some of the
provinces have space which can be utilized by the
agencies and by sub-offices in the field through
UNAMA. We would like to use some of those facilities
and co-locate with United Nations agencies already
present so as to increase both the visibility of
international support and assistance to the political
institutions of the Afghan Government. This inclusivity
might improve the security situation in those areas,
because one of our experiences in the north was that,
where there is an international presence, where there is
a Government presence and where there is an office
from our side, the security situation can improve.
Nevertheless, I know that we have to assess the
security situation prevailing in those provinces before
we make that outreach. We will not create new regional
offices, but from the regional offices we would like to
reach out with small entities into those places where
that is advisable.

The split between the two pillars in UNAMA is
more administrative than substantive in nature.
Through my leadership, I will ensure that they
cooperate so that human rights and gender, as
overarching elements in the respective pillars, are not
separated. I shall ensure that there is close coordination
between those two elements of our mandate.

I will certainly prioritize reasonable and
sophisticated recruitment, in particular as regards our
political staff in the region. In coming to the Mission, I
learned that the human capital and quality of our staff
is the main asset in our efficiency and success. The
respect we have gained, not only in the international
community but in particular among the Afghan
authorities and people in general, is due to the high
quality of our staff. We will do everything to maintain
it, and even to strengthen it.

The representative of Slovakia asked about how
we will compose the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board, and when it will be operational. I
would be pleased if it could be operational as soon as
possible. I have spoken on that matter to the President
of Afghanistan, who has expressed the same opinion.
Nevertheless, it is very difficult to reconcile the two
principles for such a joint coordination and monitoring
board: effectiveness and representativity. The
representativity pertains to donors, troop contributors
and regional stakeholders. Work is still in progress, and
I will take the opportunity provided by my visit to New
York to speak with some of the stakeholders in
question.

I have very much appreciated the fact that the
representative of the United States stressed the
importance of human capital development in
Afghanistan. That is one of our main points to be
stressed in the future, because Afghan ownership
means the development of Afghan capacity in the
country. We have dedicated our efforts in Kabul and
the provinces to that aim.

Finally, let me once again express my gratitude
for the unanimous support UNAMA enjoys from the
members of the Security Council.

