Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers
in thanking you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting, which represents a timely opportunity
to take stock of the ongoing work on reviewing the
peacebuilding architecture. I thank you also for the
informative concept note (S/2016/104, annex). I wish
also to thank the briefers, namely, ambassador Kamau of
Kenya, Ambassador Skoog of Sweden and Ambassador
Rosenthal for their respective presentations. As a
current member of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), Malaysia subscribes to a number of points and
issues elaborated by the briefers. I wish also to further
contribute to discussions with the following points.

As stressed by the briefers, 2015 and 2016 are crucial
for the peacebuilding agenda, not least in respect of the
ongoing peacebuilding architecture review process.
I take this opportunity to express support for Angola
and Australia in leading the ongoing intergovernmental
negotiations on the review outcome. We are confident
that the comprehensive, transparent and inclusive
approach of the co-Chairs will yield an outcome that
enjoys broad support and consensus among all Member
States, partners and stakeholders.

The year 2015 saw a significant and positive shift
in the PBC's approach, particularly with regard to its
advocacy role. The Commission's engagement with
States not on its formal agenda, namely, Burkina
Faso, Papua New Guinea and Somalia, demonstrated
that the PBC has the flexibility to engage outside a
predetermined scope.

It is noteworthy that the Commission was early
able to adopt a regional approach in supporting United
Nations efforts to respond to the Ebola outbreak in
West Africa. Such engagement indicates that the
PBC possesses the latent ability to act in a preventive
capacity.

It is important that the ongoing review exercise
recognize this potential and consider the necessary
measures to maintain or strengthen it further. We fully
agree withe Ambassador Kamau's observations that in
the long run investments in preventing the outbreak,
escalation, continuation and recurrence of conflict are
considerably less costly and sustainable than those
associated with reacting and responding to crises. In
the long term, strengthening the PBC's preventive
capacity and role also contributes to deepening a
culture of prevention within the United Nations system
and on the shared Charter-mandated responsibility of
sustaining peace.

The concurrent reviews of the peacebuilding
architecture, of United Nations peace operations and
of resolution 1325 (2000) present an opportunity to
address the challenge of possible fragmentation as
well as to promote better synergy, coordination and
complementarity in the work of the relevant bodies,
agencies and mechanisms of the United Nations
towards achieving the core objective of promoting
and sustaining peace. The three review processes
share an underlying aspect, namely, the pursuit of an
integrated approach that links development, human
rights and security while remaining fully mindful of
the primacy of politics in peacebuilding efforts and the
peace process. In that context, my delegation wishes to
underscore the linkages and the need for peacebuilding
architecture review outcomes to be aligned with the
goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1).

The eradication of hunger and poverty, economic
revitalizaton and stabilization, including by increasing
the revenue-generating capacity of countries in
transition, must be counted among the core objectives
of peacebuilding initiatives. At the same time, we also
support proposals to strengthen the participation of
women and youth in peacebuilding. Therefore, overall
peacebuilding efforts should incorporate inclusive
approaches and policies involving all stakeholders of
conflict-affected countries.

We also call for enhanced coordination and
concerted efforts by United Nations agencies to address
fragmentation and avoid working in silos, as reflected
in the various reports of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture,
the Peacebuilding Commission and resolution 1325
(2000). We furthermore believe that there is room in
the review process for recommendations to enhance
the PBC's engagement and collaboration with regional
organizations and actors, as well as with international
financial institutions, including through more effective
partnerships with such actors.

In that regard, the conclusions emanating from
the Commission's meeting on transition finance and
peacebuilding in Somalia on 2 November 2015 could
prove instructive. In recognizing the woeful state
of funding for peacebuilding initiatives, Malaysia
reaffirms its support for the recommendation of the
Advisory Group of Experts that l per cent of total
contributions to the United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions budgets
be allocated to the Peacebuilding Fund, not only as
a symbolic gesture but also as seed funding towards
ensuring predictable and sustainable funding for future
peacebuilding efforts and activities.

With a view to delivering as one, it is equally
important that the relationship between the Commission
and the Security Council be strengthened. Certain
proposals on reinforcing the Commission's advisory
role to the Security Council, including by increasing
formal and informal dialogue, closer engagement with
penholders and greater coordination and planning of
all activities, including meetings and field visits with
the Security Council presidency, can ensure that the
Council integrates important peacebuilding objectives
in its deliberations. In our view, that requires only
procedural tweaks.
In conclusion, Malaysia believes that the present
review process affords us a crucial opportunity to
improve the mandate and function of the PBC, which
is a unique entity with enormous potential. The review
of the peacebuilding architecture must position the
PBC so that it is better able to leverage its strengths in
advocacy and in promoting and sustaining peace, not
only in post-conflict scenarios but also in a preventive
capacity. As such we are hopeful that the review
outcome will be adopted in a timely manner with a view
to enhancing the PBC's work, including in its relations
with the Council.

