Mr. Rishchynski (spoke in French): As the new
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Canada,
it is an immense honour and pleasure for me to be here
this morning, and I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to take the floor.

(spoke in English)

I am pleased to address the Council on behalf of the
Sierra Leone country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

A decade following the civil war, Sierra Leone is
poised to shift its national strategic focus from
peacebuilding to economic development. As both the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General and
my predecessor have previously noted, that represents
a remarkable success story for post-conflict recovery.
Yet, it is not quite finished. Sierra Leone will require
continued support as it prepares for elections next year,
strives to address the enduring challenges in the areas
of good governance, youth employment and combating
drug trafficking, and builds resilience to weather
unexpected political and economic shocks.

Drawing upon the findings of a delegation visit to
Freetown earlier this year, I would like to highlight
issues of particular importance and outline the
Peacebuilding Commission's plans for the coming six
months.

As the Executive Representative noted, the
presidential, legislative and local elections in 2012
have great symbolic importance. A campaign free of
intimidation, conducted in a spirit of open dialogue and
accepted by all, will signal that Sierra Leone has built a
stable and democratic foundation upon which to build a
sustainable peace. As the elections approach, it is
essential that all actors involved build greater trust and
generate a common understanding of the ground rules
with respect to reforming the electoral laws and
making further progress on implementing the
agreements reached in the joint communique of April
2009. As the Security Council considers the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), I would like to emphasize the
central role that the mission has played in facilitating
dialogue and assisting electoral preparations, as well as
to commend Mr. Von der Schulenburg for his personal
leadership.

In that respect, the appointment of the Sierra
Leone People's Party presidential candidate opens the
door for the main political parties to engage in a more
open, regular and productive high-level dialogue. The
National Electoral Commission must deliver not just a
technically sound election, but also one that is widely
accepted by all participants. The Political Parties
Registration Commission will continue to be an
important forum for resolving potential disputes. It is
critical that the relationship between those bodies and
the major political parties improve. The Sierra Leone
Police has served as a neutral and effective force for
stability in the recent past, but continues to face serious
equipment shortages. The current limited supply of
police vehicles poses a serious transportation constraint
and could hamper response times to remote areas
during the election period. I would urge all donors to
help fill that capacity gap.

Looking beyond the electoral period, lasting
solutions to many of Sierra Leone's challenges will
depend on increasing private sector investment. Good
governance is essential for spurring such progress. The
Anti-Corruption Commission continues to advance an
ambitious agenda that includes the prosecution of
egregious offenders, public outreach and regular
institutional reviews. Such efforts have yielded steady
progress in the World Bank's ease of doing business
rankings. They must continue and accelerate.

Sierra Leone is also experiencing a surge of
investment in the extractive sector. That holds promise
for generating growth and reducing dependency on aid,
but it also brings associated risks. Resources must be
managed in a transparent manner that delivers benefits
to the population as a whole. Sierra Leone can build on
its efforts to mitigate such risks through its
participation in the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative and the Kimberley Process.

Economic growth represents an essential
component in the long-term resolution of Sierra
Leone's high levels of youth unemployment, but the
country has taken sensible steps in the short term.
Since the previous delegation Visit in 2010, which
focused closely on the issue, the Government has
established a National Youth Commission, appointed a
new Youth Commissioner, restructured relevant
responsibilities to create a Ministry of Youth and
Sports, and revised its national strategy to better match
supply-side interventions to actual market demand.
Those are most welcome developments.
As the 201] World Development Report argues,
creating jobs is a core component of peace
consolidation, but it often receives too little attention.
By providing additional support to Sierra Leone,
international partners could seize the opportunity to
begin implementing the recommendations of the World
Development Report and to invest in Sierra Leone's
long-term success.

Sierra Leone continues to face the unwelcome
threat posed by drug trafficking and organized crime.
Recognizing the regional nature of the problem, the
West African configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission held a joint meeting earlier this year, with
the high-level participation of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Office
for West Africa, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and INTERPOL. The discussion yielded
several relevant findings.

First, while Sierra Leone is the most advanced
member of the West Africa Coast Initiative, the slow
pace of progress elsewhere hinders intelligence-sharing
and early warning. The limited capacity Within the
region to track financial flows is another significant
challenge, especially given the risk that illicit profits
may aggravate corruption. Secondly, the West Africa
Coast Initiative requires additional funding to meet the
scale of outstanding needs.

Allow me to close by briefly outlining the
Peacebuilding Commission's forthcoming activities. In
October, the Sierra Leone configuration will meet to
consider the second annual joint progress report on the
Agenda for Change, prepared by the Government of
Sierra Leone in collaboration with the United Nations,
international partners and civil society, including
women's groups. Over the course of the next six
months, I also plan to visit Sierra Leone and will
convene a meeting to assess preparations for the 2012
elections, featuring the participation of relevant Sierra
Leonean officials. I will convey the findings of that
visit and the conclusions of the Peacebuilding
Commission's deliberations to the Security Council in
due course.

Finally, let me express my gratitude to both the
Government of Sierra Leone and UNIPSIL. Sierra
Leone has demonstrated what strong national
leadership can achieve in the face of adversity.
UNIPSIL, ably led by Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General Michael von der Schulenburg, in
conjunction with the entire United Nations country
team, has developed an innovative and integrated
approach to peacebuilding that is yielding impressive
results. It is a privilege to work with such strong
partners. The Peacebuilding Commission stands ready
to continue to assist Sierra Leone's efforts to
consolidate peace.

