Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): The
United States is dismayed that the Security Council again
must consider measures to compel UNITA to abide by its
commitments under the Lusaka Protocol. Last August, we
were brought to this same point when UNITA refused to
complete its demobilization, cease its broadcasts of hostile
propaganda on Radio Vorgan, and permit the extension of
State administration. Only in October, after the targeted
sanctions imposed by the Council took effect, did UNITA
take steps to complete these tasks.

Thus far UNITA has refused to take the final steps
to permit the full extension of State administration.
According to the recent reports from the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola, UNITA has retained and
even reconstituted its fighting force. This is unacceptable.
It delays the end of decades of war and the efforts of the
international community to assist in the reconstruction and
development of the country.

The United States calls on UNITA to abide by its
commitments under the Lusaka Protocol and begin the
long-awaited era of national reconciliation and healing.
This draft resolution demands that UNITA permit the
extension of State administration, complete its
demilitarization, cooperate fully with the United Nations
Observer Mission to verify its demobilization and put an
end to the violence. UNITA must take its place as a
democratic political party.

The United States will vote in favour of this draft
resolution, not to undermine UNITA's activities as a legal
political party, but to push UNITA to change its
behaviour. The draft resolution does not impose sanctions
immediately, but rather gives UNITA one last chance to
fulfil its obligations and avoid additional sanctions.

The United States urges UNITA to make use of this
opportunity. If UNITA does not act now, the sanctions
will come into effect on 25 June. Decisive action by
UNITA now will also enable the Council to remove the
sanctions imposed last fall.

The sanctions contained in this draft resolution are
targeted and strong. There are clear criteria for their
imposition as well as for their lifting. Decisive actions by
UNITA now, before 23 June, can prevent the sanctions
from entering into force.

The United States also urges the Government of
Angola to exercise patience and restraint. We are deeply
concerned about reports that Government police and

 

security forces have committed acts of violence against
UNITA supporters. These actions damage confidence in the
peace process. We welcome the steps the Angolan
Government has taken recently to curb these offences and
urge the Angolan Government to continue these efforts. We
believe the Angolan Government must win the confidence
of UNITA followers through a campaign of reconciliation,
including by making full use of trained UNITA personnel
to provide services in areas where the Government
administration is extended. We particularly urge it do so in
the areas of health and education.

In addition, to increase the confidence of UNITA
officials in the process of the extension of State
administration, today's draft resolution urges the
redeployment of MONUA personnel to the areas where
State administration has yet to be extended. By taking this
step today, we are sending a clear invitation to the UN ITA
leadership to fulfil its obligations and join in the building
of a democratic Angola. However, unless it does so,
UNITA must understand that it will face serious
consequences for its failure to act. The people of Angola
have suffered for too long. The time has come for an end
to the stalling and an end to the fighting.

Lastly, the United States thanks the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his reasoned
recommendations to the Council during this difficult period.
We commend the personnel of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola who put their lives on the line for peace.

