Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing.

The current situation in eastern Ukraine is
tantamount to a dangerous escalation of the conflict
between separatists, rebels and Government forces.
New fronts have been opened in the conflict, and it is
now spreading to a wider geographical area. Needless
to say, that further complicates what was already a very
difficult and delicate situation with an ever-increasing
array of actors. Reports of Russian troops and military
equipment moving into Ukrainian territory are a major
concern to all of us. We note, however, that the Russian
representative to the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, Andrey Kelin, has emphatically
denied the reports.

We therefore urge both Ukraine and Russia to
resolve their differences peacefully and through
genuine dialogue and negotiation. Existing, relatively
credible frameworks such as the friendship treaty
between the two countries and the 17 April Geneva
statement are valid points of departure towards
reconciliation. Indeed, President Putin and President
Poroshenko must maintain their dialogue and build on
it like a scaffold: it is the only valid path to a mutually
acceptable diplomatic solution to the crisis. A military
solution, in our view, is not a viable one. A ceasefire
should be urgently negotiated and agreed as the first
necessary step in ending the conflict, which has left
2,000 people dead, more than 3,000 wounded and tens
of thousands displaced from their homes.

For its part, the Government of Ukraine must
continue to accommodate the legitimate aspirations
of all components of its citizenry and protect their
interests. We are confident that strident efforts towards
greater inclusiveness will foster the necessary national
cohesion. That has the potential of reducing hostilities
and acts of agitation and of establishing the foundations
for building a peaceful, prosperous and united nation.

Throughout our engagement on this issue, we have
consistently stressed the need to uphold universally
agreed principles and the sanctity of international law.
That of course begins with respect for the principles
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations, and
those are the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of all States. Those are the principles that
guide Nigeria's position and have informed our stance.
We believe that only a diplomatic solution, which
is achievable by direct dialogue between the parties,
can resolve the current conflict. We urge those with
influence on the warring parties to exert that influence
and to bring it to bear on the situation in the interest of
wider international peace and security.

