Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I want to start by thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tanin, for his briefing and also express appreciation
for the interventions this morning by First Deputy
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Daeic', as well as
by Ambassador Citaku.

We welcome the formation, since the Council last
considered this agenda item, of a new government in
Kosovo. We now encourage all political actors, both
inside and outside of the government, to engage in
constructive dialogue and to continue implementation
of the reforms necessary to strengthen the rule of
law and the fight against corruption and to stimulate
Kosovo's economic development and create
employment opportunities.

We deem positive the fact that the first round of
the municipal and mayoral elections in October was
genuinely competitive and peaceful in most parts
of Kosovo. However, we regret that there were cases of
threatening behaviour and intimidation in certain Serb-
majority municipalities in the run-up to the elections.

The future of both Serbia and Kosovo lies within
the European Union (EU). In order to achieve their
European perspective, the normalization of relations
between the two countries is essential. Regional
cooperation and good neighbourly relations are pivotal
for a stable, peaceful and prosperous Western Balkans.
In that regard, it is crucial that all political leaders
in the region refrain from provocative actions and
statements. It is essential that the status issue does not
hamper Kosovo's European perspective or prevent its
membership in international organizations. We welcome
the resumption of the EU-faci1itated dialogue, which
provides an important contribution to the normalization
of relations between Kosovo and Serbia. Pristina and
Belgrade must now intensify efforts to implement
their respective parts of the agreements reached. In
that regard, we welcome the recent integration of Serb
judges into the Kosovo justice system as a most positive
development. It is critical that parallel structures
in Serb-majority areas be dismantled, and that the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
be established in a way that strengthens links between
Kosovo-Serb citizens and the Pristina Government, and
increases public trust in dialogue.

The United Nations and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo have made an
invaluable contribution to the progress made in Kosovo
since the end of the conflict. Building on that progress
to establish a truly peaceful and prosperous Kosovo,
including by engaging women and youth, will require
the constant vigilance and unwavering commitment
by all political leaders. The EU integration process,
including through the support of European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo, provides the framework to
deal with remaining challenges. By continuing to work
towards Kosovo's European perspective, Kosovo's
leaders can deliver on the expectations of their people
for a better future.

In that light, we remain interested in receiving
Special Representative Tanin's views on possible
prospects of further downsizing the Mission's structure,
size and tasks, as well as the possibility of adjusting the
reporting and briefing period from three to six months,
which is something we would support.

