Mr. Sriyono (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the duties of
the President of the Security Council for the month of
January and to assure you of my delegation's full
cooperation on the many important issues currently before
the Council. My delegation is confident that your
demonstrated leadership qualities will enable the Council
to make substantial progress.

I should also like to extend my congratulations to
Ambassador Lavrov and his delegation for the exemplary
way in which he presided over the work of the Council in
the month of December.

The Indonesian delegation would also like to express
its appreciation to the Secretary-General for submitting
the report on which our decision on extending the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) will be based. We also wish to
express our gratitude to the Friends of Georgia for having
prepared the draft resolution before us today.

A well-deserved tribute is also due to the personnel
of UNOMIG, the peace-keeping force of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the Russian Federation for their combined
contributions in deterring the further escalation of
violence and for encouraging an environment conducive
to reaching a political solution between the conflicting
parties in Georgia.

The Indonesian delegation, however, is seriously
concerned about the current situation in Georgia as it is
described in the Secretary-General's report. The protracted
yet deadlocked peace process can be understood only in
the gravest of terms. My delegation therefore supports the
efforts of Ambassador Brunner and his Deputy, Mr. Bota,
along with the efforts of the Russian Federation; they
have made a valuable contribution to the peace process.
With the prospects of any major breakthrough remaining

 

bleak at this time, my delegation appeals to the parties to
refrain from any actions that might exasperate this already
dangerous and volatile situation, which is poignantly
portrayed in deplorable humanitarian conditions in which
looting, beatings and torture have become an intolerable
aspect of everyday life for many people. Furthermore, we
note that during the current period of UNOMIG's mandate,
virtually no progress has been made concerning the serious
issue of displaced persons, while at the same time the
situation on the ground remains unsettled and tense, placing
the peace-keeping forces in harm's way.

It is against this disappointing and frustrating
background that my delegation strongly reaffirms the draft
resolution's call for the parties to agree, without undue
delay, to a framework that reflects the main tenets of this
draft resolution for achieving a comprehensive political
settlement to the crisis. In particular, we believe that the
core elements of such a framework should be based on the
premise of respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Georgia and of the rights of the multi-ethnic
people of that country.

My delegation is also of the view that as long as
people are forced into eternal submission and deprived of
their freedom of movement, enduring peace in Georgia will
remain elusive. In this regard, we cannot but express our
profound dissatisfaction with the Abkhaz authorities'
continued position of intransigence facilitating an
atmosphere that encourages the safe repatriation of
displaced persons and refugees. In this connection, my
delegation would like to recall the eighth preambular
paragraph of the declaration of the 1994 CSCE Budapest
summit, which condemns in no uncertain terms the use of
ethnic violence. We therefore urgently request the Abkhaz
authorities to accept the proposed timetable by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which would
significantly accelerate the voluntary return of refugees and
displaced persons. In addition, we call on the Abkhaz
authorities to take the appropriate steps to fully cooperate
with all relevant institutions assisting in resolving this crisis
- including the good offices of the Secretary-General and
the Russian Federation - to promote the expeditious and
safe return of refugees and displaced persons.

My delegation is hearted and encouraged by the close
cooperation established between the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia and the Commonwealth of
Independent States. It is patently clear that their presence
has exerted a constructive and stabilizing influence which
has prevented another outbreak of uncontrollable hostilities
with the attendant consequences. We are pleased to learn
that the quadripartite meetings have resumed and that
biweekly formal meetings with international and non-
governmental organizations relating to areas of mutual
concern and security are taking place. We are also
encouraged by the additional measures implemented by
UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping forces in the Gali
region. In this regard, we deem it imperative that the
parties live up to their commitments to provide the United
Nations and CIS personnel with security and freedom of
access so that they can continue to discharge their urgent
and important tasks with minimal disruption.

After careful consideration and thought, and in the
light of the ominous circumstances that prevail in
Georgia, my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council today, which extends the
UNOMIG mandate for an additional six-month period.
We look upon the UNOMIG mission as constituting a
vital element in the peace process, especially in the wake
of the current polarization of the two parties. Furthermore,
it is our conviction that this draft resolution accurately
addresses the concerns identified in the
Secretary-Generals report. We caution, however, that
while the draft resolution contains important
instrumentalities for achieving a political solution to this
crisis, a lasting peace cannot be imposed on the two
parties. We therefore stress that the ultimate responsibility
for arriving at a peaceful settlement rests with the two
parties.

