Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Let me thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate, which allows members
of the Council and non-members alike to express their
views on the topic "Peace-building: towards a
comprehensive approach", and for the working paper,
which suggests points of departure for our discussion.
We particularly welcome the fact that this debate
precedes the Fourth United Nations/Regional
Organizations High-level Meeting, which will discuss
cooperation for peace-building.

My delegation wishes to express appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his presence with us today
and for his important statement.

Last July, the Security Council reviewed the
complex dimensions of the causes and prevention of
armed conflicts, recognizing the importance of peace
building, particularly in post-conflict situations. In
November, the Council established a doctrine on peace
operations by adopting resolution 1327 (2000) after
careful consideration of the Brahimi Panel's
recommendations. At that time, we recognized the role
of the Security Council in support of post-conflict
peace-building. This was followed up with an
examination of our exit strategies in peacekeeping
operations, further recognizing the important role of
the Security Council in peace-building. Today, as we
seek to determine a comprehensive approach to
bringing peace, security and stability to the peoples and
regions of the world, we are, as it were, completing the
circle.

In past debates, we have examined, to some
degree, how the root causes of deadly conflicts
ultimately manifest themselves in the outbreak of war,
causing untold deaths, humanitarian suffering and
economic destruction. We have seen from our
experiences and our reviews of many conflict situations
how many of these causes have remained unchanged in
the aftermath of the bloodletting and destruction. We
have seen how deadly conflicts have recurred, for the
same reasons they started in the first place, after the
warring parties have committed themselves to a peace
process. We have learnt lessons on successes and
failures, and this debate today must - as you have
admonished us, Mr. President - point us towards a
comprehensive approach to peace-building involving
the organs of the United Nations, its funds,
programmes and agencies, the international financial
institutions and, equally, regional political and
economic organizations and institutions as partners in
an integrated, holistic approach to peace-building.

Let me make a few brief comments on the
elements which my delegation considers indispensable
to successful peace-building: where and when we
should engage in peace-building; by whom it should be
applied; and some of the instruments that might be
successfully employed.

Through the failure to address the causes of
deadly conflicts, situations of conflicts develop which
might otherwise be preventable. While we often think
of peace-building in the context of post-conflict
situations, my delegation posits that peace-building can
and must be employed in conflict prevention.
Eradicating the causes of conflict necessitates building
societies to respect the rules of law, adherence to
international norms of human rights and humanitarian
laws, and promoting economic and social development
to eliminate human suffering from poverty and disease.
These are among the challenges facing societies in pre-
and post-conflict situations.

For these and many other reasons, the
international community must View peace-building
against this background. By being pro-active in dealing
with conflicts rather than only responding to conflicts
after they have occurred, the international community
will have spared the lives and suffering of millions of
people and the resources employed in reconstruction
and rehabilitation of conflict-devastated societies could
be channelled into meaningful programmes aimed at
sustainable economic and social development.

While the United Nations and its partners pursue
peacemaking in conflict situations, the dividends of
peace must be clearly enunciated to the warring parties.
These dividends naturally include the benefits to be
derived by all parties in post-conflict peace-building.
This underscores the importance of introducing peace-
building strategies during the negotiating process and
of imbedding peace-building programmes at the very
outset in peace agreements. By so doing, we will be
able to demonstrate to the warring parties the peace
dividends that would inure to their benefit, which
would provide further inducements for peaceful
settlement of disputes.

We must consider how to ensure that our peace-
building strategies have the greatest impact. Far too
often, it appears that the international community
favours a top-down approach to peace-building. With
the exception of humanitarian assistance, the grass-
roots population tends to have the peace-building
process imposed upon them, often without regard to
their indigenous structural and societal needs; in the
process, the importance of civil society and the
important role of grass-roots non-governmental
organizations are often ignored. For this and other
reasons, we must recognize that the process of peace-
building does not end with the cessation of hostilities
and the holding of elections when in fact the conditions
for conflict remain intact. We have examples of this in
Guinea-Bissau and the Central African Republic.
While this step in the democratic process is an
obviously important element in the reconstruction
process and in the development of institutions of
government, much more needs to be done over the long
term. So often the international community appears to
be willing to expend resources on peacekeeping,
without an equal willingness to expend similar
resources on peace-building.

As we seek to answer how peace-building may be
effectively accomplished, we must clearly define the
respective roles of the partners in this process. While
their activities must be coordinated to avoid competing
interests, waste and duplication, there is a need for full
integration of programmes aimed at peace-building to
ensure their effectiveness. The United Nations, through
its organs, agencies and particularly its Secretary-
General, has a central role to play in the process of
coordination and integration. Of similar importance are
the roles that regional institutions and organizations
must have in peace-building, both at the pre- and post-
conflict stages. These regional institutions and
organizations must, however, be appropriately
equipped and structured and adequately resourced to
carry out their responsibilities. The meeting over the
course of the next two days between the United
Nations and regional organizations, convened by the
Secretary-General, is therefore most timely, and we
look forward to being briefed on the results of that
meeting.

Let me conclude by highlighting some of the
important and indispensable elements for successful
peace-building to be undertaken by the international
community as a whole. We must promote democratic
governance and the rule of law by ensuring that our
programmes develop respect for human rights,
minority rights and peace with justice. We must ensure
that the international community provides assistance to
emerging democracies, in pre- and post-conflict
situations, that promote long-term economic prosperity
and social development. We must seek to strengthen
the capacity of international financial and development
agencies to focus attention on peace-building measures
at all stages of a country's involvement in conflict. We
must provide adequate resources to regional
organizations and institutions so that they may become
pro-active at the pre- and post-conflict stages in peace-
building efforts and throughout the peace process. We
must ensure that, when threatened from without, a
nation is secure in the understanding that the
international community will provide the necessary
support for its security and territorial integrity.

We must also ensure that the programmes we
design in a post-conflict situation make adequate
provisions for disarming former combatants, for their
rehabilitation and, most importantly, for their
reintegration into society, politically, socially and
economically. We must ensure that the exploitation of
natural resources is to the benefit of the people as a
whole in the country concerned and does not support
the corrupt within and without.

Finally, no matter how much we recognize what
needs to be done to address each situation, if there is a
lack of political will by those involved in the process
and anything less than the full commitment of the
international community, both of which are
indispensable elements for successful peace-building,
our efforts will be for naught. If we bring all of these
things together in an integrated approach to peace-
building, the successes which have eluded us in the
past will finally be achieved.

