Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I wish to begin by
condemning the attacks against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali yesterday, which resulted in the loss of life of
yet another United Nations peacekeeper from Chad. I
would also like to express our deepest condolences to
the family of the victim and to the Government and the
people of Chad.

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting. Indonesia welcomes the briefings
by the Secretary-General, Ambassador Mulamula,
Ms. Maite and Ms. Vilakazi.

Challenges to peace in many conflict situations
in Africa are complex, volatile and characterized by
unprecedented civilian casualties, forced displacement
and setbacks to peace processes. Far too often, however,
we are so busy reacting to conflicts that we are unable
to prevent them and address their root causes. This
approach is not sustainable and is proving to be very
costly. I wish to underline three points.

First, shifting to a culture of prevention is a
necessity. From day one, the Secretary-General has
emphasized conflict prevention as one of his priorities,
and my delegation is very supportive of this shift.
Indonesia also endorses the concept of sustaining
peace, which emphasizes a system-wide approach to
conflict prevention. We must foster synergy between
the Security Council and other entities of the United
Nations family and harness their comparative strengths
to comprehensively address drivers of conflict.

The United Nations does not lack proper tools for
preventing conflict. The United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime have been assisting developing countries
in promoting good governance, and the Peacebuilding
Fund has been funding regional peacebuilding
initiatives in Africa. Indonesia also values the role of
the Secretary-General's good offices and of United
Nations regional offices and encourages the Secretary-
General to utilize every instrument in his preventive
toolbox to avoid the recurrence of conflict.

Secondly, the United Nations cannot prevent
and resolve conflicts in Africa single-handedly.
Through Agenda 2063 of the African Union (AU),
the people of Africa aspire to a conflict-free Africa.
In realizing this noble goal, the AU and subregional
organizations have been increasingly taking charge of
peace and security matters on the continent. Robust
partnership between the United Nations and such
organizations is therefore quintessential, and, in fact,
various forms of collaboration already exist, ranging
from the deployment of a United Nations-AU hybrid
peacekeeping mission to United Nations support for
regional counter-terrorism initiatives.

Thirdly, it is necessary to make full use of each
organization's comparative advantages. The AU and
subregional organizations have unmatched knowledge
on conflict on the continent and familiarity with
relevant stakeholders. The United Nations must always
listen to them. They also have geographical proximity to
conflicts, which gives them a strong incentive to resolve
them, and the ability to be first responders. The United
Nations should engage with them from the earliest signs
of conflict to identify workable approaches.

Meanwhile, the United Nations could provide policy
advice, political backstopping and logistical support to
AU missions. It could provide adequate resources to
ensure that the AU can complete its critical endeavours,
including by financing AU-led peace operations. In
addition, the United Nations and regional organizations
could also team up in mediation efforts. Strategic
discussion is needed on how the United Nations could
better support the development of regional mediation
capacity in Africa.

To keep peace in our region, the countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) have
been working tirelessly to promote the ASEAN Way,
with its fundamental reliance on preventive diplomacy.
Indonesia believes South-East Asia and Africa have
much to learn from each other in preventing and
resolving conflicts.

I should like to conclude by underlining that, even
when regional organizations are fully determined to
play their role, there is a limit to what they can do if the
Security Council is not united or ready to take up its
primary responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations, namely, to maintain international peace and
security. We should ensure that resources are available
for peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Expecting our
special political missions as well as our peacekeeping
missions, which, as the Secretary-General mentioned,
are mostly on the African continent, to be able to
do their noble duty with limited support is to set a
mission impossible.

As the largest troop- and police-contributing
country in the Council, I should like to pay tribute to the
brave Blue Helmets in the field, including those from
Africa, which, as a continent, is the largest collective
troop-contributor on the continent.

As the last Council member to speak before the
President, and having heard the statements of various
colleagues in the Chamber, I think it is quite clear to
all of us that we all support conflict prevention. What
is needed now is to faithfully implement preventive
diplomacy, with wisdom and vigour. Furthermore, I
second the statement by the Ambassador of the United
States exhorting us to take action. Africa is awaiting
us all.

