Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Mr. President, I am
honoured to address the Security Council today, and
I congratulate you and your friendly country Rwanda
on your presidency and skilled leadership. We would
also like to express our appreciation to the Russian
Federation for its leadership of the Council in March.
And I thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing on
developments in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and in the region.

We are already four months into this year and the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem - the territory that constitutes the State
of Palestine - remains precarious, as the political

impasse persists and conditions on the ground continue
to worsen. While many, in speaking of that impasse,
have referred to the status quo and its unsustainability,
we must face reality. There is no status quo. The situation
has in fact never ceased to change, and regrettably not
for the better.

Israel continues to pursue illegal policies aimed
at altering the demography, character and geographic
nature of the territory, directly endangering the
viability and the very possibility of a two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders. That is being
done systematically and deliberately, in grave breach
of international law. As land confiscations, settlement
construction and human rights violations continue, the
prospects for achieving that solution are diminishing.
At the same time, the belief that peace can soon be
realized is also diminishing, as expressed in growing
Palestinian civilian protests against the occupation.
Israel's violent suppression of peaceful protests
continues to cause casualties, further aggravating the
situation, as do ongoing Israeli settler terror and havoc
against Palestinian civilians and their land.

The combination is highly toxic and requires
immediate remedy. Urgent action is needed to salvage
the prospects for achieving a peaceful solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict 4 based on the long-
standing parameters that are well known to everyone
in the Chamber, parameters that form the foundation
of the two-State solution and the essence of a historic
compromise, which the Palestinian leadership has
committed itself to and the international community
widely supports. With each passing day, an opportunity
is lost to reverse the damage done by Israel's nearly
46-year military occupation and to instead promote
genuine peace, security and coexistence between the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples.

The Palestinian leadership has therefore welcomed
recent efforts by concerned parties to revive the path
of peace, including the important visit of United States
President Barack Obama to the region in March. We
welcome the priority accorded to resolving the conflict,
the renewed commitment to a just peace and the efforts
to create an atmosphere conducive to progress. We have
repeatedly proven, in word and deed, our commitment
to finding a political path forward for the achievement
of peace. We have thus sincerely engaged in follow-up
meetings with United States Secretary of State John
Kerry, as well as meetings with the Arab ministerial
follow-up committee, including at the Arab Summit in

Doha. In that regard, the Arab commitment to peace,
reaffirmed for over a decade in the context of the Arab
Peace Initiative, is unquestionable.

Yet, we know that intention alone cannot overcome
the serious obstacles posed by Israel, the occupying
Power, which have repeatedly undermined and actually
sabotaged past efforts for peace. We thus believe the
following elements are imperative for facilitating a
meaningful political process and the success of any
forthcoming initiative. Israeli settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including in
and around East Jerusalem, must cease. That would
constitute a serious signal from Israel that it is ready
to negotiate in good faith an end to the occupation.
There is a global consensus on the illegality of
Israel's settlement campaign. Moreover, everyone
is in agreement - colonization, expansionism and
annexation are entirely incompatible with ending
occupation and making peace.

Israel's leaders must realize that peace cannot
just be spoken of from lofty podiums to appease
the international community, while the occupation
continues to be entrenched. They must demonstrate
they are ready for peace and act to make it a reality.
That requires a halt to all settlement activities and
acceptance of the principle of withdrawal from the lands
forcibly seized in 1967, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. Accordingly, Israel
must also accept the global consensus that negotiations
begin on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders and
that only by negotiation can that border be adjusted
between the two sides. Those steps would contribute to
diffusing the situation, building the necessary trust and
fostering the appropriate atmosphere for the launch of
negotiations.

A further imperative is the release of Palestinian
political prisoners and detainees in conformity with
prior agreements and consistent with international law
and humanitarian principles. As indicated in our letters
to the President of the Council in past months, their
plight remains a priority for the Palestinian people and
their leadership, with 17 April recently commemorated
as "Prisoners Day". Sensitivities surrounding that issue
are high, not least because of the illegality of their
capture and the occupying Power's inhumane treatment.

Currently, 4,900 Palestinians are in Israeli
captivity, among them are 235 children, 1,200 persons
needing urgent medical treatment and 168 persons held
under administrative detention without charge or trial.

Dozens more Palestinians continue to be arrested and
detained every week in Israeli military raids throughout
the country. The brutality of their imprisonment has
drastically raised tensions, particularly following
the torture killing of Arafat Jaradat in detention in
February and the death of Maysara Abu Hamdiyeh due
to medical neglect last month, prompting widespread
civilian protests.

Likewise, the plight of Samer Issawi, whose hunger
strike has lasted for over 260 days in protest of his
re-arrest and detention without charge, has galvanized
Palestinian sentiments and remains of high concern.
We salute from this podium Issawi's courage, victory
and brave resilience in demanding his freedom and
the resilience of all Palestinian prisoners in Israeli
prisons and detention centres. While noting yesterday's
positive developments in the case ofIssawi, we reiterate
our appeal to the Secretary-General and all concerned
members of the international community, including the
European Union, the Russian Federation and the United
States as the other members of the Quartet, to continue
their efforts to compel Israel to release Issawi. He and
all other Palestinian prisoners and detainees should be
released and returned to their families and communities
and not be exiled from Palestine.

Also, we reiterate our call for an end to Israel's
blockade of the Gaza Strip, which continues to debilitate
and disfigure the Palestinian society, inflicting severe
socioeconomic and humanitarian hardship, isolation
and repression on our people, as recently highlighted
by the humanitarian coordinator in the occupied
Palestinian territory and others. While recognizing
the global financial crisis affecting all, that blockade
is totally obstructing Palestinian economic subsistence
and must end. It is an unjust situation for our people
to bear, as well as for the donor community, which is
constantly asked to pay the price for Israel's illegal
occupation measures.

Partial or temporary remedies will not help; all
of those critical issues require a political solution. As
stated at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians, convened in March 2013, by Norway's
Minister for Foreign Affairs, efforts to solve Palestine's
acute economic problems are essential, but will only be
meaningful within the framework of a negotiated two-
State solution. That is true of all the problems and crises
that persist and are symptoms of the larger problem: the

continuation of the conflict and the absence of a just
solution.

The basis for that solution is clear and present in
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map. What is needed is
the political will to take action on that basis in order to
overcome the prevailing obstacles and to advance serious
negotiations so as to resolve all core issues within a set
time frame. For that to happen, Israel cannot continue
to be absolved of its legal obligations. It must be held
accountable. The tangible efforts of the international
community to compel Israel to abide by the law are
long overdue and should not be considered optional.
They are vital to stabilizing the situation and to giving
peace a chance. The political impasse is unsustainable.
Efforts to simply manage the conflict are unacceptable,
as evidenced by the mounting pressure and protests in
the occupied Palestinian territory against the backdrop
of instability in the region.

We strongly hope that Secretary of State Kerry
succeeds in his efforts, along with other regional and
international partners, to launch a credible peace
process. Those efforts must include the Security Council.
The Council cannot remain passively on the sidelines,
abdicating its responsibilities vis-a-vis the achievement
of a lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
and the establishment of peace and security in our
region. Furthermore, in that context, we support the
efforts of the Arab ministerial delegation that will soon
visit various capitals, including Washington, DC, with
the aim of promoting a political horizon.

For our part, I once again in this Chamber reaffirm
the commitment of the Palestinian leadership to a
peaceful settlement in accordance with the two-State
solution. However, I must stress that at the core of that
commitment is our obligation to preserve the dignity of
the Palestinian people and to ensure justice for them.
Essential to that is the fulfilment of their national
aspirations and rights, including the right of our
refugees to return and the right to self-determination in
our independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

Before concluding, I wish to refer to two additional
issues. On the internal Palestinian front, we continue to
strive for an end to the political division. Active efforts
are being made, under the leadership of President
Abbas with regional support, to achieve reconciliation.
We are grateful for the international community's
support of unity, which is a national interest of the
Palestinian people and which we hope can soon be
realized. Furthermore, we are hopeful that elections
can soon take place in continuation of the democratic
path that we have chosen. In that regard, although Prime
Minister Fayyad has resigned, while commending him
for his laudable and serious work at the helm of the
Government over the past years, we wish to reassure
the international community and to ask for its support
as we undergo that transition.

Today, I must also express our grave concerns about
the situation of the Palestinian refugees in Syria. As
has been made clear in briefings over the past week, the
violent conflict raging there continues to claim many
civilian lives, including those of Palestinian refugees,
hundreds of thousands of whom have fled Syria,
again suffering displacement. That crisis underscores
the ongoing plight of the Palestinian refugees and the
need for a just, comprehensive and lasting solution
to the question of Palestine in all its aspects, as well
as the urgency of a political solution to the tragic
conflict in Syria. We appeal to the international
community, including the Security Council, to uphold
its responsibilities in that regard.

