Mr. Eliasson: It is an honour and a pleasure for
me to address the Council today, together with my
colleague and dear friend, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, the
African Union (AU) Special Envoy for Darfur. As
members may be aware, we also briefed the African
Union Peace and Security Council jointly on 12 June in
Addis Ababa. The fact that we are holding these
briefings together is an indication of the ever closer
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU, in
the spirit of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter.
Darfur is a case in point. The complexity and
scope of the conflict make it even more essential that
we strengthen regional and international collaboration.
The visit of the Security Council to several African
States, including the Sudan, only three weeks ago, is an
important manifestation of this growingly important
dimension of international relations.

Today, I will provide an overview of the political
process and the search for peace in Darfur. As members
will recall, in November 2006 at the Addis Ababa high
level consultations on Darfur, there was a unanimous
call for a re-energized political process. The Darfur
Peace Agreement of 2006 was not welcomed or
accepted by a majority of Darfurians. There was also a
clear need to bring the fragmented non-signatory
movements together and to prepare the parties for
substantive talks. By December 2006, Mr. Salim and I
were appointed as Special Envoys with this task at hand.

At my first briefing to this Council, in March
2007, I reported a sense of deep fatigue and deep
frustration on all sides, following four years of conflict
and suffering in Darfur. I cautioned, however, that
there were voices advocating status quo or a military
solution. Furthermore, I expressed concern over the
gravity of the humanitarian and security conditions on
the ground.

Still, at that time, Mr. Salim and I felt that there
was a window of opportunity, a potential for dialogue
between the parties. We noted a certain readiness among
them to engage in the political process. Conditions on
the international and regional fronts seemed relatively
favourable at that time. Momentum was being built
toward the deployment of a joint AU-United Nations
peacekeeping operation. During this period, we
developed the roadmap for the political process,
presented to this Council in June last year. The aim was
to convene substantive talks by the end of last summer.

Over the past 18 months, Mr. Salim and I have
urged the parties to prove their serious intentions,
notably by improving the security and humanitarian
situation. There was a need to build confidence and an
environment conducive to peace talks. We travelled
numerous times to movement-controlled areas of
Darfur and to locations in the region, and urged the
movements to build internal cohesion. We urged them
to adopt an issue-based approach and to focus on
common concerns in the areas of power-sharing,
08-39591
wealth-sharing and security. We strongly advised them
to come to the negotiation table with unified positions.

We also met frequently in Khartoum and Juba
with officials of the Government of National Unity,
and urged them to show preparedness and make
compromises in order to speed up the political process.
We requested them to exercise political and military
restraint. Also, we urged them to discuss with us how
the issues of power- and wealth- sharing, as well as
security could be dealt with at the talks.

During all this time, we visited over-populated
refugee camps and internally displaced person camps
on the ground. We sat under the trees with traditional
leaders and we walked through many local, tragically
empty, markets. We saw with our own eyes and felt
with our own hearts why Darfur to many is considered
forgotten and neglected. To all the people we saw, we
had the same message and were met with the same
response: it is time for a serious peace process which
brings an end to the suffering, an end to political
marginalization, an end to socio-economic inequality
and an end to the climate of insecurity and fear
prevalent today in Darfur.

Last summer, the atmosphere was positive. The
Security Council had adopted resolution 1769 (2007).
There had been no reported cease fire violations for
four months. Most movements had indicated that they
would be ready to start negotiations by the end of the
summer. Despite continuing fragmentation among
them, progress was made, notably in Arusha, Tanzania,
in August 2007, when their leading personalities
agreed on a common platform for the talks.

Based on these developments, Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and Chairperson Konare decided to
launch the first phase of the formal peace talks in Sirte,
Libya, in October. While the tone of the exchanges
between the parties was constructive, the absence of
key movements and of a consolidated National Unity
Government delegation made it extremely difficult to
engage in substantive discussions. The conditions were
just not ripe. The start of a peace process was,
however, a catalyst for the movements to intensify
their unification efforts, not least assisted by the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) in Juba.
Mr. Salim and I were encouraged by the work done to
restructure the tangled web of smaller groups. We saw
the emergence of five main groupings: the Sudan
Liberation Army (SLA)-Unity, the United Resistance
Front (URF), SLA-Abdul Shafie, SLA-Abdul Wahid
and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM)-Khalil
Ibrahim.

Unfortunately, the willingness of the movements
to embark on the road to peace has over time not been
consistent. SLA-Abdul Wahid continues to place
severe pre-conditions for participation in the talks.
JEM-Khalil Ibrahim has pursued the military track and
has been met with international criticism for doing so.
Both these movements have also refused participation
in the talks if what they call "splinter movements"
were to take part. The URF and SLM-Abdul Shafie are
basically positive to the process but are still working to
resolve internal problems. SLA-Unity has been
cooperative and declared itself ready to attend talks at
any time.

In the beginning of last fall, JEM. split and SPLM
suspended its work in the Government. Since then, the
environment has continued to deteriorate. The
incursions and stand-off between Chad and Sudan have
underscored the urgent need for good neighbourly
relations between them. The attack on Omdurman
proved that there are those who still believe in a
military solution. The destruction in Abyei showed the
lingering North-South tensions in Sudan and the
consequences of unimplemented agreements. Continued
clashes in Darfur between the movements and the
Sudan Armed Forces and among tribal militias make it
clear that this intractable conflict is still unfolding.

To this should be added continued violence and
dire humanitarian conditions on the ground.
Humanitarian access is constrained by fighting
between the movements and between them and the
Government's armed forces. Access and security have
been further curtailed by attacks on humanitarian
workers and assets, by banditry, by looting and even by
abductions and murders. This has taken a heavy toll on
humanitarian operations, not least on the delivery of
food which the World Food Programme (WFP) has had
to substantially diminish. High food prices globally
and the impending rainy season give further reasons
for alarm.

The security situation in Darfur should now be
our primary concern. In accordance with our
framework for the way forward, presented this spring,
Mr. Salim and I have, for a few months now, placed
strong emphasis on reducing the level of violence. As a
part of these efforts, we had extensive contacts with the
3
parties on convening informal security consultations
between the movements and the Government of Sudan
in Switzerland earlier this month.

In the end, JEM. and SLM-Abdul Wahid chose not
to agree to meet for such consultations at this time. For
that and other reasons, we decided to postpone.
Meanwhile, we continue to discuss security with the
parties on a bilateral basis.

Against this background, it is with much regret
that I report today that we are in a troubled state of
affairs in the political process. Since the Sirte talks, the
parties have not been willing to come together for
substantive talks. Mr. Salim and I have not sensed a
prevailing willingness on the part of the parties to
engage in confidence-building measures so as to
improve prospects for negotiations. Trust among them
has not been established and is in some cases
completely absent.

Fragmentation within the movements continues to
affect their cohesion and preparedness for talks.
Instead of coming together around issues that would
facilitate the process and improve the lives of
generations of Darfurians, some of the movements
have been engaged in power struggles and in-fighting.
They have been preoccupied with formulating
preconditions for talks and using rhetoric often distant
from reality. The original movements, SLA-Abdul
Wahid and JEM-Khalil Ibrahim, claim to be more
legitimate than the other groups. Thus, they should, in
my view, accept responsibility, exercise leadership and
promote cooperation with the other movements.

At the same time, we must recognize that the
movements have great and genuine lack of trust in the
Government of Sudan. They seriously doubt that there
will be a fair implementation of a peace accord. They
look at the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and Darfur Peace Agreement as
examples of why not to come to the negotiation table.
Continued attacks against civilians and resettlement on
land owned by people now languishing in the camps do
not foster an atmosphere of confidence. Let us also
remember that it is first and foremost the Government
of Sudan that has the resources and responsibility to
ensure protection, prosperity and a life of dignity for
all the people of Darfur and Sudan.

Mr. Salim and I have thus called several times
upon the Government to exercise maximum restraint
and be forthcoming on key issues of the conflict in
order concretely to demonstrate its commitment to a
political solution. Further, for trust to be established,
for a credible political process to be made possible and
for reconciliation to occur, respect for human rights
and the rule of law is crucial.

I often ask myself why the conflict in Darfur is so
difficult to resolve. I have come to the conclusion that
it is because it requires simultaneous harmony at four
levels: the international community; the regional
partners; the Government of National Unity of Sudan;
and, finally, the movements in Darfur. Such harmony
has, over time and in varying degrees, been
conspicuously absent.

It is now crucial that influential players from the
international community explore and analyse their
comparative advantages vis-a-vis the parties and the
region. To make progress, all must accept
responsibility. A much more efficient division of labour
is required in dealing with this crisis. There is an
urgent need for outside actors - international
organizations, Member States and especially members
of this Council - to jointly exert influence, as well as
use bilateral leverage on the parties to stop further
hostilities and take steps towards peace. A well-
prepared high-level international meeting could play a
positive catalyst role in that respect.

To succeed, we must also look at Darfur through
the broader lens of Sudan as a whole, as well as of the
region. In so doing, we should keep the following
considerations in mind.

First, the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement obviously has far-reaching
implications for Darfur. This is true in terms of
confidence-building, but also for future power-sharing
arrangements in Darfur and Sudan.

Secondly, there will be no peace in Darfur
without a normalization of relations between Sudan
and Chad. Concerted efforts are required to assist and
influence both countries to re-establish security and to
live up to existing agreements, the most recent of
which is the Dakar Accord.

Thirdly, peace will require political will and a
willingness from the parties to compromise. This also
requires that key international and regional actors come
up with more credible diplomatic, financial and socio-
economic incentives and disincentives, including
08-3959]
recovery programmes in places where conditions are
stable.

Fourthly, there must be a more rapid and effective
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The
implementation of resolution 1769 (2007) is critical for
the credibility of the international community and for
this Council and for the security and well-being of the
people of Darfur. The international community has
demonstrated solidarity with Darfur through the brave
men and women offered to UNAMID from many
nations. At the same time, I must say that hand-picking
eligible nationalities for a peacekeeping operation is
hardly consistent with the spirit of the United Nations
Charter, and it certainly complicates the peace process.

Fifthly, the quest for peace will always be
obstructed when there is an abundance of arms. More
effective efforts must be made to end the arms flow to
Darfur, in accordance with the United Nations
embargo.

Finally, the people of Darfur must be much more
actively engaged in the process. We should recall
resolution 1325 (2000) when we see that women and
children suffer the most. Ordinary citizens and
internally displaced persons have carried a heavy
burden and have already paid a huge price. Any future
agreement will be stillborn unless civil society,
traditional leaders and representatives from the
displaced communities know that their voices are
heard. Their interests - and not only those who have
taken up arms - must be respected. In this regard,
Mr. Salim and I welcome the recent commitment by
the Government to a stronger engagement with civil
society in Darfur.

I would like to conclude with a few personal
reflections. I often quote the old Swedish saying that
you can bring a horse to the waterhole, but you cannot
force a horse to drink. In the case of Darfur, there is
now reason to seriously question whether the parties
are ready to sit down at the negotiation table and make
the compromises necessary for peace. Mr. Salim and I
have tried our best to assist them. The appointment of a
full-time joint United Nations-African Union chief
mediator to continue in this quest is now imminent.
The name is to be announced as soon as the parties
have been informed. Mr. Salim and I will remain
available for advice and engagement as need be.
08-39591

However, the appointment of a chief mediator
will, in itself, of course, not bring peace to Darfur. As
mentioned, others must contribute by providing more
enticing incentives and more credible disincentives to
the parties. That may require a shift in mindset in how
the main protagonists and we all view the crisis. There
has been a tendency to compartmentalize the conflict
in Darfur, without taking sufficient account of the
national and regional dimensions.

The outside world, as much as the parties, has a
responsibility to bring an end to this tragedy. It risks
tearing apart a great nation of Africa, seriously
destabilizing the region and endangering international
peace and security. For over five years, millions of
people have suffered enormously. This simply cannot go
on. A new generation in Sudan may be doomed to a life
in conflict, a life in despair and a life in poverty. The
international community should have learned enough
lessons from other conflicts in which populations were
left to stagnate and radicalize in camps.

Therefore, we must now urgently mobilize all
available political energy inside and outside Sudan to,
first of all, stop escalation and reach a cessation of
hostilities and, secondly, lay a foundation for serious
peace talks for Darfur. But, at the end of the day, we
will not make progress unless the Sudanese themselves
show seriousness, political will and a focused
commitment to peace. It is for them to accept
responsibility and finally settle the outstanding issues
that for so long have plagued the people of Darfur and
the people of Sudan.

