Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin my statement by thanking the delegations
of Australia, Luxembourg and Jordan for preparing this
resolution (resolution 2139 (2014)) and for the flexibility
that they showed in negotiating it.

Through the unanimous adoption of resolution 2139
(2014), the Security Council has taken an important
and necessary step in helping to address the critical
humanitarian situation in Syria, which deteriorates
daily and which has tragically affected the Syrian
people. The situation has had a serious impact on the
neighbouring countries and has become a threat to
international peace and security. A void has thus been
filled, given that the presidential statement of 2 October
2013 (S/PRST/2013/15) has not been implemented, nor
did it lead to progress on the ground.

My delegation voted in favour of the resolution,
which is a forceful message that obliges all parties to
comply with international humanitarian and human
rights law, to ensure the protection of civilians and to
establish specific measures on the ground to enable
prompt, safe and unhindered humanitarian access to
the affected population throughout Syria.

We believe the reference to accountability before
the law for those who have committed human rights
violations and abuses to be of particular importance.
For my delegation, the cases that could constitute war
crimes or crimes against humanity should be referred
to the International Criminal Court.

The resolution that we have adopted must be
fully implemented in all its provisions. In the case of
non-compliance, the Council should consider additional
measures. In accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, the States Members of
the United Nations agree to accept and carry out the
decisions of the Security Council.

It is our conviction that only through a political
solution can we put an end to the humanitarian crisis.
We agree with the call by the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoy concerning the need to seek such a
political solution to the conflict. With that in mind, it is
crucial to put an end to the militarization of the conflict,
as stated in the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

