Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): For
years, as part of its responsibilities for maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
has been mobilized on the issue of chemical weapons.
After the chemical attacks in Ghouta in 2013, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2118 (2013), which
provided for the complete dismantling of the chemical
arsenal of the Syrian regime. Russia, as co-sponsor
of that resolution, had guaranteed its implementation.
Despite that guarantee, the Damascus regime has never
complied with its obligations under resolution 2118
(2013) and has never renounced - as we saw again
on 7 April - the use of chemical weapons against its
civilian population.

Five years after the Council's adoption of resolution
2118 (2013), we note that the general subject of chemical
weapons remains tragically topical. The upcoming
voting marks our fourth meeting in less than a week on
this issue. Yesterday we met in an emergency meeting
(see S/PV.8225) following a new chemical-weapons
massacre in Douma, Syria, whose appalling images
left us shocked. Last month we met to discuss the
unacceptable attack in Salisbury (see S/PV.8203). Last
year we met day after day after the terrible attack of
Khan Shaykhun. That shows the deterioration of the
situation and how serious the stakes are today for
our security.

The use of chemical weapons is so abominable
that it has been banned for almost 100 years, and the
international community began years ago to eliminate
them. As such, the chemical non-proliferation regime,
which we have patiently developed and strengthened, is
one ofthe pillars of our collective security architecture,
at the heart of our security system. Yet today it is under
serious threat. We face the cynical, barbaric and all-out
use of chemical weapons against civilian populations.

The Douma attacks once again illustrated the
abject brutality of the Syrian regime's resolute military
strategy. Such acts constitute war crimes or even
crimes against humanity. They increase the risk of
dangerous normalization - tolerating the return of
these agents of fear and death is nothing more than a
blank cheque to all those who would like to use them.
To allow the normalization of the use of chemical
weapons without responding is to let the genie of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction - which
pose an existential threat to us all - out of the bottle. It
would mark a serious and reprehensible setback to the
international order that we have all patiently helped to
develop. The consequences would be terrible, and we
would all pay the price.

That is why we cannot accept it. France will do
all it can to prevent impunity for the use of chemical
weapons. It is in that spirit that we launched an
international partnership last January. The demise
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW)-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism in November, due to the Russian veto to
protect Al-Assad's regime, sent a dangerous signal of
impunity. It deprived us of an essential deterrent tool.
It left a vacuum that the Syrian regime has rushed to
exploit, and which yesterday's atrocities have tragically
reminded us of.

The American initiative to re-establish an
independent mechanism, based on a balanced approach
and taking into account the concerns expressed by every
member of the Council, enables us to fill that glaring
void. Such a mechanism would support the inquiry
that has already been launched by the OPCW. It would
also respect the essential criteria of independence,
without any interference, and impartiality to which
each member of the Council has committed. Such
a mechanism would have a mandate to attribute
responsibility for the attacks. Only the combination of
those two criteria - independence and a mandate to
attribute responsibility - will make that mechanism
effective, and therefore dissuasive. Let me be clear: in
view of the gravity of the 7 April attack, France will
not accept any third-rate or sham mechanism whose
independence and impartiality would not be genuinely
ensured. That is what the Security Council owes today
to the Syrian victims of chemical attacks and to the
entire international community, whose security is
threatened by the chemicals in the hands of the regime
of Bashar Al-Assad.

Since the threat is of an existential nature for us
all, combating the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction must, more than ever, be among the top
priorities of the Security Council. If there is one
area in which the Council has a moral and political
responsibility to convene and act, it is this one. If there
is one domain for which the credibility of the Council
is at stake, where tactical games have no place, it is
this one.

This is one of those moments when we have no
choice but to act because what is at stake is essential.
We cannot allow the chemical non-proliferation regime,
and with it our entire security architecture - along
with the principles and values that underpin our
action - to crack and disintegrate before our very eyes.
Today's vote is one of those key moments, one of those
moments of truth. On behalf of France, I therefore call
on each member of the Council to properly gauge and
assume its responsibilities now and to vote in favour of
the American draft resolution (S/2018/321).

