I would like to begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock, and the Director of the non-governmental organization Physicians for Human Rights, Susannah Sirkin, for the quality of their briefings. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report on the humanitarian situation in Syria (S/2020/576). Unfortunately, that complex situation continues to deteriorate. It is feared that, with a health system already weakened by several years of insecurity, coronavirus disease (COVID-19) will spread rapidly, particularly in camps for internally displaced persons, where social distancing and hygiene standards can hardly be guaranteed. Nevertheless, we are pleased to note that Syria has so far registered a low number of cases of COVID-19 and continues its efforts to provide the necessary medical supplies and equipment to help limit the spread. In that regard, we commend the efforts of the World Health Organization and all national and international organizations to prevent the spread of COVID-19 in Syria, particularly in conflict affected areas. The Niger also commends the Syrian Government for its continued collaboration with the United Nations and other organizations to enable the delivery of humanitarian assistance within the framework of the cross-border and cross-line mechanism. My delegation calls on the Government and humanitarian organizations to enhance their cooperation and redouble their efforts to protect Syrians in all regions of the country. However, the Niger remains concerned about reports of an unacceptable humanitarian situation regarding the cases of women and children who are victims of the fighting between armed groups and the fate and well-being of many detainees on both sides. In that regard, we would like to echo the Secretary-General's appeal to the belligerents to share information on the fate of the detainees with their families within a reasonable time frame. We therefore also reiterate our support for the appeal launched by Special Envoy Pedersen on 18 May for "[I]arge-scale and unilateral releases as well as more meaningful actions on missing persons" (S/2020/420, p. 3). The deterioration of the Syrian economy as a result of the war and the recent devaluation of the Syrian pound further complicates the already precarious living conditions of the population. The shortage and the soaring prices of certain basic necessities, including food items, in recent weeks are threatening the livelihoods of many Syrian families. According to the World Food Programme, 9.3 million people are now considered food insecure in Syria. The Niger reiterates the urgent need to take the necessary steps to guarantee access to food, essential medical supplies and medical assistance in the context of COVID-19, and echoes the call made by the Secretary-General last March for the suspension of the economic sanctions imposed on that country. The Security Council must find a permanent and secure solution to the problem of the delivery of humanitarian aid to north-eastern and north-western Syria. But, in the meantime, the cross-border and cross-line mechanism for the delivery of this aid remains the only lifeline for millions of Syrians in need. In that regard, we look forward to the renewal of resolution 2504 (2020) in July, on a consensual and non-politicized basis.In conclusion, whether we are talking about humanitarian, political or chemical-weapons issues, respect for Syria's sovereignty and the full involvement of its Government in all the processes are crucial to finding lasting solutions to the crisis. My delegation therefore calls on Council members to put aside their differences and make the necessary compromises so that we can help the Syrians turn this painful page in the history of their country.
