Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We appreciate both
of today's briefings, which only add to the extremely
gloomy picture we have all been seeing for many
months now. The situation in Syria is a cause of
continuing concern. After six years of conflict there,
we are still not seeing any viable progress towards a
political solution. The forces ofthe regime and its allies
continue to pursue their goal of changing the military
balance and creating new realities on the ground. If the
recent history of the conflict is any guide, the fragile
logic is doomed to failure.

In the past three months we have seen four
offensives and counter-offensives, with the sides in
the conflict taking, losing and retaking the ground.
There is no winner in this game, but the losers are
obvious - they are the civilians, who continue to
suffer from the warmongering of hawks. We agree
with condemnation by the World Health Organization
(WHO) on 16 November stating that between 13 and
16 November six hospitals in Syria were attacked in
aerial bombardments. Those numbers will increase,
given the additional firepower of the reinforcements
employed by the Russian Federation and the active
participation of the Admiral Kuznetsov naval battle
group in the bombing of Aleppo, Idlib and Homs.

It may sound like a joke, but yesterday the Twitter
feed of the Russian Embassy in the United Arab
Emirates stated that "The allegedly destroyed hospitals
in #Aleppo exist only in the mind of the Department
of State's spokesman John Kirby." We are also deeply
concerned about recent information from WHO that all
the hospitals in the besieged rebel-held areas of eastern
Aleppo are now incapacitated after days of heavy
air strikes.

President Al-Assad has recently been very vocal in
the media. In an interview on 16 November with Radio
e Televisao de Portugal, he made it very clear that he
continues to view all the forces in Aleppo and other
embattled provinces as terrorists. Unfortunately, we are
seeing some attempts to reconsider the role ofthe Syrian
President in the future of the country. The changing of
the great Powers' policies towards a political transition
in Syria could provoke yet more instability throughout
the Middle East.

We underscore the urgent need for accountability
in Syria. We welcome the fact that the United Nations
Board of Inquiry has begun its investigation of the
attack on 19 September on the United Nations-Syrian
Arab Red Crescent relief operation to Urum al-Kubra,
and we look forward to its conclusions. We also call for
an immediate inquiry into the killing on 26 October of
children and other civilians in a school complex in the
village of Haas in Idlib province. The perpetrators of
such horrific crimes appear to act in the confidence that
there will be no accountability and justice. They must
be proved wrong.

