Mr. Barros (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the Prime Minister of Romania for giving
us the opportunity to address an important issue in the
building of a multilateral system that is both
operational and forward-looking. This initiative forms
part of a series of open debates whose objective has
been to consider various aspects of the way in which
the United Nations should respond to the search for
improved conditions for peace and stability.

The debate that brings us together today
challenges us as a civilization. The battle for peace
must be fought on two fronts: on the level of security
and in the socio-economic sphere.

The Charter of the United Nations assigns a
prominent role to the action of regional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
Chapter VIII reaffirms the principle of subsidiarity and
complementarity in the regulation of relations between
the Security Council and regional bodies. Although the
Charter affirms the primacy of the Security Council in
the enforcement of its resolutions, it also creates an
ample framework for cooperation between the global
system represented by the United Nations and regional
mechanisms.

The Millennium Declaration called for stronger
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, based on the premise that underlies the
international system: shared responsibility for carrying
out socio-economic development throughout the world.
This creates a dilemma at both the global and regional
levels, for which these mechanisms are the best suited
to achieve stability and peace and to promote
cooperation. The forging of an effective link between
the global and regional levels requires steps that will
enable both to respond jointly to the challenges of a
multidimensional approach to the issues of peace and
security and to the new dangers that threaten
contemporary society.

The increase in demands related to peacekeeping
has exceeded the capacity of the United Nations to
confront them, due to qualitative and quantitative
changes in international threats. Such threats, which
have become more complex over time, now include
intra-State conflicts, terrorism, small arms and light
weapons trafficking, the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, the diversion of resources to feed conflicts
and the collapse of State structures, all of which have
created humanitarian disasters. In the light of this
reality, it is vital that we strengthen the interaction
between regional organizations and the global system
in order to give practical content to the principle of
complementarity envisioned by the authors of the
Charter.
In that context, the responses of the international
community are gradually adapting to the
multidimensional character of crises and their
demands. The new context also requires enhanced
capacity at both the global and regional levels, not only
to work towards the prevention of conflicts and the
peaceful solution of controversies, but also to help, in
the aftermath of conflicts, with the process of national
reconciliation and reconstruction.

The complex design of conflict prevention,
implementation of peace and political rehabilitation is
a permanent challenge for the United Nations. The
Organization must systematize its experiences, improve
its policies and adopt a regional peace perspective in its
process of internal reform. The Security Council has
already begun to incorporate the regional dimension
into its treatment of conflicts.

In that context, cooperation between the United
Nations and the regional organizations must be guided
by certain considerations. Regional organizations have
the advantage of physical proximity to the threats, as
well as a greater understanding of those threats and the
political sensitivities involved. Concerted action allows
them to exploit this advantage and facilitates an
appropriate interpretation of the provisions of the
Charter, particularly with respect to peacekeeping
actions and support for the delivery of humanitarian
aid.

Globalization creates a framework that extends
the effects of conflicts. The response of local actors to
a regional threat can benefit from a more homogeneous
socio-cultural vision. These actors have a special
incentive to maintain security in the area and their
proximity facilitates a timely response. Regional action
also facilitates the development of particular formulas
for confronting conflicts, which can enrich the debate
and help create a wider range of instruments for the
maintenance of peace and security.

The Americas have also been involved in that
process. The work of the Organization of American
States in the protection of democracy as the foundation
of hemispheric security is particularly noteworthy. The
adoption and implementation of the Inter-American
Democratic Charter provide a useful example of a
regional initiative to promote mechanisms that
strengthen peace and security.

Association and cooperation with regional
organizations are one way to enhance the legitimacy of
actions to maintain peace and security and provide an
incentive for regional actors to assume their
responsibilities. Measures to develop mutual
confidence and security in such areas as open military
spending, balanced military strength or armament
accountability are facilitated by cooperation and
coordination in stabilization processes that, in turn,
help to strengthen regional collaboration on security
issues.

The case of Haiti has provided a valuable
experience in cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations in a process of stabilization.
The participation of the majority of the region in the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti reflects
the commitment assumed by Latin America and the
Caribbean with respect to the poorest country in the
hemisphere. Recognizing the comprehensive and long-
term character of the international community's
involvement, Chile has proposed a resolution intended
to integrate the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean into reconstruction efforts.

The objective of developing the potential for
regional involvement in issues relating to the
maintenance of peace and security in stabilization
processes leads us to reflect upon concrete ideas for the
promotion of a constructive relationship between those
two bodies. We believe that it would be useful to
consider the following proposals.

First, we should seek formulas for incorporating
the vision of regional organizations into Security
Council debates relating to Chapters VI and VII. The
preventive emphasis will surely help avoid the
complexity of deploying of a peace operation.
Secondly, we should encourage the Secretariat to
support and coordinate the activities of regional
organizations on issues of peace and security, which
could take the form of a mechanism for consultation
and information exchange. Thirdly, within the
Secretariat we should coordinate and facilitate the
procurement of resources from international financial
bodies in order to enhance institutional response
capacity at the regional and global levels in the
maintenance of peace and security.

Bringing regional identities and realities into
harmony facilitates the management of a globalized
world. It is impossible to create improved conditions of
stability without attending to the specificities of each
region. The strengthening of regionalism complements
and emphasizes multilateral action at the global level
and strengthens the universal values that are the
foundation of stable and lasting peace.

We should like to reaffirm our commitment to
continuing to work in that direction in order to improve
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in stabilization processes.

