Mr. Mladenovic (Yugoslavia): At the outset, I
would like to wish you, Mr. President, and your
country, as well as the other new non-permanent
members of the Security Council, a successful and
productive tenure. I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his very useful
briefing.

The situation in and around Kosovo and
Metohija, the autonomous province of the Yugoslav
constituent Republic of Serbia, is characterized by two
different features. On one hand, we have the
international community, including the countries of the
region, making efforts to stabilize the situation in the
field pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and the Kumanovo military-technical
Agreement. On the other hand, there are major security
problems in the Ground Safety Zone in parts of the
municipalities of Bujanovac, Medvedja and Presevo,
brought about by the incursions of ethnic Albanian
terrorists and their attacks on the peaceful local
population and Yugoslav security forces, as well as
serious security problems in many localities in Kosovo
and Metohija itself. The latter throws a very dark
shadow over the overall picture, so it is necessary for
the Security Council to continue, in accordance with its
responsibilities, to take even more active measures to
overcome this situation.

The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia continues to consider the calls made in the
statement by the President of the Security Council of
19 December 2000 extremely relevant and expects
them to be implemented in full and without delay. This
relates in particular to the Council's calls for the
immediate and complete cessation of violence in the
Ground Safety Zone, for the dissolution of ethnic
Albanian extremist groups and for the immediate
withdrawal from the Ground Safety Zone of all those
engaged in extremist activities.
Furthermore, my country's Government calls on
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to take more robust measures in controlling the
administrative boundary in order to prevent terrorist
incursions into the Ground Safety Zone, to stabilize the
situation in it and to fulfil their other obligations under
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Kumanovo military-
technical Agreement.

The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia continues to be firmly committed to the
quest for a solution to the present situation in the
Ground Safety Zone, as well as for the comprehensive
solution for Kosovo and Metohija, in a negotiated and
peaceful way, proceeding from full respect for
resolution 1244 (1999), as well as the obligations that
the new Governments of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and its constituent Republic of Serbia have
in ensuring the full protection of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country.

To stabilize the situation, the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has proposed that the
Ground Safety Zone be either eliminated, narrowed or
modified to put an end to the activities of ethnic
Albanian terrorist groups. Bearing in mind the
justifiability of this proposal, we expect that it will be
given full support, and we are ready to negotiate the
modalities of its implementation. Consultations with
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to that
end have already begun.

Proceeding from its firm commitment to a
negotiated solution, the Government of my country is
convinced that it is possible to bring about a lasting
peace only by abiding by democratic principles, by
building confidence among all residents of Kosovo and
Metohija and by developing a democratic society. For
that, it will be necessary to provide a secure
environment for all and to speed up the process of the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons and
the establishment of dialogue between the
representatives of the Albanian community in Kosovo
and Metohija and the new democratic authorities in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of
Serbia. I would like to add that the Government of the
Republic of Serbia, with the assistance of the federal
Government, is already making considerable efforts to
integrate the entire population of the Ground Safety
Zone into the institutions of the democratic civil
society being built in our country.

Establishing better communications between the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the Republic of Serbia on the one hand, and UNMIK
and KFOR on the other, will certainly be a major
precondition in this regard. In that context, let me
recall the readiness of my country to sign an agreement
on the status of UNMIK with the United Nations.

I would like to take this opportunity to wish
Mr. Hans Haekkerup success in his future endeavours
as the Special Representative for Kosovo and head of
UNMIK in implementing resolution 1244 (1999). In
this he will have my Government's full support.

The use of depleted uranium ammunition during
the NATO intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
its aggression against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has brought about ever more vocal protests
world wide, which are entirely justified. Considering
that effects of radiation on people and the environment
are not limited in space and time, the international
community is duty-bound to take urgent and all
necessary measures to forestall its harmful wide-scale
consequences.

My Government insists that all the facts be
established and, in particular, that all the consequences
be eliminated with the full cooperation of all relevant
international actors, including the Security Council.
The responsibility for the use of those weapons should
be borne by those who authorized them, regardless of
whether they were or were not aware of their harmful
effects.

As a victim of depleted uranium ammunitions, the
consequences of which are not yet fully known, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has the right to be
informed precisely and comprehensively of their use.
This also implies the right to international assistance in
establishing the facts regarding the effects of radiation
and, in particular, in decontaminating the affected
areas. Needless to say, the greatest share of assistance
should be provided by those who authorized the use of
the weapons. At the same time, we believe that the
possibility should be considered, within the overall
United Nations disarmament effort, of initiating
international action towards establishing a regime to
ban the production and use of those weapons. The
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is ready to render its
full contribution in this regard and calls on all other
States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to join it in achieving this goal.

