Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Let me also start by
thanking International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor
Bensouda for her valuable update on her Office's work
regarding the situation in Libya.

At the outset, I want to express once again
my country's full support of the activities of the
International Criminal Court, which promotes the rule
of law and fights against impunity for perpetrators of
the most serious crimes.

During the reporting period, the security and
humanitarian situation in Libya continued to deteriorate.
We all saw numerous reports from various sources on
human rights abuses and violations, such as unlawful
killings, kidnappings and forced disappearance, torture
and others. Like in many other conflict situations,
people in Libya have grown accustomed to constant
clashes among armed groups and to the existence of
parallel institutions. In the past few months, Tripoli
has seen fighting between rival militias, including
shelling of the city's main airport and surrounding
areas. The increasing use of heavy artillery and rockets
has resulted in high numbers of casualties, including
among civilians. We are especially concerned about
the situation in Derna, where protracted fighting has
reportedly gravely affected civilians.
We also condemn in the strongest terms the killing
of 36 people, whose bodies have been recently found in
Al-Abyar, some 70 kilometres east of Benghazi. A full,
proper and immediate investigation is needed to uncover
the truth. In this context, we echo the Prosecutor's call
on all parties to the conflict to ensure respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law in accordance

with the provisions of the Rome Statute relating to the
responsibility of commanders and superiors to prevent
or repress the commission of crimes by their forces.

The next issue I would like to focus on is abuses
against migrants and refugees in official and unofficial
detention centres in Libya. I am referring to arbitrary
detention, torture and rape and other forms of
mistreatment. In our view, the activities of the Office
in the collection of information and evidence relating
to alleged crimes against those vulnerable groups may
help prevents such crimes and the illegal activities of
human trafficking and smuggling networks in Libya.

We strongly believe that difficult security or
political conditions cannot be permanently invoked by
any State to justify its non-cooperation with the ICC,
especially in situations referred to the Court by the
Security Council. It is completely evident to Ukraine,
as a country whose situation is under preliminary
examination in the ICC, that full cooperation with
the Court by all States parties and non-States parties,
including members ofthe Council, as well as concerned
regional and international organizations, is of the
utmost importance for the successful fulfilment of the
Court's mandate.

We are also grateful to the Prosecutor for providing
additional information about ongoing cases against
Mr. Al-Werfalli Mr. Al-Tuhamy, Mr. Al-Qadhafi and
Mr. A1-Senussi. Without going into details, all of
these cases are being undermined by one similar and
crucial problem. On the one hand, the Court continues
to demonstrate its dedication to investigating crimes
under the Rome Statute, but on the other hand, those
in Libya with authority and control over the suspects
did not provide assistance to transfer them to the Court.
In that respect, we attach considerable importance to
Libya's recent reaffirmation of its commitments to
uphold the rule of law and ensure accountability, as
well as to cooperate with the ICC. We look forward to
concrete steps from Libya, in accordance to its legal
obligations, to facilitate the surrender of suspects to
the ICC.

In the light of some recent positive developments
in the political dialogue, we would like to conclude
by emphasizing the necessity of the international
community further supporting the Libyan Government
of National Accord in its efforts to restore law and order
in the country, combat impunity and ensure the right
to justice for all victims. The active role of the Office
in further discharging its mandate independently and
impartially will definitely accelerate that process.

