Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): 1 would like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Mexico, Austria and
Turkey for their useful briefings on the activities
carried out by the Security Council Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1540 (2004), 1267
(1999) and 1373 (2001).

The 1540 Committee, under the dynamic
leadership of Ambassador Claude Heller, has made
significant progress in strengthening the global
non-proliferation regime. We welcome the efforts of
the Committee and its experts group to promote the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We note
with satisfaction the various follow-up activities on the
outcome of the review process. We encourage the
Committee to further enhance its efforts to promote
outreach activities and raise greater awareness among
States of the obligations imposed by the resolution. It
is also important to improve the Committee's activities
in the area of assistance to States in order to help them
build their national capacity to implement the
resolution.

We applaud Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting
and the 1267 Committee for their excellent work in
implementing the heavy programme of the Committee.
We pay tribute to the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team for its efforts in assisting the work of
the Committee. The review of the names on the
consolidated list is indeed an enormous task, which the
Committee undertakes painstakingly and efficiently in
spite of constraints. We attach great importance to the
work of the Committee and urge continuous
improvement of the sanctions regime to ensure a
reliable and transparent procedure.

In this context, we reiterate the importance of
consulting affected States during the listing and
de-listing of individuals and entities on the
consolidated list in order to enhance the credibility and
wider acceptance of its recommendations. It is in so
doing that the 1267 sanctions regime will comply and
be consistent with the international standards of due
process, international law and respect for human rights.

We welcome the remarkable progress made by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee under the dynamic
leadership of Ambassador Ertugrul Apakan. He has
deployed considerable efforts in promoting interaction
and dialogue with Member States to make sure that
they understand their obligations pursuant to the
various resolutions. The briefings on the activities of
the Committee to the wider United Nations
membership have fostered greater visibility for the
Committee.

We commend the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), under the leadership of
Mike Smith, for the activities carried out to implement
resolution 1373 (2001). The direct dialogue with
permanent missions, country visits, seminars and
workshops, thematic briefings and close collaboration
with regional and other international organizations
have helped to raise awareness and strengthen the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We note
with satisfaction the completion of the analysis and
adoption of the Preliminary Implementation
Assessments of all Member States and the posting of
the technical guide on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) on the Committee's website.

We support the efforts of CTED to build the
capacity of States to combat terrorism, as that will go a
long way towards solving the problem of partial or
non-compliance by some Member States with their
reporting obligations. In this context, we stress the
importance of regular consultation with the affected
States to promote compliance with their obligations
under resolution 1373 (2001).

We welcome the ongoing CTED dialogue with
Member States, donors and beneficiaries on the
facilitation of technical assistance. The need for CTED
to collaborate with relevant bodies within and outside
the United Nations, as well as regional organizations,
in carrying out its activities enjoys our support. Its
participation in the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, with a view to implementing the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, should be
sustained.

Nigeria was one of the countries visited by CTED
in February 2010. The visit has generated closer
cooperation between CTED and our focal point on
counter-terrorism. It has also contributed to
strengthening our international counter-terrorism
measures.

We are pleased with the increased cooperation
between the three Security Council Committees and
with other organizations within and outside the United
Nations. We welcome their joint efforts to improve
information-sharing and to coordinate their
relationships with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations and their participation in the
framework of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force. The effective utilization and coordination
of their respective capacities will enhance the
implementation of the respective resolutions pertaining
to their work. We urge continued transparency in their
work and accessibility to the wider United Nations
membership, regional organizations and States.

Given the capacity constraints in many countries,
it is imperative that they deploy more joint efforts to
raise awareness of the challenges facing us and, where
necessary, assist States with the tools to respond
appropriately.

