Mr. Guehenno: Your first question was whether
there a single model for the integration of the various
efforts of the international community. I think there are
degrees of integration; it will vary from one mission to
the other. However, I do believe that in any
peacekeeping or peace-building operation - and we
see more and more that the two have to be closely
linked - there has to be a unity of effort on the part of
the international community. I think that the
international community weakens its hand when it goes
into a crisis situation in a scattered way, so to speak. I
think part of the success achieved by the Afghanistan
mission is very much linked to its integrated nature. It
is often thought that it could be even more integrated.

In the case of Angola that is now being
considered, there will also be a need for a major effort
of the international community to support the
reconstruction of a country that has been torn by many
years of war. There, again, I would think that an
integrated model is in order. The way in which one of
the two number twos in the Mission federated the
efforts of the development community and the
humanitarian community has proved to be very
effective in Sierra Leone. The various agencies, funds,
and programmes provide the substantive backstopping
with their expertise, but there is an operational
integration that is of the essence and we see, for areas
such as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR), that the links among the political, military,
humanitarian and economic are very close. How can
you disarm combatants if you do not have an economic
and reintegration strategy? So my answer to the
question is that there are degrees of integration, but
that certainly integration is the right answer.

The second question was how we can give the
Council a greater sense of urgency. I think there we all
share responsibility. As the Brahimi report said in an
often quoted sentence, we should tell the Council what
it needs to know, not what it wants to hear. There is a
responsibility on the part of the Secretariat to call the
attention of the Council to unfolding crisis situations.
If I may say so, there is also a responsibility for
Member States which have a particular understanding
of a region to call the attention of Council members to
an unfolding situation. In the case of Sierra Leone the
proactive role taken by your country, Madam President,
certainly helped focus the attention of the international
community on the need to have a sustained effort in
that part of West Africa.

