Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Today the Security Council
will take action on an important draft resolution which
addresses one of the fundamental issues of international
peace and security, the issue of nuclear weapons. Slovenia
is a co-sponsor of the draft resolution, and we strongly
deplore the nuclear tests recently conducted by India and
Pakistan. By participating in the drafting of this
resolution, we wish to add our voice to the overwhelming
international concern at this unfortunate development.

Slovenia is a party to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (N PT) and a signatory
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT).
We are strongly committed to the principles and
objectives of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament,
as adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. Like many other Member States,
Slovenia considers these two treaties as essential

 

foundations for the efforts towards nuclear disarmament and
eventual elimination of weapons of mass destruction.

Nuclear testing by India and Pakistan represents a
serious setback to these efforts. While these two countries
have not acceded to either the NPT or the CTBT, and
consequently legitimately argue that they have not violated
any of their treaty obligations, we believe that their recent
actions had an adverse effect on universal aspirations to rid
the world of weapons of mass destruction. The principles
of nuclear non-proliferation and of prohibition of nuclear
tests have been accepted so broadly that their legal effects
equal the effects of solemn declarations of the General
Assembly. As such they cannot be simply ignored by States
not parties to these two treaties. Moreover, the nuclear
testing by India and Pakistan can have a serious negative
impact on stability in the region and beyond. It is
impossible to ignore the expressions of concern voiced in
Asia and the Pacific, as well as worldwide.

We are of the view that acquisition of nuclear
weapons is not the way to solve any problems. It will not
bring the coveted status of a nuclear-weapon State. It also
will not help resolve any outstanding political issues.
Instead, it may spark a costly nuclear-arms race which
would not benefit the security, stability or economy of
either contender.

The legitimate security concerns and political issues in
the region need to be addressed by dialogue and other
political means. In dealing with the present situation, it is
necessary for the Security Council to act with determination
to prevent the reversal of important achievements in the
area of nuclear non-proliferation and to strengthen the
efforts towards nuclear disarmament. This is why the draft
resolution demands that India and Pakistan refrain from
further nuclear tests and urges them, and other States that
have not yet done so, to adhere to the NPT and the CTBT
without delay and without conditions.

It is particularly important that India and Pakistan
refrain from weaponization or deployment of nuclear
weapons or missiles and from production of fissile material
for nuclear weapons. In this context, we note some
encouraging indications in both countries with respect to
measures of self-restraint.

The draft resolution before us expresses support for
the efforts of the Secretary-General to encourage dialogue
between India and Pakistan. We urge them to avail
themselves of his offer to assist in conducting a
constructive dialogue. The existing mechanisms of bilateral
dialogue on all political and security issues need to be
fully utilized. We are of the View that the Secretary-
General can and should play a useful role, in accordance
with the Charter, in the efforts made to reinvigorate the
dialogue.

Slovenia reiterates the importance of universal
adherence to the NPT and the CTBT which are essential
foundations for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament.
Nuclear non-proliferation and prohibition of nuclear
testing are not in themselves sufficient to eliminate the
nuclear danger. Progress is needed with respect to
effective measures of nuclear disarmament. We should
not allow the nuclear testing in South Asia, or anywhere
else, to jeopardize our efforts in this path. Instead, we
should reaffirm our commitment to proceed with effective
implementation of all the provisions of NPT, including its
article VI, and to pursue with renewed vigour the ultimate
goal of nuclear disarmament and eventual elimination of
nuclear weapons.
