Mr. Ghafoorzai (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to sincerely thank, in the name of the Afghan nation,
all those who have participated during these last two days
in the debate on Afghanistan. On behalf of tormented
Afghan women, I would especially like to thank all those
countries that took a strong stance in defence of the God-
given rights of women in Afghanistan against the brutal,
un-Islamic, uncivilized behaviour and deeds of the
Taliban, in violation of basic human rights, basic
principles of democracy and basic principles of the United
Nations Charter to which we are all committed.

We have heard the appeals made in the debate by
members of the Security Council and other members of
the United Nations to all of the Afghan conflicting sides
to choose negotiations instead of conflict and war. As far
as the Islamic State of Afghanistan is concerned, I can
assure all Council members that these appeals will be
communicated and will be heard. As far as we are
concerned, we have adopted a policy of respecting both
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions. We
have expressed our readiness to support Mr. Holl's
Mission. We have also expressed our support for any
negotiated political settlement, at any venue, on any
platform.

It has been, and continues to be, the Taliban who
have adopted an intransigent attitude towards the United
Nations. This reality is reflected in the records of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council.

We also heard a statement today by Ambassador
Kamal of Pakistan. We were not caught by surprise, but
we were somewhat disappointed, because the Prime
Minister of Pakistan had promised that he would
reconsider the policy of the new Pakistani Government
with regard to the issue of Afghanistan. However, the
statement made by the Ambassador of Pakistan was the
only one with a totally different tone and spirit, when we
compare it with the statements made by all representatives
who took part in the debate.

Security Council members may recall that at one of
the consultation meetings of the Council, it was reported
that the former Minister of the Interior of Pakistan, Mr.
Naseerullah Babar, had stated in a meeting in Mazar-i-
Sharif that he had power of attorney from the Taliban.
The Council members were surprised to hear that; yet it
was once again repeated by the representative of the
Secretariat that this is exactly what the former Minister of
the Interior of Pakistan had said.
Upon hearing the Pakistani Ambassador's statement,
it became somewhat clear that the Government of
Pakistan is still trying to lend some kind of legitimacy to
the Taliban mercenaries. When we say mercenaries, I

 

think we have adequate reasons to justify describing the
Taliban as a mercenary group. We have presented and
submitted more than adequate documentation that they are
being trained, financed, armed and equipped in Pakistani
territory, in Quetta, and then they are being sent into
Afghanistan for operations.

The Ambassador of Pakistan made some suggestions.
First of all, he was of the opinion that the Taliban are not
the kind of power to be washed away easily. We have
never advocated that the Taliban should not be heard, that
they should not have any role in shaping the future political
situation of Afghanistan. It is the Taliban who have
continuously rejected any proposal for dialogue and
negotiations.

By inviting the New York-based Taliban
representative, the Ambassador of Pakistan even approached
the point of giving the exact location and address of the
Taliban office in New York. It was somewhat surprising.
He was inviting the New York Taliban under the Arria
formula.

That would constitute a recognition that the current
contacts between Mr. H011 and the Taliban are useless and
inadequate. Moreover, I wonder whether there is any need
for the Taliban to have a voice in the United Nations as
long as they enjoy the presence of a loyal representative
here.

For the Council to listen to the Taliban under the Arria
formula would basically run counter to the resolutions of
the General Assembly with regard to mercenaries,
especially those who are used against the right to self-
determination of peoples throughout the world. That would
definitely establish a dangerous precedent.

The Ambassador of Pakistan said that he would prefer
the "vacant seat" formula to be used for Afghanistan, and
he referred to a decision of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. I was not clear about the decision to which he
referred, because the Islamic State of Afghanistan continues
to represent Afghanistan at the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. There have been many gatherings and
meetings, the last as recently as three weeks ago. The
representative of the Islamic State of Afghanistan
represented Afghanistan at the meeting of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, that was held, at ambassadorial
level, in New York.

What happened in Islamabad? I think that the presence
of some esteemed leaders of Islamic countries at the
commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the creation
of Pakistan was used by the host country for political
gain, in favour of the Taliban. The Ambassador of
Pakistan also referred to the statement made by
Commander Massoud, in which he indicated his
resoluteness to continue to fight on in various battles
against the Taliban. Yes, he said that; he made that
statement. As long as the Taliban continue to reject any
proposal for dialogue and political settlement, Commander
Massoud and the other members of the Supreme Council
for the Defence of Afghanistan have no option but to
continue to defend the territorial integrity, national unity
and sovereignty of Afghanistan.

In brief, I would like to put on the record of the
Security Council the fact that tolerance of the Taliban and
their supporters would mean tolerance of human rights
violations; justification of obscurantism; opposition to the
principles of democracy; rejectionism; and a continued
intransigent attitude towards the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council.

