Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to thank
Special Representative Ibrahima Fall for his
comprehensive and thorough briefing on the Second
Summit of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. Our thanks go also to Ambassador
Mulamula for her statement, along with our best
wishes for success in her new job. Greece fully
associates itself with the statement to be made later on
by the Permanent Representative of Finland on behalf
of the European Union.

The region of the Great Lakes has been the scene
of recurrent ethnic violence and interrelated crises in
recent years. On many occasions they presented a
considerable challenge to the international
community's capacity for crisis response and
management. However, in recent years, considerable,
albeit painstaking improvement has taken place. There
has been a remarkable national reconciliation in
Rwanda; a successful organization of elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with overwhelming
participation by the Congolese people and the election
of democratic legislative and executive authorities;
peaceful and democratic elections in Burundi that led
to a new President and Government; and the ceasefire
agreement between the Lord's Resistance Army and the
Government of Uganda.

Today, the countries of the area, as well as the
international community, have gradually realized that
achieving peace, stability, security and development in
the Great Lakes region should entail a strong regional
dimension. The Second Summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, held in Nairobi
last week, is the culmination of efforts put forward by
all interested parties in that direction. The Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, adopted at the Summit, constitutes a milestone
in the cooperation between the States of the region.
We believe that it is now crucial to implement the
protocols and programmes of action included in the
Pact, through the regional follow-up mechanism. The
countries of the area must demonstrate their political
will in implementing the mechanism and making the
Special Fund operational. The international community
should stand ready to assist African countries in that
endeavour.

In that respect, the Security Council, besides
following closely the post-transitional phase in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi,
could also focus on the regional context by better
assisting the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement of ex-combatants, as
well as by improving monitoring and strict
implementation of the arms embargo, especially as
regards small arms. The Council should direct
peacekeeping operations to pay special attention to
strengthening border security, in particular in view of
the spillover effect of the Darfur crisis into Chad and
the Central African Republic.

The Security Council, as well as the United
Nations system in general, including the Peacebuilding
Commission, should also concentrate on facilitating
solutions for several key issues of the region, such as
combating the illegal exploitation of natural resources.
In that respect, we are ready to support proposals for
special mechanisms, taking into account existing
initiatives such as the Kimberley Process for diamonds
and the Forest Law Enforcement and Governance for
illegal logging.

We firmly believe that ending impunity in the
Great Lakes region, as well as establishing the
foundations for sustainable economic development,
addressing humanitarian and human rights issues,
supporting institution-building, combating corruption
and strengthening the rule of law and good governance,
will contribute to the promotion of peace and stability
in the region. In that respect, the International Criminal
Court, the Peacebuilding Commission, the Bretton
Woods institutions and the United Nations system in
general could prove to be valuable.

We would like to commend the efforts of all the
participants in the Nairobi Summit, in particular
Tanzania and South Africa, the joint African Union-
United Nations Secretariat and Special Representative
Ibrahima Fall.

We believe that the Nairobi Summit took place at
a truly historic juncture for the region of the Great
Lakes. It provides us all with a unique opportunity to
chart the course towards peace, security and
development for millions of people who have known
little else than oppression, violence and poverty.

The Security Council should express its support
to that ongoing process, and for that reason we fully
subscribe to the draft presidential statement prepared
by Tanzania, for which we thank that delegation.

