Mr. Hamidi (Malaysia): I first wish to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your delegation for so ably
steering the proceedings and work of the Security
Council over the course of the past month. I am pleased
to be here with you, Sir, and with the other colleagues
around the table. I believe we had an important and
useful discussion earlier this morning, graciously
hosted by Secretary Johnson and Ambassador Power of
the United States of America. We welcome Lithuania's
initiative in convening this meeting ofthe Council, which
for the first time ever includes ministers responsible for
internal and homeland security, aimed at, among other
objectives, assessing the implementation of resolution
2178 (2014), regarding the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters. I also wish to thank His Excellency Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, the Chairs of the Council's
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) and resolution 1373 (2001),
and the Secretary General of INTERPOL for their
comprehensive and insightful briefings.
Last September, the Council took an historic
and decisive step with the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2178 (2014). In our view, that resolution
helped pave the way for the international community
to respond to and address the growing threat posed
by the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters at the
national, regional and international levels. Malaysia
reiterates its strong and unequivocal condemnation
of all acts of terrorism whenever and by whomsoever
committed - regardless of the motivation. We remain
committed to implementing all the relevant Council
resolutions aimed at combating terrorism. We welcome
the opportunity afforded to us today to take stock of
efforts to that end.

In that regard, I am pleased to announce that,
since the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), Malaysia
has taken a number of concrete measures aimed at
addressing the threat of terrorism within and outside
Malaysia and in ensuring the safety and security of
our people. Among others measures, the Malaysian
Parliament earlier this year voted to enact a new law
aimed at preventing terrorism, entitled the Prevention
of Terrorism Act, which is currently awaiting royal
assent before being passed into law. In essence, the
Act aims to prevent the commission of or support for
terrorist acts involving listed terrorist organizations in
a foreign country. I would stress that in drafting the Act,
the Government took into account the need to respect
Malaysia's obligations under the relevant human rights
instruments it is party to.

One key feature of the Act that I wish to share with
the Council concerns its provision on rehabilitation
and deradicalization. The assumption underlying this
provision is rooted in the belief that the fight against
terrorists cannot be won through force or punitive
measures alone. The inclusion of a rehabilitation
and deradicalization component in the Prevention of
Terrorism Act was based on the success of a similar
model provided in the now-repealed Internal Security
Act in Malaysia.

In essence, the model comprises multiple
components geared towards changing the world
view and mind-sets of radicalized or extremist
individuals through approaches such as small group or
individual counselling. This component also involves
a humanitarian aspect where assistance is provided
when such individuals are ready to reintegrate into
society. We believe that such measures are important to
preventing relapse or the return to militant or terrorist
activities.
Alongside the Prevention of Terrorism Act, the
Government is in the early stages of promulgating
legislation that would have extraterritorial application,
among other features, and allow for measures to be taken
against persons found to be committing or supporting
terrorist acts involving listed terrorist organizations
in a foreign country. This legislation is provisionally
entitled "The Special Measures against Terrorism in
Foreign Countries Bill 2015".

With regard to successes in preventing the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters, I am pleased to share
with the Council that, since February 2013 to date, a
total of 107 persons, including 87 men, 20 women and
16 foreign nationals with suspected connections to or
involvement with Daesh, have been arrested. We are
actively monitoring the activities of 63 Malaysians who
are known to have travelled to Syria and Iraq to engage
in fighting in those countries. Out of this number,
11 are confirmed to have been killed.

With regard to improving information and
intelligence sharing, particularly through the advanced
passenger information system, I wish to inform the
Council that Malaysia is in the process of acquiring
an advanced passenger screening system, which is
expected to be fully operational by November 2015. It
will go a long way towards providing early warning on
the possible arrival of high-risk travellers, including
potential foreign terrorist fighters.

With regard to border control measures, Malaysia
is currently developing a comprehensive national
immigration control system for effective filtering or
screening on entry and exit of travellers through air,
sea or land checkpoints. With regard to efforts at the
regional level, I am pleased to inform the Council
that Malaysia, in its capacity as Chairman of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and incoming Chair of the tenth ASEAN Ministerial
Meeting on Transnational Crime, will be hosting a
ASEAN Special Ministerial Meeting on Radicalism
and Violent Extremism in Kuala Lumpur on 2 October.
We believe that the proposed meeting will provide an
important platform for ASEAN countries to share their
experiences in countering the rise of radicalism and
violent extremism in the region and also to exchange
views on concrete measures that could be taken to
prevent the spread.

In conclusion, Malaysia is convinced that the
international community needs to address the incentives
and motivations that lead people to leave their homes
and loved ones to fight in far-f lung regions of the world,
including, inter alia, prolonged and grievous injustice,
unequal access to resources and opportunities, gross
violations of human rights, foreign occupation and
systematic discrimination. At the domestic level, our
study of the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon has
shed some light on such fighters' motivations and the
huge gap in terms of the international community's
response.

Malaysia is convinced that unless we deal effectively
with the root causes of terrorism, we will not be able
to curtail the soft power of the terrorists, particularly
their efforts to enlist and entice new recruits, much
of which happens through social media. That said, we
are conscious that even if the so-called root causes of
terrorism could be addressed, the scourge of violent
extremism will not be resolved overnight. However,
we believe that doing so would go a long way towards
removing the motive factor so cleverly manipulated
by the terrorists in gaining sympathy for their dubious
cause and ends.

We must all remain fully seized of and committed
to combatting the twin scourges of terrorism and
violent extremism for the simple reason that their
primary target is our youth. These young people, who
hold infinite promise and potential for a brighter future,
are in danger of being led down a path of death and
destruction. This, God willing, must not be allowed to
happen.

