Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): 1 would like to thank Viet Nam for organizing this debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson for their inspiring presentations. As many have recalled before me, 75 years ago our Organization rose from the ashes of two world wars. Carried by the shared memory of unspeakable horror, the framers of the Charter of the United Nations wanted to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. Today we must reaffirm this objective, but also reflect on the major principles of international relations, the most important of which is multilateralism. It is an indispensable factor of international stability, democracy and prosperity and is at the heart of the Charter. For Belgium, this week more than ever, multilateralism is not limited to fine words during the ministerial week of the General Assembly. Multilateralism must translate day in and day out into concrete actions, making use of the institutions created under the Charter. In my country's view, the role of the Security Council is therefore paramount when there is a threat to international peace and security. In 1945, 51 of us signed the Charter and joined the new Organization. Our United Nations family has since almost quadrupled. Joining that family, however, means accepting obligations for the benefit of a higher purpose. In recent decades, we have developed new means of implementing the Charter, including international criminal courts, stronger mandates for peacekeeping operations to protect civilians and the imposition of targeted sanctions. Let us also mention the efforts of the Secretary-General, who, through his good offices, facilitates the peaceful settlement of conflicts. Similarly, regional organizations play an indispensable role, which has, moreover, continued to grow, particularly in the areas of prevention and early warning. Yet we have not been able to protect all populations from the scourge of war. A glance at the world map is enough to see how fragile peace is. In addition, new challenges are testing our resilience as an international community, such as the multiplication of non-State actors that threaten our security, the risk of an arms race, and climate change and its impact on security. To respond to those challenges, we need to make the system we have created more operational. There are a number of concrete initiatives aiming to achieve that. The fight against war crimes, crimes against humanity and crimes of genocide is the primary responsibility of each State. However, the Security Council also has a responsibility to act in a timely manner, such as by referring to the International Criminal Court a situation in which one or more of those crimes appears to have been committed. Despite the tools and means at our disposal, we often react too slowly, sometimes too late. We have been slow to agree on how to interpret the warning signs of a crisis, such as massive human rights violations, and how to mount a collective response. The Charter also affirms the primacy of the prevention and peaceful settlement of conflicts. The International Court of Justice plays a crucial role in that regard, in particular through its advisory opinions. The Court will be fully effective, however, only if all States accept its compulsory jurisdiction. Finally, in Belgium's opinion, reforms are needed to strengthen the legitimacy, representativeness and effectiveness of the Council. Thatis why we fully support the code of conduct drawn up by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group and the initiative of France and Mexico to regulate the right of veto. In particular, we cannot ignore the principle of the rule of law in our own procedures and working methods. To be consistent, the Security Council must guarantee individuals the right to due process and to fair and clear sanctions procedures. In conclusion, as a founding Member of the United Nations, Belgium remains committed to the Charter-to its letter but above all to its spirit - and our wish is to translate that commitment into concrete action.
