Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I
wish to thank the Special Representative Chambas, for
his informative briefing today and for his leadership of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS).

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of UNOWAS (S/2019/549) underscored just
how varied the realities are in West Africa. From
presidential and parliamentary elections where people
freely and fairly chose their preferred candidates, to
continued insecurity in the Sahel, where terrorism
and armed conflict have interrupted livelihoods and
made millions subject to food insecurity, the positive
and negative developments in West Africa are as big
and diverse as the region itself. UNOWAS has played
an important role in West Africa, and the United
States deeply appreciates the Office's efforts aimed at
supporting long-term peace, security and stability in
the region.

West Africa has seen several noteworthy positive
developments over the past six months, as was
highlighted in the Council today. The United States
is encouraged by the success of the largely peaceful
elections held in Nigeria, Senegal and Mauritania,
and we extend our particular appreciation to Special
Representative Chambas for his efforts in all countries
to emphasize the importance of dispute-resolution
processes rather than violence as a means of pursuing
grievances arising from the electoral process. In
addition, we are encouraged by the Secretary-
General's projection of high economic growth across
the region for 2019 and 2020. While we know that such
projections are uneven across West African countries,
we are nevertheless optimistic that such economic
performance, when coupled with responsible fiscal
policy and good governance, is a bellwether for the
region's future.

At the same time, the United States is deeply
concerned about the increase in security and governance
challenges across the region. Transnational organized
crime and the illicit trafficking of narcotics continue to
undermine responsible governance and fuel corruption
in Guinea-Bissau. We call on Government authorities
to maintain the momentum towards genuinely free and
fair presidential elections in November and encourage
all political leaders to refrain from volatile rhetoric.
In Burkina Faso, the terrorism threat emanating from
Mali is fuelling instability and has displaced hundreds
of thousands, curtailed Government services in some
areas and disrupted livelihoods. We are concerned by
the potential spillover of the situation into neighbouring
countries. We encourage the Government of Burkina
Faso to continue to address the root causes ofinstability
and work with regional partners to address the growing
terrorism threat. In addition, we request that UNOWAS
continue its efforts in security sector reform.

In Mali, we are troubled by the insufficient progress
in implementing the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation emanating from the Algiers process, and
by the insecurity in central Mali that has exacerbated
ethnic and intercommunal tensions. Such violence has
negatively affected such institutions as health facilities
and schools, which provide basic services, and forced
hundreds of thousands from their homes. With the recent
renewal of the United Nations peacekeeping mission in
Mali (resolution 2480 (2019)), the United States calls
on the Government of Mali and the signatory armed
groups to use this opportunity to take urgent steps to
implement the provisions of the resolution.
While the United States is a strong supporter of
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) as a long-term security initiative in the region
and has provided $111 million to help operationalize
it, we must emphasize the need for the Council to
comprehensively review the problem of terrorism and
its root causes across the whole of West Africa, not
just the Sahel. It is time to transform the stand-alone
report and briefing on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force into
a broader discussion on terrorism challenges and root
causes across West Africa, with spillover to the littoral
States of the Accra initiative. This broader review
should draw attention to the impact of the conflicts on
millions of people across the region and the efforts of
all Governments of the States of the region to prevent
and counter radicalization and terrorism in general.

We must also focus on the threats emanating from
north-eastern Nigeria. Throughout the Lake Chad
region, the United States is supportive of coordinated
multinational efforts to bring long-term stability to
a region that has suffered for far too long from the
predations of Boko Haram and the Islamic State
West Africa Province. Terrorism remains a threat to
millions, and affected countries must redouble their
comprehensive efforts to counter these actors, protect
the civilian population and create the conditions for the
safe, dignified return of the displaced. We share the
Secretary-General's emphasis on the need to address
the root causes of insecurity and instability, including
inequality, exclusion and marginalization, human
rights Violations and abuses, sexual violence and a lack
of opportunity and proper livelihoods. To that end, the
United States is working closely with Sahel countries
and international partners to support integrated
security-sector response efforts. In 2018 alone, we
committed more than $242 million in overall security
assistance to the G-5 Sahel countries.

The United States is committed to supporting
the millions of people across the region who have
suffered for too long from the worst of such conflict
and instability.

