Mr. Nshole (spoke in French): The humanitarian
tragedy taking place in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is deteriorating to such a degree that its people
wonder if the situation is even being addressed by the
international community and by the United Nations.
I will provide a brief summary of the humanitarian
and security situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, its root causes and the expectations of the
Congolese people.

The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is marked by a surge in violence
in Ituri province and a deterioration in North Kivu,
South Kivu, Maniema, Tanganyika and Kasai. Since
17 December 2017, the situation in Ituri has been marked
by increased violence that quickly spread to several
areas and targeted the Hema community. The identity
and motivations of the attackers are not known. It is
certainly not an inter-ethnic conflict, as we sometimes
hear in the media. More than 100 people have been
killed and more than 2,000 houses and huts have been
burned. Public infrastructure has not been spared; some
100 schools and 5 hospitals, not to mention the Catholic
parish of Lita, have been ransacked. Approximately
338,000 displaced people have been registered.

The risk of an outbreak of epidemics due to
insufficient sanitary infrastructure is to be feared,
especially with the return of rain to the area. The
humanitarian needs are enormous and, to date,
the response capacity of humanitarian actors has
been limited, inter alia, by the difficulties faced by
humanitarian workers in reaching the areas of violence.
In Kasai, approximately 1.4 million people, more than
half of whom are children, have been forced by the
Kamwina Nsapu militias to flee their villages and to
wander the roads. Many families who have decided
to return home following the massacres have been
traumatized by the sight of their pillaged villages,
destroyed houses and ravaged fields, with nothing left
to eat.

In Tanganyika, the humanitarian situation continues
to be dominated by the massive displacement of people
following the intercommunal conflict between the Twa
pygmies and the Bantus in the Manono and Kabalo
territories. The number of displaced people in that
part of the country is approximately 200,000. That
violence has also affected livelihoods. New waves of
internally displaced persons estimated at 105 displaced
households, or 525 people, have reached Kalemie since
the beginning of February.

The security context in North Kivu has been
dominated by repeated attacks by elements suspected
to be armed groups of the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF), which has led to the deaths of civilians in the
Beni territory. Those repeated incursions of armed
men have caused serious problems for the protection
of civilians.

In South Kivu, the security situation remains very
volatile and humanitarian access is precarious owing
primarily to the activities of armed groups and militias,
including Raia Mutomboki, and clashes with the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo.
Several displaced people have fled to the Shabunda
territory since February in search of security.

In the former Equateur province, the presence
of Central African refugees in the north-east of the
province continues to weigh on the host communities,
exacerbating the precarious situation of the local
populations. Four camps, set up in North Ubangi and
South Ubangi provinces by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, provide
shelter to more than 100,000 Central African refugees.

Today in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
there are 4.49 million internally displaced persons,
according to statistics published by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in late
December 2017. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo is the African country with the most internally
displaced persons, more than 60 per cent of whom are
children and 55 per cent of whom reside in just three
provinces - 26 per cent in North Kivu, 15 per cent in
South Kivu, and 14 per cent in Tanganyika. However,
as of 31 December 2017, there were 623,059 Congolese
refugees in the neighbouring countries of Angola,
Burundi, Uganda, Rwanda, Tanzania and Zambia.

The causes of that tragedy are essentially the
unstable and precarious security situation due to the
incursions of suspected ADF; the activities of armed
groups; interethnic clashes, in particular among the
Twa and Bantu communities; and the manipulation
of certain negative forces that are interested in the
destabilizing our beloved country, as is the case in
Ituri. Furthermore, the sociopolitical and electoral
crisis that arose from the failure to hold presidential and
legislative elections in accordance with the time frame
set out in the Constitution of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the New Year agreement is creating
discontent and a vacuum of State authority in certain
areas of the country, owing to the lack of legitimacy of
the main institutions.
With regard to the expectations of the Congolese
people, in the light of the foregoing and in order
to prevent the tragic humanitarian situation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from becoming
worse, it is essential for the United Nations to become
further involved and urge the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to hold proper elections. The Congolese
bishops are convinced that only credible, transparent
and peaceful elections can give the Congolese people
legitimate leaders who are capable of addressing the
multifaceted crisis that is ravaging the country. Calls by
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
for the full implementation of the provisions of the New
Year's agreement, which is a prerequisite for the holding
of smooth elections, and compliance with the key dates
of the electoral calendar should be the priorities of the
day. Any complacency on those issues would be a time
bomb, since elections that bring us back to square one
would be a waste that the international community
must avoid.

The mandate of MONUSCO should be strengthened
to provide the Mission with the necessary legal means
and equipment to protect civilians, vulnerable people
and their property in areas where there are attacks
and recurrent Violence. Populations that are victims
of insecurity and have been forced to flee their land
urgentlu need humanitarian assistance. It is also
essential to establish an economic development plan
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo following
the elections.

