Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): Let me join
previous speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of May.
You may rest assured, as always, of our full support
and cooperation. We wish also to congratulate
Ambassador Claude Heller and the Mexican delegation
and to thank them for their excellent presidency last
month. I thank Ms. Karin Landgren, Representative of
the Secretary-General, for her up-to-date briefing.

My delegation takes positive note of the overall
relatively calm and stable security situation in Nepal
during the reporting period. We share the sense of
cautious optimism described in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/22l) regarding progress on
major components of the peace process in Nepal, in
particular those related to the drafting of the
constitution and discussions on the future of the two
armies.

At the same time, we share the common concern
about a number of unresolved issues - related
essentially to ethnic and political groups, the form of
governance and the new federal structure of the
country. We are particularly worried about the latest
political rift in the Nepalese leadership. We call upon
all political parties to exercise restraint and give top
priority to stability by promoting national unity and
resuming dialogue, in the spirit of compromise and
reconciliation, to expedite the peace process. We hope
that all parties in the Government of Nepal will build
upon the hard-won progress made so far in order to
continue to work together for the common good of the
whole nation.

Given the outstanding role played by the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), we commend the
Mission for its efforts in the area of arms monitoring
and supporting the work of the Special and Technical
Committees in the past reporting period. Taking into
consideration the Nepalese Prime Minister's request
for further support from UNMIN for both the Special
and Technical Committees and bearing in mind the
ownership of the country's peace process by the
Nepalese Government and people, we believe that
UNMIN should maintain its close cooperation with the
Government of Nepal and other United Nations
agencies to help sustain peace and stability and
expedite the necessary activities within its mandate to
complete its tasks. We reaffirm our support for the role
of the United Nations in coordinating international
development assistance for Nepal. We join in the
commitment made by the international community to
support the peace and development process on which
the Nepalese people and Government have embarked.

