Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I would like first of
all to welcome you, Sir, to New York and to
congratulate you on Colombia's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We also commend
the important statement made today by the Secretary-
General.

I wish to join other speakers in thanking you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate on the
question of small arms. We agree that the problem of
small arms, and particularly of their illicit proliferation,
is one of the challenges that the Security Council, in
accordance with its mandate, has to address. We share
the view that the uncontrolled accumulation and spread
of small arms and light weapons may encourage the
outbreak of hostilities, destabilize situations,
undermine the implementation of peace agreements
and hamper post-conflict peace-building efforts
throughout the world. These weapons are often primary
tools of Violence in many conflicts, in particular in the
areas where the illicit supply of small arms flourishes.

The global dimension of this problem was clearly
identified at the recently held United Nations
Conference. I would like to use this opportunity to
thank Ambassador Camilo Reyes for his excellent
leadership of that important international forum.

Bearing in mind the transnational nature of this
problem, it is our deep conviction that the United
Nations should play a leading role in the fight against
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons, as
well as in restraining the proliferation of these
weapons. In this process the Security Council has its
own distinctive role to play. We believe that the
Council can offer added value in such areas as
strengthening the effectiveness of its arms embargoes,
putting an end to economies of war and encouraging
voluntary moratoria on arms exports to conflict
regions, as well as supporting disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration measures. We are
convinced that the Council embargoes on arms supplies
to the so-called hot spots could play a central role in
checking the proliferation of and eradicating illicit
trafficking in these weapons. Most importantly, the
Council must ensure full implementation of its arms
embargoes and other sanctions targeting the illicit trade
that pays for these weapons.

Effective monitoring mechanisms should be
further developed and put in place so as to prevent
violations of arms embargoes. We attach particular
importance to the need to enhance the effectiveness of
these measures through their rigorous enforcement by
all Member States. In this regard, we strongly support
and believe in the need for establishing effectively
functioning national export control systems to prevent
illegal small-arms transfers. We note the importance of
the effective functioning of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for
former combatants, including the destruction of light
weapons in their illegal possession as part of the
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building support
activities of the United Nations.

While there are still great challenges ahead of us,
on the positive side we should note a number of
important developments in the struggle against illicit
small-arms trafficking and the proliferation of such
weapons. In our View, the most significant recent event
was the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
which gave the international community a unique
opportunity to have a comprehensive analysis of this
multifaceted problem and to develop a strategy for
coordinating collective efforts in this field.

We welcome the final document of the
Conference: the Programme of Action. This important
document reflects realistic approaches and, in our View,
will further facilitate concerted efforts by all States to
reach an eventual solution to this problem.

We consider that the strengthening of
international cooperation between border, customs and
law-enforcement bodies in combating illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons requires the priority
attention of States and regional organizations. In most
cases such efforts require technical and financial
assistance. Those countries that have the resources and
experience should therefore be called upon to provide
such assistance whenever necessary.

I would also like to highly commend the
initiatives of the European Union and welcome the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) document on small arms and light weapons,
which in our view constitute a significant step towards
the elaboration and implementation of global measures
in this area. We support various other regional
initiatives, particularly in Africa.

We also attach great importance to the adoption
of the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.

Let me also emphasize that Ukraine pursues a
quite responsible policy in the area of arms trade. The
national system of export control provides for effective
procedures in international transfers of arms, including
small arms and light weapons. Our country also fulfils
all its obligations as a party to the relevant
international export control regimes. The legislation
currently in force envisages strict measures aimed at
preventing illegal arms manufacture, possession, use
and transfer. Ukraine maintains its regular dialogue on
these issues with member States of the European
Union, the OSCE and other interested States. We fully
abide by the relevant recommendations of the General
Assembly and decisions ofthe OSCE.

Ukraine backs the measures aimed at the
mandatory destruction of weapons confiscated from
those possessing them illegally. I would like to inform
the Council that such measures are being implemented
in my country on a regular basis.

In conclusion, let me assure you, Mr. President,
that Ukraine remains a strong supporter of the final
eradication of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and will continue to take an active part in the
international efforts to combat this practice, as well as
to restrain the proliferation of these weapons.

