Mr. Du Xiaocong (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I should like to thank Ambassador Takasu
for briefing the Council on the 90-day report of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) and for his work since assuming the
chairmanship of the Committee. China notes that the
Committee has done effective work over the past 90
days, for which we express our appreciation.

Not long ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1929 (2010), its sixth on the Iranian nuclear
issue since July 2006. Like the previous five
resolutions, the new resolution reflects the
international concern over the Iranian nuclear issue and
the hope of all parties for a peaceful settlement of the
matter through diplomatic negotiations. All countries
have the obligation to implement the aforementioned
resolution comprehensively and seriously.

China has always supported the safeguarding of
the non-proliferation regime and is opposed to the
possession and development by Iran of nuclear
weapons. We support the dual-track strategy to address
the Iranian nuclear issue and have always strictly
implemented our various obligations under the Security
Council's resolutions. At the same time, we believe
that sanctions are not aimed at solving fundamental
questions and should not be used to that end. A
peaceful solution through diplomatic negotiations is
the best option.

As the Security Council adopted the new
resolution, the foreign ministers of the five plus one
group issued a joint statement reiterating their
commitment to addressing the nuclear issue through
diplomatic negotiations. Not long ago, Ms. Ashton,
High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, wrote to Mr. J alili,
Secretary of the Iranian Supreme National Security
Council, reiterating her willingness to meet with Iran
as soon as possible.

At the same time, all parties continue to work
actively to promote the implementation of the Tehran
Research Reactor agreement signed by Brazil, Turkey
and Iran. Iran has also expressed its willingness to
negotiate with the international community and to
cooperate with International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). China hopes that all parties will seize this
opportunity to resume talks on the basis of equality and
mutual respect, to undertake further dialogue and
engagement, and to carry out diplomatic efforts,
especially outside the Security Council, to find a
peaceful solution. We hope that Iran will continue to
cooperate with the IAEA and to clarify and settle the
problems so as to remove the doubts of the
international community regarding its nuclear plans.
China will actively participate in the work of the
1737 Committee, support and cooperate with the
Chairman, and promote the constructive role of the
Committee in appropriately addressing the Iranian
nuclear issue.

