Mr. Keating: I am delighted to speak to the Security
Council so early in my tenure. It is a pleasure to brief
the Council alongside Ambassador Madeira, who has
been in-post since December 2015 and therefore is an
old hand already as compared to me.

Before I start, allow me to pay tribute to my
predecessor, Nicholas Kay, who handed over a
Mission that is in good shape. All my interlocutors in
Mogadishu - Somali and international, African Union
and United Nations - have stressed the critical role he
and his team played in the past two and a half years.

I would also like to pay tribute to the international
community and to the Council, which has played a
pivotal role on Somalia for several years. The unity of
the Council is a fundamental requirement for progress
in Somalia. I look forward to working closely with it.

Let me begin with some first impressions. I was
lucky enough to have spent some time in Somalia in
my youth, when Mogadishu was thriving, and again in
the 19905, when it was in turmoil. My two weeks as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General have
not been Somalia's easiest, marked as they have been by
tough political negotiations and marred by two horrific
terrorist attacks. Yet the Somalia I see today is closer
to that of my childhood memory than to that of the
nightmare of the civil war. It is a country of enormous
potential, of determined people of entrepreneurial
spirit, with extraordinary natural resources, a privileged
geographic location and a natural gateway. Somalis
know their potential, and they will not be deterred from
realizing it. In the wake of the terrible attacks at E1 Aade
and Lido beach, their spirit is doubly impressive.

I pay tribute to the bravery and dedication of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
its troops and to the courage of the Somali people.
Kenya has vowed not to be deterred by the attack
against its soldiers. Equally, Somalis are neither
cowed nor deflected from their goals by Al-Shabaab
atrocities. That is not to underestimate the challenges
ahead. But, as we enter a critical year for the country's
transformation, Somalia's steady progress will continue.
That will require Somali leadership and the sustained
support of the Council. Success in Somalia in 2016 will
depend upon managing threats, notably those posed by
Al-Shabaab, as well as seizing the opportunities that
political progress will bring about.

The security situation remains very challenging.
The Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission will say more on that.
We owe a great debt to the courage and dedication of
AMISOM. soldiers.

Somalia's security requires a comprehensive
approach - a full-spectrum approach, as the Secretary-
General indicated in his plan of action for preventing
violent extremism. Our political, security, development
and human rights efforts must proceed together and
reinforce each other.

Military and counter-terrorism efforts need to be
accompanied by stronger policing and the rule of law.
A priority must be to strengthen federal institutions
and regional capabilities within Somalia as the basis
for a longer-term transition plan for AMISOM. That
needs to be complemented by work to strengthen
institutions, generate jobs in the private sector and
reduce dependence upon humanitarian aid.
Security remains a paramount concern. Too
many Civilians and too many soldiers are dying.
Al-Shabaab remains a present threat. I am encouraged
by the commitments made on security-sector reform by
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud in September 2015,
including a comprehensive review of the sector, timely
and adequate pay by electronic means and transfer to
a unified biometric registration system. The United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and
its partners stand ready to support those important
initiatives.

The Federal Government is currently developing
a national security policy, which is urgently required.
The establishment of a national security architecture
must be complemented by the establishment of clear
police, justice and corrections models for Somalia in
the context of federalism, not least as the basis for
coordinated support by international partners. I hope
we see progress on that set of issues before the High-
level Partnership Forum, to be held next month in
Istanbul.

The humanitarian situation remains worrisome.
The underlying causes of Somalia's protracted crisis
remain unresolved. Millions of children, women and
elderly people are acutely vulnerable. In total, some
4.9 million people, representing 40 per cent of the total
population, are in need of humanitarian assistance.
Over 1.1 million people remain internally displaced.
Some 300,000 children under the age of five are acutely
malnourished. Millions lack access to basic health care,
water and sanitation.

The Somalia humanitarian country team recently
launched the humanitarian response plan for 2016
with a total requirement of $885 million to save
lives, strengthen livelihoods, improve access to basic
services and protect vulnerable groups, including by
seeking durable solutions for the internally displaced.
The overarching objective is both to meet pressing
need, build resilience and reduce dependence on
humanitarian aid. It needs to be generously supported.

All our efforts will be conditional upon political
progress. Last November, thousands of Somalis across
the country, from all walks oflife, took part in a national
consultative forum. That signalled a decisive step
forward towards democracy: transparent and inclusive
consultations on an electoral model for 2016, with the
active participation of women, youth and minorities.
The Mogadishu Declaration of 16 December 2015
outlined key principles, including on term limits, the
quality of the electoral process and the participation
and representation of women and youth.

It therefore gives me particular pleasure to share
some breaking news with the Council. This morning, a
decision was taken by the Somali Cabinet on the electoral
model to be used later this year. That is the culmination
of almost six months of intense consultations. It may
be a watershed moment, marking the growing political
maturity of a federal Somalia. The Federal Government
has taken a bold decision. Leaders of the Somali
regions, while many differences and concerns remain,
recognize its importance. As I speak, they are engaged
in discussions around its implementation.

Reaching a decision on the electoral model was
not easy. Following repeated rounds of consultations
among Somali leaders, in Kismayo and Mogadishu,
and prolonged deadlock, the leaders of the Federal
Government recognized that the national interest
demands forward momentum. The model envisages
that a lower house of 275 members, based on
maintenance of the 4.5 power-sharing formula between
the clans, and an upper house of 54 members, based
on equal representation of the existing, emerging and
prospective federal member states and the allocation of
additional seats to the pre-existing entities of Puntland
and Somaliland. This is a Somali-devised model.
It is Somali-led and Somali-owned. Unity among
international partners in support of the process leading
to that decision has been exemplary. International
partners will need to work with Somali stakeholders
to ensure its timely implementation. I hope I have the
support of the Security Council in that endeavour.

The decision marks an important milestone for
Somalia, the Federal Government and the leaders of
the federal member states. There are many more ahead.
The journey is going to be long and bumpy. Much
work remains to be done on the details related to the
implementation of the electoral model and to ensure
agreement of a political road map for the period from
2016 to 2020, to deliver universal elections by that date.
We must navigate around potential obstacles and will
face obstructions along the way. Spoiler behaviour will
need to be contained. And we must be ready to provide
assistance to federal and regional leaders.

Real momentum could and should result from
the breakthrough that has been achieved today. That
could spur other critical political processes. I welcome
the launch of the state formation process in Hiraan
and Shabelle Dhexe on 12 January. Once that process
is finished and the status of Mogadishu Banadir is
clarified, the map of the new, federal Somalia will
be complete. Progress has also been made in recent
months on the review of the Provisional Federal
Constitution. A technical review of 10 of its 15 chapters
has been completed, and the major political issues to be
addressed are now much clearer.

The federalization process must not just be a top-
down, mechanical exercise; to succeed in the long
term, it must be an endeavour in which all the people
of Somalia have a real stake. There is much left to do to
ensure reconciliation and unity. Freedom of expression
and opinion has been challenged in recent months,
and I call upon the Somali authorities to respect that
freedom.

Ambassador Madeira and I are looking forward to
strengthening and deepening the working relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union on
the ground. In line with resolution 2245 (2015), we
will convene a senior leadership coordination forum
among UNSOM, AMISOM. and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) to discuss our
strategic and operational priorities. We are committed
to taking full advantage of the creation of UNSOS, and
the opportunities that affords for greater coherence and
effectiveness.

We share a commitment to implementation of the
United Nations Human Rights Due Diligence Policy
with respect to United Nations support to non-United
Nations security forces, which remains an important
tool to promote respect for human rights and ensure
accountability in a volatile military context. If its are
objectives to be met, a strong working partnership
with AMISOM, as well as with the individual troop-
contributing countries is essential, including to follow
up on allegations and ensure accountability. That is in
all our interests. Human rights violations will erode the
population's support for AMISOM. and for the Somali
Federal Government.

As I have outlined here, the challenges are manifold.
In the coming months I will work with Somali leaders,
civil society and the international community to
support a comprehensive approach embracing political,
security, development and human rights priorities. The
exciting thing is that increasingly politics is displacing
violence as a means of resolving differences among
Somalis. There is an eager desire to advance and leave
the suffering and divisions of the past behind.

Let me conclude by saying that the unity of the
Security Council and the coherence of the broader
international community provides a powerful basis for
the United Nations and our African Union partners to
make a decisive contribution to Somalia's future. The
Council has my commitment and that of the entire
United Nations team that we will support the leaders
and people of Somalia to realize their goal ofa peaceful,
prosperous and democratic future.

I hope to achieve more before the high-level
partnership forum in Istanbul and look forward to
seeing members there in February.

