Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): In my June
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7463), I outlined
how the threat from Al-Qaida and its associates had
evolved over the previous year. I also addressed how
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities had
responded to this evolving threat.

Since then, the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team has presented two reports to the
Committee: the first, pursuant to resolution 2214
(2015), on the threat posed by Al-Qaida and associated
groups in Libya, in particular the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also known as Daesh, and
Ansar Al-Sharia; and the second on the impact of the
measures introduced in resolution 2199 (2015) against
ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front. The findings from these
reports form the basis of my briefing today. I will also
make some additional remarks on the Committee's
general work.

The Monitoring Team presented its report on
the terrorism threat in Libya to the Committee on
12 October. I understand that, due to a delay in
translation, the report will be available as a United
Nations document at the beginning of November. The
Committee has also agreed several actions based on
recommendations made by the Monitoring Team in the
report.

In advance of the report's circulation, I will limit
myself to a few key observations. The report concluded
that while the threat from Al-Qaida and its associates,
including ISIL in Libya, is not new, the current situation
signals a potentially increasing level of threat. Libya
presents fertile ground for Al-Qaida-associated groups
to opportunistically exploit and complicate an already
difficult situation.

Libya is also strategically valuable to such terrorist
groups. Its geographic location in Africa and proximity
to Southern Europe is important. It is also a gateway
to the African desert, stretching to a number of
African countries, and it has significant oil resources,
widespread availability of arms and weak internal
security. Not surprisingly, Libya continues to attract
significant numbers of foreign terrorist fighters from
the Middle East and North Africa.

The report concludes that ISIL in Libya has so far
been the only known ISIL affiliate that benefits from
support and guidance from ISIL in Syria and Iraq.
The report further notes that ISIL, with an estimated
strength of 2,000 to 3,000 fighters, is an evident
short- and long-term threat. ISIL's central command
in Iraq and Syria views Libya as a good opportunity
to expand its so-called caliphate. It controls territory
in and around Sirte and has terrorist cells in several
Libyan cities, including Derna, clearly demonstrating
an intention to control additional territory. It has been
able to perpetrate attacks in many other parts of the
country. Several of the individuals involved in these
attacks, and senior ISIL leadership in Libya, have not
yet been designated. To extend the reach ofthe sanctions
measures, including to those individuals, we will need
Member States to provide further listing proposals to
the Committee.

There are some moderating factors on the threat
from ISIL in Libya. ISIL currently lacks popular
support and is seen by locals as a foreign terrorist
organization not embedded in their communities. ISIL
in Libya is therefore very dependent on incoming and
returning foreign terrorist fighters for support. The
Committee would like to remind Member States that
advance passenger information, or API, can facilitate
detection of the movement of individuals who are on the
Al-Qaida sanctions list. Member States should exercise
vigilance regarding the travel of individuals to Libya.
As Chair, I will raise with the relevant stakeholders the
possibility ofajoint meeting for analyzing any capacity
gaps in Libya, including border-control issues, and for
discussing ways to address those gaps.

Finally, as regards Libya, the report notes that long-
standing regional terrorist organizations such as Ansar
Al-Sharia, and in particular Ansar Al-Sharia Derna,
seem to have weakened since ISIL became established.
However, they continue to operate and use Libya as a
base.

I now turn to the impact of the measures imposed
in resolution 2199 (2015). In August, the Monitoring
Team presented to the Committee its assessment of the
impact of the measures introduced in resolution 2199
(2015). The Chair's summary of the assessment was
circulated to the Council on 25 September and can be
found on the Committee's website. The Committee has
also agreed on several actions based on the Monitoring
Team's recommendations. They are largely aimed at
raising awareness of the threats posed by ISIL and the
Al-Nusra Front, particularly around financing, and
suggest ways in which Member States and the private
sector could implement the required measures.

The measures introduced in resolution 2199
(2015) to inhibit financing of ISIL and the Al-Nusra
Front focused on eliminating their key revenue
streams, namely, oil smuggling, antiquities looting and
trafficking, kidnapping for ransom and illegal donations.
The Monitoring Team considered that resolution
2199 (2015) has had an effect in raising awareness
of the need for concerted action by Member States,
particularly where ISIL's smuggling of antiquities and
accessing of the international financial system are
concerned. However, the Monitoring Team identified
a series of major challenges that have complicated
effective implementation of the measures, including
the difficulty of identifying the origin of seized crude
oil and antiquities. The Monitoring Team further noted
that it would be premature to make a full assessment of
the impact of resolution 2199 (2015), only five months
after its adoption.

By way of assistance, the Committee has produced
a note, also available on the Committee's website,
which outlines the challenges and suggests some
solutions. At the Committee's direction, the Monitoring
Team is currently preparing a technical assistance note
for business entities on oil and antiquities smuggling
by ISIL. Other agreed Committee actions, such as the
production of a voluntary self-assessment tool and
outreach with humanitarian actors, are forthcoming.

I would now like to provide the Council with three
short updates on the work of the Committee more
generally. First, in September, the Al-Qaida sanctions
list expanded with the inclusion of 20 more names,
most of them related to ISIL. This reflects the growing
threat that ISIL poses and efforts by Member States to
propose designations. The Al-Qaida sanctions list now
contains 247 individuals and 74 entities.

Secondly, the new Ombudsperson for the 1267
sanctions regime, Ms. Catherine Marchi-Uhel,
commenced her important responsibilities in early July.
There have also been some changes in the Monitoring
Team's composition. I would like to acknowledge the
Team's hard work under the leadership of its Acting
Coordinator, Hans-Jakob Schindler, which has been
both timely and of high quality.

Finally, I plan to convene another open briefing
for interested Member States in November. As with the
open briefing held in April this year, I intend it to be
an informal, interactive discussion of the Committee's
work. I encourage interested Member States to
participate and to contact the Chair or the Committee
in advance about issues on which they would like to
be briefed. We expect the discussion to be particularly
useful ahead of the December mandate review of the
1267 sanctions regime.

In conclusion, it is important that the international
community provide support to Libya and its neighbours
in the struggle against Al-Qaida, ISIL and their
associates. Countering ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front
in Iraq and Syria must remain a high priority for
the Council and its members. For the success of our
common endeavour, it is critical that we encourage all
Member States to fully implement, support and promote
the measures adopted by this body.

