Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): At the outset, let me thank
Baroness Catherine Ashton, High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union, for her statement. Rwanda views positively these
regular interactions between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, particularly the
European Union (EU) and, in my region, the African
Union (AU).

From the ashes of the Second World War,
Europeans decided to come together and establish an
economic and political union, which, five decades later,
has succeeded in establishing peace and security on the
continent, despite certain challenges such as Kosovo or
Cyprus. Here, I would like again to commend Baroness
Ashton for her role as mediator in bringing the Prime
Ministers of Kosovo and Serbia together in Brussels for
a fourth meeting on political dialogue.

Based on its experience in making and building
peace at home, the EU has been collaborating effectively
with the United Nations, supporting peace and security
outside the continent, particularly in Africa. In that
regard, the African Peace Facility is playing an
important role in equipping Africa with the necessary
tools and means to prevent conflict on the continent,
notably through capacity-building and support for an
early warning system.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the action of the EU in Mali and in the Sahel. We have
welcomed the decision to establish an EU training
mission in Mali aimed at building the capacity of the
Malian forces and providing financial and logistical
support for the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali (AFISMA). Similarly, I commend the
EU for its continuing engagement in Somalia and the
Horn of Africa, particularly by supporting the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

In peacekeeping operations, Rwanda values the
triangular cooperation of the AU, the EU and the
United Nations. Support by the EU, mainly in the
form of capacity-building, planning and financial
support, has provided robustness to peacekeeping in
Africa, particularly the AU-led missions AFISMA
and AMISOM. Most of the time, support has been ad
hoc, fragmented and sometimes politicized. There is,
therefore, a need for a more coordinated, coherent,
predictable and sustained United Nations and EU
support to AU with a view to assisting the AU to resolve
its structural and capacity challenges.

In conflict and post-conflict situations, the
European Union has consistently advocated for the rule
of law; protection of civilians, particularly for women
and children; responsibility to protect human rights;
and accountability. We share all those principles, as
they are universal values that should guide each of us.
In order better to achieve those goals, however, it is
important that the EU and other partners give priority
to peace and political dialogue, while strengthening the
capacity of national jurisdictions. International justice
and universal jurisdictions, when used genuinely, are
important as means to end impunity for the most serious
crimes. They should, however, be the last resort.

I conclude by once again commending the EU for
its effective and important collaboration with both
the United Nations and the AU in peace and security.
We look forward to sustained and strengthened
collaboration.

