Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
France welcomed with great satisfaction the conclusion of
the Basic Agreement of 12 November on the territories of
Eastern Slavonia in the Republic of Croatia. This happy
outcome to a grave problem that threatened peace and
security in the region is due to the wisdom of the parties,
and we should congratulate them.

France welcomes in particular the courageous choice
of the authorities of the Republic of Croatia, who, in a
difficult context, opted for the peaceful reintegration of
their territory. This outcome was far from certain, given the
particularly bloody recent history of Eastern Slavonia. No
one has forgotten the martyrdom of Vukovar, and the tragic
plight of the more than 100,000 refugees of all nationalities
driven out of the region or the uncertainty that remains -
though we hope to see it dispelled soon - regarding the
fate of hundreds of missing persons.

The energy and know-how of the international
mediators, in particular Mr. Stoltenberg, who spent many
months attempting to bring the parties together, deserves
our highest praise, and our thanks go to all those who
assisted Mr. Stoltenberg, particularly the representatives of
the United States, the Russian Federation and the European
Union.

Now we must establish and guarantee a just and
lasting peace for all the inhabitants of Eastern Slavonia.
This is the principal goal of the resolution just adopted by
the Security Council.

We have to show that the entire international
community supports the peace process now under way and
take this occasion to show our support for the essential
principles that have inspired it: the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Croatia; recognition
and protection of the fundamental rights and freedoms of
the whole population of the region, without distinction as to
origin; the need for the rapid return of all displaced persons
and refugees; and the guarantee that all the inhabitants of
Eastern Slavonia will be able to live in peace and dignity
in the place where they were born and have always lived.

It is on the basis of these principles that France
co-sponsored this resolution, and we hope that the Basic
Agreement of 12 November will rapidly be implemented in
an effective way and to the satisfaction of all the parties.

The fact that we need the support of the community of
nations in order to do this is precisely reflected in operative
paragraph 2, which notes the request to establish a
Transitional Administration and to authorize an
appropriate international force, acknowledges the role of
the Security Council and invites the Secretary-General to
support the Council in this matter.

We therefore make an urgent appeal to the
Government of the Republic of Croatia and the Serbian
representatives of Eastern Slavonia not to allow any act
to jeopardize this Agreement.

