Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I wish at the outset to personally
congratulate your friendly delegation on your presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August; you
can rest assured of my delegation's support. I wish
also to congratulate the delegation of Peru on its very
successful stewardship during the month of July.
I wish to thank you, Mr. Minister, and your country,
Poland, for having organized this very important debate
on the topic of children during this year of historic
commemorations, including the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1882 (2009) and the establishment of the
mandate of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
as well as the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. These are deeply symbolic
milestones that demand reflection and especially a
response in terms of ways and means leading to an
optimal international mobilization to protect children,
prevent them from being recruited or sent into combat,
and ensure that their basic rights are no longer violated
in time of conflict.

Today's debate will no doubt contribute to raising
international awareness and to strengthening our
determination to act for a better world for all Children,
so that no child is left behind.

I would like to thank Mrs. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive
Director of UNICEF; and Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan
for their very highly appreciated briefings.

In today's conflicts children are, unfortunately,
the primary victims: when they are directly impacted,
when they are separated from their loved ones, when
their education is jeopardized, when they are taken out
of school or living in the street, when they are forced to
join armed groups and when they become the victims
of exploitation and sexual abuses. Children who are
victims of armed conflict have their childhood stolen
from them and often suffer a vicious circle of endless
violence. Likewise, children who were abducted
and later released underwent terrible experiences
during their detention that are traumatizing to their
psychological makeup, and they are later stigmatized
by society. All such children need our support as a
priority in order to fully integrate into society.

The efforts of the international community would
benefit from being incorporated into a more realistic
and strategic approach, with respect not only to
conflicts that are under way but also to an emphasis
on prevention. At the same time, an approach that
combines incentives as well as more binding measures,
especially in terms of accountability and fighting
impunity, is necessary.

The prevention of conflicts and their devastating
effects on children requires that national and
international efforts be coordinated, especially through,
inter alia, the entrenchment of democracy, good
governance, the rule of law, respect for human rights
and the promotion of sustainable development, as well
as raising awareness of communities on the importance
of protecting and promoting children's rights through
use of the media, including television, radio, social
networks, advertising campaigns and schools.

The establishment of legal, policy and institutional
measures for the protection of children and the prevention
and elimination of violence against them, including in
times of conflict, remains a particular focus and should
be guaranteed for those most at risk of being recruited
by armed groups, in particular children separated from
their families or without families, children placed in
institutions, children living or working in the street, and
refugee and migrant children. In addition, it is necessary
to coordinate our actions and chart the path we must
follow together - States, international organizations,
non-governmental organizations and representatives
of civil society 4 to guide our initiatives and actions
on the ground. Much has been accomplished but more
remains to be done.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco condemns
in the strongest terms all forms of violence against
children in armed conflict, including their abduction
and conscription by armed groups, their use as human
shields, their being taken as hostages or their recruitment
in refugee camps. Morocco's focus on children's rights
at the international level was reflected in its 2019
presidency of the UNICEF Executive Board. I take this
opportunity to reiterate to Ms. Fore and UNICEF, our
confidence and great appreciation for their remarkable
work and dedication in promoting the well-being of all
children in all its dimensions.

In addition, Morocco has always been involved in
international efforts to end the involvement of children
in armed conflict. It has acceded to all international
instruments relating to the rights of the child and was
among the first countries to sign and ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict and the
Paris Principles and Paris Commitments on this issue.

As part of the extension of these commitments to the
protection of the rights of the Child, wherever they may
be, I would like to announce today that the Kingdom of
Morocco has decided to endorse andjoin the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
