Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having made
sure to include the item of post-conflict peacebuilding
on the agenda of the Security Council. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Momen, for his work in leading the Commission and
for his extremely instructive briefing.

The Security Council has always promoted
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict, as
manifested by its initiatives in Sierra Leone, Liberia
and, more recently, Timor-Leste. The public debates
held recently and the resolutions and presidential
statements subsequently adopted speak eloquently of
this new direction in the Council's action.

Although post-conflict peacebuilding is a long-
term process that does not usually yield immediately
quantifiable results, it remains true that the efforts
made in that framework are vital to ensuring lasting
peace and security and providing opportunities for
sustainable development. Thus, since the 2005 World
Summit, the issue of peacebuilding has been at centre
stage in the United Nations work in countries emerging
from conflict.

Peacebuilding takes place after the re-establishment
of peace in order to make the United Nations presence
more visible and efficient. In that context, the United
Nations must consider in an integrated and consistent
fashion all the problems that arise from conflict or are
exacerbated by it. In coordination with the Government
of the country concerned, it must propose ways to build
a viable State that respects fundamental freedoms
and strives to ensure good democratic, political and
economic governance.

It is true that the international community's recent
initiatives in post-conflict peacebuilding have met with
mixed success. That is because the approaches adopted
have often varied in accordance with the influence, and
above all the perceived value, of the country concerned.
As countries emerging from conflict are often unstable,
sometimes for years at a time, and some fall back into
violence, the peacebuilding approach must represent

the resolve of the international community to ensure
that the country emerging from conflict does not fall
back into violence due to lack of appropriate support
and means.

Togo therefore welcomes the progress made since
2010 on ensuring lasting peace in countries emerging
from conflict, even if the international community's
expectations have not been met in certain countries,
such as Guinea-Bissau, given the repeated interference
of the military in political life. These results have
been possible partly because of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which, because of its structure and
mandate, plays a very important role in the political,
economic, social, security and human rights spheres.
However, if the Peacebuilding Commission's actions
are to be sustained, the States concerned must exercise
national ownership over them. National ownership is
all the more necessary in that it enables a harmonious
implementation of the projects already begun and
obviates competition between the agencies of the
United Nations system and development partners on
the ground.

In a country that is rebuilding after conflict, the
political sphere must take priority in that it must help
reorganize and establish new institutions and prepare
for and organize democratic, free and transparent
elections. In other words, it must lay out and establish
a programme of good governance. We welcome the
fact that the United Nations is investing more and
more in the preparation and organization of elections,
since failure to organize elections well or a lack of
transparency often leads to violence that could give rise
to another conflict.

Peacebuilding in a country emerging from armed
conflict requires that the root causes of the conflict be
taken into account. These can be internal or external.
This is why, in pursuing peacebuilding, all stakeholders
in the conflict must be involved so that they can all
make their contribution to rebuilding a country that
has been torn apart by conflict. In that respect, my
country welcomes the the international community's
increasing awareness of the important role that women
play in the search for lasting peace and security. But
if the process must be open to everyone, the political
parties or the organizations that these parties belong
to must be strengthened in accordance with the
basic principles of peacebuilding, including national
ownership, partnership and mutual responsibilty. Such
capacity-building requires the consistent support of the
international community.

We often note that the assistance expected by a
country emerging from conflict is not forthcoming
because of various factors, including a lack of
confidence, whether the country is considered of
interest, and investors' lack of enthusiasm for that
country. That is why Togo believes that the country
involved and development partners must from the outset
establish a contract of mutual commitment based on
accommodations among the parties in order to identify
and locate responsibility, should there be a failure to
respect commitments.

In conclusion, Togo would like to thank the
international community for its efforts to provde
sustainable assistance to countries emerging from
conflict, especially in Africa. We urge it to do more to
ensure that such countries do not fall back into violence.
To that end, my country supports the draft presidential
statement to be adopted later in the debate.

