Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and I wish to commend
Ambassador Ben Mustapha of Tunisia for the able
manner in which he presided over the work of the
Council in February.

I further wish to thank you and your delegation
for convening this important follow-up meeting to the
historic and precedent-setting meeting of the Security
Council last September, and we thank the Secretary-
General for his important statement this morning. Your
initiative is further commendable since the United
Nations is often criticized of being a talk shop, and
follow-up action like today's can go a long way
towards correcting that image. Regular review of the
Council's decisions is one way to ensure that it
becomes more effective in fulfilling its mandate.

When the Security Council, at the level of heads
of State and Government, adopted resolution 1318
(2000), it made a number of important commitments
aimed at ensuring an effective role for itself in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly in Africa. Principal among these
commitments was the pledge by the Council to uphold
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, which should be respected at all times. This
review, six months later, proves that, while some
progress has been made, the Security Council still
needs to be much more responsive to and proactive
towards the challenges facing it today.

Since the focus of this meeting is on Africa, I
shall deal with that first. In that region, the root causes
of conflict remain poverty and underdevelopment, and
the Council should continue to further strengthen its
coordination with regional and subregional
organizations that have direct knowledge of the reality
of certain issues in order to develop integrated
responses to conflicts which address both peace and
security and sustainable development.

The Council was unfortunately found lacking in
political will with regard to peacemaking and
peacekeeping efforts in certain conflicts. On the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
peace process is moving forward at the moment thanks
to the commitment of the parties to the conflict.
However, it is our view that progress could have been
achieved earlier had the Council not at times adopted a
wait-and-see approach. While the Council's adoption
of resolution 1341 (2001) is welcomed, this reaction
from the Council is minimalist, despite the excellent
conditions for peace. A question mark remains as to
whether the agreed numbers of military personnel will
be sufficient to effectively deal with the situation,
given the size of the country and the enormity and
complexity of the conflict.

A further positive point is that the Council has
shown continued commitment to cutting off UNITA's
resources, which enable it to wage war against the
Angolan people. In this regard, the extension in
January of the mandate of the Monitoring Mechanism
was welcome, but the Council also needs to take
appropriate measures against sanctions violators.
Sanctions remain a viable tool for the Council to
enforce its decisions. However, in some cases the
effectiveness of sanctions is questionable and they have
caused untenable hardship to civilians. In cases like
these, sanctions need to be eased or lifted so as not to
prolong the agony of the affected people.

Another criticism frequently leveled against the
Security Council is that it practices selectivity in
dealing with conflict situations. Unfortunately, if one
looks at the continuing tragedy in the occupied
Palestinian territories, it is hard to argue against such
criticism. The military onslaught and economic
strangulation of the Palestinians continue, with massive
human rights and humanitarian rights abuses, while the
Security Council does not appear fully committed to
stop the violence and to find a lasting solution to the
conflict. To restore its credibility, the Council should
ensure that its resolutions, such as resolution 1322
(2000), are fully implemented. It also remains an
urgent necessity for the Council to establish a United
Nations protection force for Palestinian civilians.

An area where the peacemaking efforts of the
international community are being frustrated is the
situation in Western Sahara. The Security Council must
be vigilant and should not accept any attempt to derail
the implementation of the United Nations settlement
plan. The people of Western Sahara have suffered too
much and for too long. They must be allowed to
exercise their right to self- determination. This is
clearly a case where the Council has to assume its
responsibility to ensure that the settlement plan is
implemented without any further delay.

The other victims of war are women and children,
and the Council has a special responsibility to
safeguard them and to protect their interests. Concrete
measures should be taken to ensure a greater role for
women in all efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security. Additional efforts and
initiatives should be put in place to end the targeting of
children in situations of armed conflict, including the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict, in
violation of international law. The Council should
ensure that all of its resolutions regarding these
vulnerable groups are fully implemented.

In conclusion, while the Security Council
possesses enough tools, through the Charter of the
United Nations, to respond to situations regarding the
maintenance of international peace and security, it
needs to be continuously vigilant to be able to respond
to modern-day challenges, which are not so clear-cut
but clearly pose threats to international peace and
security. These issues include HIV/AIDS and the
effects of poverty. In this regard, it is imperative for the
Security Council to reform itself to reflect the will of
the wider United Nations membership, so as to
strengthen its role, maintain its authority and improve
its effectiveness.

