Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Morris for his briefing and for the valuable
information he has given to the Council today.

As previous speakers have mentioned, one can
only be powerfully struck by the dimensions of the
task, by the severity of the crisis and by the difficulties
faced by the World Food Programme (WFP) in trying
to cope with situations, such as that of Ethiopia and
Eritrea, whose urgency Mr. Morris has described. Like
Ambassador Cunningham, we wonder how the WFP
can today face an emergency affecting 11 million
inhabitants without being certain - or at least, we are
not certain - about what the actual donations expected
from member countries would be? So my first question
would be along the same lines as that raised by
Ambassador Cunningham: given a situation such as
Ethiopia and Eritrea, what assistance can we expect to
receive in order to tackle the magnitude of the crisis?

Secondly, it is clear that when it is said that
chronic hunger is growing in the developing world and
that hunger in the world is still the main reason for
medical emergencies or shortcomings, we are dealing
with questions concerning the system. As the
representative of Cameroon said, we are facing
problems which have to do with development policies
and how we address them. The United Nations has a
toolbox for this. For decades, we have developed
bodies within the United Nations whose function it is
to assess the situation in developing countries and to
try to provide, particularly through the Economic and
Social Council, responses that relate to how the
international system can tackle these questions. I would
like to ask Mr. Morris if he has any further thoughts
about this.

Lastly, while entirely aware of the seriousness of
the situation in Africa, Mr. Morris explained at the
beginning of his speech the tasks that the WFP is
undertaking in Iraq. I would like to raise the possibility
that we hold another meeting in which Mr. Morris
could directly address that issue.

