Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kobler and
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Robinson
for taking the time to brief us today on the reports
of the Secretary-General (S/20l4/157 and S/204/153, respectively) and the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

As the Secretary-General's reports highlight,
despite the positive developments of late 2013, it is clear
that the momentum has slowed, with limited progress
on both the political and military fronts. We are looking
at a volatile security situation in not only the east, but

throughout the country. Negative forces are still on the
rampage, killing and maiming, raping young girls and
women, recruiting children and displacing thousands
of civilians.

The seriousness and scale of the killings and
violations that continue in Katanga and in areas formerly
occupied by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) in North
Kivu are deeply troubling. A major reason for that is the
culture of impunity that continues to prevail throughout
the country. All perpetrators - Whether from the
Forces armees de la Republique de'mocratique du Congo
(FARDC), which has committed 18 per cent of crimes
reported in 2013, or any other armed group - must be
brought to justice and held accountable for their crimes.

There is no doubt that the next few months will
be critical. We need to take a serious look at how
resolution 2098 (2013) is being implemented, especially
in the neutralization of negative armed groups, the
consolidation of the peace process and the protection of
civilians in liberated areas.

We welcome mention in the reports presented by
the briefers of the fact that some members of some
armed groups have peacefully surrendered, and indeed
we applaud the FARDC, supported by MONUSCO,
for attacking and destroying a number of Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) camps. The resumption of
the Minova trial is another positive development, and
we look forward to a conclusive prosecution that can set
a precedent for future cases. The recently promulgated
amnesty law, adopted as per the Kampala Declarations,
is also a positive step in national reconciliation, but
one that will require measurable actions. We urge
MONUSCO and the international community to closely
monitor its implementation.

However, those positive developments should not
obscure the fact that one of the oldest armed groups
remains at large. As always, for the past 20 years, the
problem that we have is the posture of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
United Nations peacekeepers, currently MONUSCO,
towards the threat posed by the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), the genocidal
forces responsible for the genocide against the Tutsi.
Throughout the last quarter of 2013, we were told that
the FDLR were next on the list of negative forces to
be eliminated. What therefore happened between when
that promise was made and the next briefing? No one
knows. There is no accountability.

At our most recent meeting on MONUSCO, the
military operation plan presented to the Security
Council was that the FARDC was to go after the ADF.
They did so, and we applaud them. Following that, we
were told that MONUSCO was to focus its resources
on the FDLR. Nothing happened. Only a week or two
before this briefing did we hear the news that there was
a military operation against the FDLR.

The threat ofthe FDLR persists, despite the mandate
of MONUSCO, which was given extra offensive
capabilities after the deployment of the Intervention
Brigade, and MONUSCO's failure to commit to fighting
that force remains evident.

Once again, it is high time we see a change of
attitude on the part of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo towards the FDLR. Rwanda has
for several years expressed legitimate concerns about
the lack of political will of that Government to tackle
the threat of the FDLR. Various Security Council
reports have detailed evidence of all kinds of support
given to the FDLR by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and Rwanda has provided even more.

The continuous excuses given by MONUSCO,
again and again, when it comes to conducting
military operations against the FDLR are disturbing.
While it is not making excuses about the lack of
intelligence - which Rwanda has shared with
MONUSCO - it is engaged in propaganda operations
to hoodwink the Security Council about military
operations with the FARDC against the FDLR. On
9 March 2014, the MONUSCO Force Intervention
Brigade, jointly with the FARDC, raided the FDLR's
illegal road block along the Kalengera-Tongo road.
Reliable information revealed that Colonel Ramadan,
the acting FARDC commander of the eighth military
region, leaked information of the impending Brigade
attack on the FDLR, thus undermining the operation.

Let me just add that it is not only Rwanda
expressing frustration over inaction against negative
forces. The countries of the region and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) have
expressed frustration over the lack of political will by
MONUSCO to address the threats of armed groups in
the Great Lakes region.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has been
host to domestic and foreign armed groups, particularly
the M-23, the FDLR and the Allied Democratic Forces/
National Army for the Liberation of Uganda. As a
result, the ICGLR came up with detailed mechanisms
to address the situation, including political and military
measures. Some of those mechanisms have been taken
over by the United Nations, including the Intervention
Brigade under MONUSCO - and yet the major threat
posed by the FDLR has not been tackled. That was
again the subject of the ICGLR Summit held in Luanda
on 15 January 2014, where the chiefs of defence staffs
of Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Uganda and South Africa were again tasked
with assessing the situation and coming up with new
mechanisms to eradicate the FDLR.

On the current situation regarding the FDLR, let me
briefly share some updates with the Council on FDLR
activities. The FDLR's strength is estimated at 3,640,
with infantry and integral weapons. That strength
is likely to increase, due to ongoing recruitment and
training. Currently, the FDLR is engaged in the
following activities.

First, it is enhancing collaboration with FARDC,
especially at the operational level. That has enabled
the FDLR to refit, re-arm, share intelligence and have
freedom of action and free passage for infiltration
and terror attacks in Rwanda. From July 2013 to date,
42 FDLR infiltrators and terror elements have been
arrested and are undergoing prosecution in Rwandan
courts.

Secondly, on the mobilization, recruitment, training
and establishment of terror networks in Rwanda, those
activities are facilitated by provision of safe passage
and logistics by the FARDC.

Thirdly, the recent claim by MONUSCO that
the FDLR is located in populated areas is just a
sheer lie. Instead, the outfit has most of its units in
Virunga National Park, in North Kivu province. It
also maintains its dispositions in unpopulated areas of
Mwenga and Uvira territories in South Kivu, involved
in illegal mining and taxation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to sustain the war
effort.

I would also like to discuss a different issue,
M-23 ex-combatants. While the Secretary-General's
report (S/2014/157) suggests that consultations on the
unresolved issue of the ex-combatants in Rwanda are
ongoing, we remind the Council that those combatants
have been in Rwanda since March 2013 - almost a
year. The Government of Rwanda has done everything
required by international law to contain that group,
including relocating them to Ngoma district in Eastern
Province, approximately 250 kilometres from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo border. But despite
our repeated calls for the international community to
assume responsibility, not much has been done. Some
contacts were initiated in December, but they were not
really that much.

I will not dwell much on the report on the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework (S/2014/153),
since the implementation of the Framework will be
discussed on 27 March in Nairobi.

As we have said previously, next month marks the
twentieth commemoration of the genocide against the
Tutsi. There could be no greater symbol of justice for
its victims than the defeat and eradication of the FDLR
once and for all. It is a virulent genocidal force that has
been allowed to terrorize the region for the past two
decades.

