Mr. von der Schulenburg: Mr. President, I am
grateful for the opportunity to present to you the First
Report of the Secretary-General on the recently
established United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (S/2009/59). As we meet here
today, Sierra Leone is entering its eighth year of peace.
It was in January 2002 that the then President Ahmad
Tejan Kabbah declared an end to the ll years of an
often brutal war.

Since then, Sierra Leone has made great strides.
Today, there are no longer any armed opposition
groups in Sierra Leone and the use of arms in political
or ethnic disputes has almost completely disappeared.
Over the last seven years, we have seen a number of
democratic elections and the peaceful transition from
one elected Government to another. There have also
been two important and peaceful local Government
elections and a number of by-elections since 2004, the
most recent election having taken place in July of last
year. Also promising are the signs that
non-governmental associations are increasingly
engaging in free and fair elections to select or replace
their leaders.

Sierra Leone has also made considerable progress
in rebuilding key national institutions. The
performance of the National Electoral Commission and
the Sierra Leone Police during the recent elections has
been very professional. Sierra Leone now has a
working Human Rights Commission and the first steps
have been taken towards a decentralization of power
towards the provinces.
09-23183

Although exact statistics are hard to come by,
there is a general agreement among experts that
poverty levels in Sierra Leone have dropped since the
year 2003. Furthermore, a recent health survey would
indicate that child mortality rates have declined
considerably, providing an example of how focused
Government intervention, together with decisive
support from international development partners, can
produce results.

Despite these encouraging achievements, much
remains to be done, and Sierra Leone's young
democracy continues to face daunting challenges.
Sierra Leone remains one of the poorest countries in
the world and is at the bottom of Human Development
Index created by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). Despite all the progress that has
been made, many Sierra Leoneans do not yet fully
benefit from any peace dividend; that is especially the
case for many rural poor and the country's youth.

Almost a year and a half into the tenure of the
new Government, expectations among many Sierra
Leoneans remain high that the new Government will
deliver on the promises it made during the elections.
For the Government, it is now very important not to
lose momentum, to stay the course and implement the
many reforms and plans it has committed itself to put
into place. The President's Agenda for Change
provides an excellent policy document to lead and
focus the work of the Government over the coming
years.

In addition, we, the international development
partners for Sierra Leone, should stay the course and
fulfil our commitments, even in the difficult times of a
global financial crisis. In a region that is beset with
social, political and economic problems, it is important
that we all work together with the Government to make
Sierra Leone a success story and turn it into a beacon
for democracy, stability and economic progress. That
job has not yet been done; it will require continued
Government efforts and sustained international
cooperation.

Many donors have come to the support of Sierra
Leone. In addition to international organizations, such
as the United Nations family, the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and the African
Development Bank, I would like to applaud in
particular the sustained support that Sierra Leone has
been receiving over the years from the British
09-23183

Government and the European Commission, as well as
from its regional partners, in particular Nigeria. In
addition, other countries such as China, Ireland,
Germany, the United States, Japan and Italy have
proven valuable and reliable partners to Sierra Leone. I
would also like to welcome Sweden, Norway, the
Netherlands and India - States that have now joined
in supporting Sierra Leone. Nonetheless, we will have
to continue making all efforts to even further expand
the donor base for the country.

Coming out of a conflict and trying to consolidate
peace will never be an easy task, and as we travel down
the road towards greater stability and economic
progress, we must be fully aware of the risks that lie
ahead. Only then can we deal with them effectively.
Therefore, I believe it is of the utmost importance that
President Koroma in his Agenda for Change has clearly
reiterated his Government's determination to combat
the three most imminent threats on Sierra Leone's road
to peace and prosperity - corruption, illicit drug
trafficking and youth unemployment.

Let me be more specific. The Government has
made considerable progress on stamping out
corruption. The newly structured Anti-Corruption
Commission has made a credible start, and a recently
approved anti-corruption law provides the legal basis
for decisive action. However, old habits die slowly, and
time and perseverance are required for them to be
overcome. However, I remain confident that the
Government is determined to ensure that any real or
perceived administrative mismanagement or corruption
will not derail the strong commitments it has made to
the people of Sierra Leone and its international
development partners to deal with the problem.

The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) and the United
Nations country team stand ready to continue to work
with of the Anti-Corruption Commission. In this
context, I also welcome the work of the UNDP together
with other development partners in supporting the
Government's civil service reforms with the aim of
creating a more transparent and effective Government. I
also welcome the recently established presidential
committee to review all mining contracts of the country,
which were a source of so much conflict in the past.

With respect to illicit drugs, the trafficking of
illicit drugs from Latin America through West Africa en
route to European markets has created immense
3
political and socio-economic challenges in large parts
of the subregion. This threat has now reached the
shores of Sierra Leone. Thankfully, Sierra Leone is still
in the prevention stage; illicit drugs have not yet
penetrated its society and undermined its institutions.
The fight against illicit drug trafficking can be won, and
the decisive actions taken by President Koroma
following the seizure of the plane loaded with illicit
drugs in July of last year are particularly commendable.

The financial and logistical power of
international drug cartels greatly surpasses the
resources that are available to countries such as Sierra
Leone; the street value of the recently seized cocaine is
estimated to exceed the Government's entire budget for
this year. Sierra Leone will therefore need strong and
reliable international support. In this context, I would
like to thank the British Government, the United States
as well as the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime for their prompt action in support of Sierra
Leone's law enforcement services. I would also like to
thank the Netherlands for considering funding a
sizeable assistance programme to strengthen Sierra
Leone's law enforcement agencies. Further, I welcome
plans by Venezuela and Colombia to strengthen their
cooperation with law enforcement authorities in West
Africa and stand ready to facilitate any cooperation
that they would also like to extend to Sierra Leone.

With regard to youth unemployment, one of the
most disheartening aspects of many post-conflict
societies is that young people, instead of being a
country's most productive resource and a symbol of its
future, may indeed be perceived as a potential threat to
peace and stability. We estimate that in Sierra Leone
approximately 1 million young people are either
underemployed or simply unemployed. Despite the
magnitude of the problem, attempts to find solutions to
youth unemployment have remained modest.

In order to deal with that problem, the
Government is in the process of setting up a National
Youth Commission. It is now important that that be
followed up with a number of concrete programmes
designed to make a difference in the lives of tens of
thousands of young men and women. All of this will
require a focused and well coordinated approach on the
part of the Government and its international
development partners.

Allow me to add a few words on our own behalf.
As required by the Council, we have now established a
new United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone. The essential groundwork has been laid,
but more work still needs to be done if the Office is
become fully functional.

We see the new United Nations Office as a vehicle
for the partnership between the United Nations -
including the Peacebuilding Commission and, indeed,
the Security Council - and the democratically elected
Government of Sierra Leone. It will be our primary
task to assist the country and its Government through
the difficult process of consolidating peace.

In that spirit, we see ourselves at the forefront of
the development and testing of a new and, above all,
practical concept of effective peacebuilding. Compared
with the previous mission, our new Office is much
smaller but, at the same time, much more substantive,
enabling us to deal professionally with the many
important mandates that the Council has given us.
More important, we have been able to develop a
stronger, integrated approach combining the political
mandate given to UNIPSIL with the development and
humanitarian mandates given to our sister United
Nations agencies.

The result of that new approach is the Joint
Vision of the United Nations Family for Sierra Leone,
a document that has recently received the endorsement
of the Peacebuilding Commission. Let me take this
opportunity to thank all my colleagues in the United
Nations country team for their exceptional readiness to
work together for the good of Sierra Leone, as well as
for their great spirit of mutual support.

Peacebuilding in Sierra Leone needs sustained
political and financial support from the international
community. Here, we will continue to rely on the vital
support that we have received from the Peacebuilding
Commission. In particular, the personal commitment,
support and leadership that His Excellency
Ambassador Frank Majoor has extended to the United
Nations family, my team and myself over the critical
period of the transition from a peacekeeping to a
peacebuilding mission is highly appreciated.

We intend to further strengthen this important
relationship between the Peacebuilding Commission in
New York and the Peacebuilding Office in Freetown.
Ambassador Majoor and I have been discussing the
possibility of holding, together with the Government, a
special session of the Peacebuilding Commission either
here in New York or in Freetown to rally international
support behind the President's Agenda for Change and
the United Nations Joint Vision.

Peacebuilding will not be achieved overnight.
There will be no clear benchmarks to tell us if and
when we have succeeded. We need patience, and we
need to avoid succumbing to undue rush.
Peacebuilding must be nurtured, and that requires time.

At the same time, however, peacebuilding brings
with it a sense of urgency. After a conflict,
expectations are high and many of the underlying
problems that once led to the civil conflict need to be
urgently addressed. Together with the Government, we
will therefore have to find the right balance between
patience and perseverance, on the one hand, and the
need to act urgently, on the other. Finding the right
balance may largely determine our success in
peacebuilding.

Finally, let me reassure members of the
commitment and determination of all my United
Nations colleagues in UNIPSIL and our sister agencies
to make peacebuilding in Sierra Leone a success. As
the first of the new type of fully integrated United
Nations peacebuilding offices, we all hope that, with
the Council's help, we will also be able to make Sierra
Leone an example for other countries that may choose
a similar path out of conflict.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for the confidence invested in me and to thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Kamal DerVis, United Nations Development
Programme Administrator, for their support. In addition,
I wish to thank the Government of Sierra Leone and, in
particular, President Koroma for the warm and cordial
welcome that I have received in their country.

