Mr. Cooney (Ireland): I would like to join with
others in expressing condolences to the peoples and
Governments of India and Pakistan for the suffering
inflicted by the recent earthquake.

I thank you, Mr. President, for calling this open
debate today. The representative of Sweden will shortly
make a statement on behalf of the European Union,
with which Ireland fully associates itself. However, I
would like to take this opportunity to highlight a
number of issues which Ireland, as an incoming
member of the Security Council, a troop contributor to
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and a country which has long
demonstrated a special concern for the people of East
Timor, considers to be of particular importance.

We have heard from a number of speakers today.
I will not list them all, but I am sure that nobody would
begrudge my paying special tribute to Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, both in his own right and as
representative of all the men and women of UNTAET
who are currently serving in our name in East Timor.
Nor can I fail to mention the moving contribution of
Mr. Ramos-Horta. The statesmanship and generosity of
his remarks concerning Indonesia set a standard that
could usefully be emulated in post-conflict situations
elsewhere.

Ireland has read the latest report of the Secretary-
General and agrees with other delegations that his
Special Representative and UNTAET have achieved
significant progress to date and that they must continue
their excellent work. We fully support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and agree
that the mandate of the current mission should be
extended to the end ofthis year.

As East Timor moves towards independence and
international recognition as a sovereign State, it is clear
that the Timorization exercise remains central to
achieving the aims of peace-building. When UNTAET
was established in October 1999, there was no history
of open and democratic political activity in East Timor.
In a short period of time, significant progress has been
made towards independence. A political structure is
now emerging with the development of consultative
mechanisms, such as the East Timor Transitional
Administration and the all-Timorese National Council.
The UNTAET programme of promoting civic
education, constitutional development, the rule of law
and political education, and in preparing the people of
East Timor for democratic elections, has laid good
foundations. As a result of the further development and
intensification of this work, my delegation looks
forward to the people of East Timor participating in
truly democratic elections this summer, which in turn
will provide a solid foundation for the future.

Ireland welcomes the development of the judicial
system in East Timor and encourages Member States to
respond to Mr. Vieira de Mello's renewed call to
provide additional personnel for the investigation and
prosecution of serious crimes. We also welcome the
positive steps taken by Indonesia to arraign before their
courts those militia members accused of crimes against
refugees and personnel of international organizations.
We support these and other attempts to re-establish
trust and confidence among all the people of East
Timor.

But despite the many positive developments,
Ireland remains concerned about the security situation,
particularly the plight of refugees in the region. In this
regard, we strongly condemn the continued activities of
irredentist militia groups in West Timor and call on
them to end their attacks, in line with resolution 1319
(2000). We welcome the efforts of UNTAET, the
Indonesian armed forces and the Government of
Indonesia Task Force for Refugees to arrange
exploratory visits by militia leaders in 2001 to East
Timor.

We call on the Indonesian authorities to further
increase their efforts to eliminate militia action, which
serves only to damage the international reputation and
standing of their country. We hope to see an early
improvement in the security situation, especially in the
western districts. As well as enabling refugees to return
home safely, it is essential that the security
environment should enable a resumption of
humanitarian efforts and ensure that elections can be
prepared and carried out in a calm and safe manner.

We emphasize that objective assessments of the
security situation need to be made by UNTAET on a
regular and ongoing basis, and that any revision of the
military and security components ofthe Mission should
be made only in the light of real progress towards
sustainable transition. The significant efforts of the
international community, including the European
Union, should not be endangered by a premature
reduction oftroops.

Ireland fully recognizes the desire of the people
of East Timor to move quickly towards full
independence. We believe an international presence
will need to be maintained after independence,
including military, humanitarian and technical
expertise components. We believe that such a presence
should be mandated by the United Nations and should
comprise as wide as possible representation of
countries. It will be important to include careful plans
for the progressive hand-over of defence and policing
responsibilities to the East Timorese authorities,
keeping in mind the need to constantly evaluate
progress within the East Timor Defence Force and the
local civilian police. We agree with the other
delegations at this meeting that the handover from
UNTAET to the newly established functioning
structures should be as smooth as possible and that a
precise exit strategy should be worked out in advance.

On a national basis, in addition to providing
troops to UNTAET and making financial contributions
to the United Nations and the World Bank projects,
Ireland has a substantial bilateral programme of
assistance with East Timor. In this connection, we have
recently opened an office in Dili that is helping to draw
up plans for assistance that include the post-
independence period. Ireland is committed to spending
the equivalent of $10 million, which will be focused on
the vitally important areas of education and agriculture,
as well as the establishment of a properjustice system.

Ireland remains fully committed to supporting the
people of East Timor both during the period of
transition to independence and, importantly, after
independence has been achieved.

