Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We are pleased
to see you preside over this meeting, Sir. Pakistan
appreciates Azerbaijan's initiative to hold this debate
on ways to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC). We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
OIC Secretary-General Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu for their
participation and briefings today. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the Security Council
for reaching out to the OIC to forge strong partnerships.
We pay tribute to Mr. Ihsanoglu who, on his watch,
has moved the OIC to a higher plane of performance
and engagement. He has made the OIC a mainstream
international organization focusing on issues of peace
and security, human rights, economic development,
education and scientific and technological exchange.

With 57 Member States in Asia, Africa, Europe
and Latin America with a combined population
of 1.6 billion, the OIC is the second-largest
intergovernmental organization after the United
Nations. Most significantly, the 2008 OIC Charter
enshrines the purposes of international peace and
security and understanding and dialogue among
civilizations, cultures and religions. Because ofthe vast
geographical expanse ofthe OIC, which straddles many
regions and subregions, it is only natural that the OIC
and the United Nations should collaborate closely for
the realization of the purposes and principles set forth
in the United Nations Charter. Both organizations have
cooperated productively to advance their shared agenda
on preventive diplomacy, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, human rights, humanitarian assistance
and refugees, counterterrorism and promotion of
tolerance, peace and intercultural dialogue.

The OIC itself is a natural partner and interlocutor
for the United Nations and the Security Council.
It works closely with the League of Arab States, the
Gulf Cooperation Council, the Economic Cooperation
Organization and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, all of which are partners of the United Nations.
It networks successfully with the African Union, the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe on a host of issues, including
conflict resolution, human rights and mediation.

Many issues on the Council's agenda relate to the
States members of the OIC. Millions in OIC countries
continue to live in conflict and post-conflict situations
or under foreign occupation and alien domination.
Those conflicts and injustices pose a grave threat
to international peace and security and impede
socioeconomic development in affected countries and
regions.

The OIC has lent a helping hand by contributing
to the various mediation, humanitarian, peacebuilding
and reconstruction efforts in the Sudan, Somalia, Sierra
Leone and Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is working with
the United Nations for the promotion of sustainable
peace and stability in Afghanistan, Iraq, Myanmar,
Libya, Somalia and Mali.

We thank the OIC for adopting year after year
resolutions on the realization of the right to self-
determination of the people of Jammu and Kashmir.
It has established a contact group on Jammu and
Kashmir, appointed a special representative and called
for a ceasefire along the line of control.

The countries of the OIC, including Pakistan,
constitute the bulk and backbone of the United Nations
peacekeeping endeavour. In future, the Security
Council and the OIC need to work energetically and
cohesively on six issues.

First, the threat of terrorism has manifoldly
increased. It has now become much more amorphous
and lethal. We agree with the Secretary-General that no
culture or religion should be associated with terrorism
or extremism. Terrorism is now inspired and driven by
primeval brutality and extremism. It is an existential
threat to our zeitgeist. The OIC and the United
Nations can work to eliminate the menace through a
combination of deterrence, dialogue and development.
It is equally important to address root causes and
alleviate deprivation and exclusion.

Secondly, In collaboration with the United Nations
and the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, the
OIC should explore political tools, legal means and
cultural metaphors to address the tension between
incitement to hatred and violence and freedom of
thought and expression. We all need a harmonious
world, for us and for future generations.

Thirdly, a just, comprehensive and durable peace
in the Middle East is at the heart of the OIC-United
Nations agenda. There is a deep sense of disappointment
among the OIC countries and others at the inability of
the Security Council to implement its own resolutions
that have been crafted to provide the framework for
a lasting solution in the Middle East. Now that there
is renewed engagement between Palestine and Israel
for a two-State solution, the OIC should use its clout
and standing to help the Quartet and the United States
resolve that long-standing issue. If the issue of Palestine
gets resolved, we will all be living in a different, better
world.

Fourthly, within the OIC, there are influential
countries that can use their proven leverage to prod and
persuade the Syrian Government and the opposition
to move to the negotiating table in Geneva to find a
diplomatic formula for national reconciliation and
transition that is acceptable to the Syrian people. In
fact, a formula already exists; the Geneva communique
of 30 June 2012 has all the essential ingredients for a
solution.

Fifthly, the Secretary-General and the Security
Council should involve the OIC more closely in the
Sahel region and the Horn of Africa on the issues
of asymmetric warfare and terrorism. The OIC's
competencies for mediation can help in moving those
regions towards conflict resolution and political
stabilization.

Sixthly, there should be a closer interface between
the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation on social, economic, human rights and
environmental issues. In the coming years, as the United
Nations fashions its post-2015 development agenda,
it should work with the OIC and, through it, with its
members, for the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and the implementation of the
sustainable development goals as soon as they are
designed.

We are confident that the incoming Secretary-
General of the OIC, Mr. Iyad Madani, whom we
welcome here today, will build on the excellent work
done over the years by Secretary-General Ihsanoglu.

Finally, I would like to say to the wider audience
that the OIC as an organization has come of age. Its
importance should not be underrated.

