Mr. Windsor (Australia): Australia supports
Security Council renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and welcomes the opportunity to reaffirm our
commitment to Afghanistan and to international efforts
in support of the Afghan Government and people.

In view of the hour and to facilitate the work of
the Council, I will summarize my statement, which will
be distributed.

We are grateful for the briefing by the Under-
Secretary-General and for the statement by the
Ambassador of Afghanistan. We wish him and his
mission all the best in advance of Nowruz.

We believe that the draft resolution before the
Council should build on the substantial outcomes of
the London Conference and reinforce the central role
the United Nations has to play in supporting the
security, stability and development of Afghanistan. The
draft resolution should endorse further the concept of
constructive partnership between the Afghan
Government and the international community and the
shared plan of phased transition to Afghan leadership
and ownership of security, governance and
development for the Afghan people - the key outcome
of London.

A renewed UNAMA mandate should also address
the call for a better coordinated and civilian effort in
Afghanistan to improve the impact of international
civilian assistance, and the need for a more rigorous
alignment of international assistance with clearly
identified Afghan priorities, with UNAMA in the
primary coordinating role in these activities.

Australia does not underestimate the significant
and interrelated security, political and economic
challenges facing the Afghan people and ourselves.
There is a real need for much greater focus on the
accountability of the Afghan Government. President
Karzai has made commitments to improving
governance, pursuing electoral reform, taking effective
anti-corruption and anti-narcotics measures and
creating social and economic opportunities for all
Afghans. Australia will work in cooperation with
UNAMA and the rest of our partners to help the
President and his Government deliver on these
commitments.

Parliamentary elections, of course, will be a
crucial test of progress by the Afghan Government in
improving electoral and political processes. In this
regard, we encourage the Afghan Government to
appoint independent and reputable electoral
commissioners so that the process can be acceptable to
all Afghans, including opposition parties. UNAMA will
have an important role in supporting the preparations
for and conduct of these elections, and we expect - in
fact, as we have heard today - that the Afghan
Government will work closely with the United Nations,
not only to learn from the lessons of 2009, but also to
lay the ground work for elections in future. We
appreciate the words of Ambassador Tanin this
morning with regard to transparency and credibility in
those future elections.

Australia's own approach to Afghanistan
recognizes the importance of comprehensive civil-
military engagement in capacity-building and
development assistance, in concert with sustained
efforts to strengthen security by training the Afghan
army, and the details of that are set out in our
statement. We firmly believe that an Afghan
Government-led and -owned process of political
reconciliation and reintegration is required to draw
back into the fold those people who lay down their
arms, eschew violence, sever links with Al-Qaida and
other terrorist groups, and accept the Afghan
Constitution. For this reason, as the Japanese
Ambassador mentioned, we will contribute
A$25 million to the peace and reintegration trust fund,
subject to Australia having an appropriate role in the
administration and governance oversight of the fund.

In conclusion, we support the lead role of
UNAMA in guiding the Afghan Government through
the implementation of international assistance
initiatives. We look forward to working with the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
welcome UNAMA and the International Security
Assistance Force working together on enhanced
civilian coordination structures.

I also take this moment to acknowledge again the
dedication and sacrifice of UNAMA personnel
operating in the challenging environment of
Afghanistan. We support all efforts to meet the security
needs of UNAMA staff there so that it may continue to
fulfil its indispensable role throughout the country.
