Mr. Varso (Slovakia): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I

 

would also like to thank your predecessor, the
representative of the United States, for his effective
leadership of the Security Council during the month of
November.

Slovakia fully supports and has aligned itself with the
statement of the European Union delivered earlier today by
the representative of Austria. Allow me to make a few
additional comments on behalf of my delegation.

The maintenance of international peace and security is,
and will remain, one of the primary purposes of the United
Nations. The experiences and achievements of the
Organization in fulfilling this goal have shown that,
although conflicts take a variety of forms, peacekeeping
operations are one of the key instruments available to the
United Nations to resolve those conflicts.
Slovakia shares the Secretary-General's view,
expressed in his report on Africa, that peacekeeping
operations in their various forms can be critical confidence-
building measures. Judging from recent experience, it
would seem that the multidimensional and interactive
approach to peacekeeping as such is inevitable.

Slovakia has been participating in United Nations
peacekeeping operations since its establishment as an
independent State in January 1993. The active and
successful participation of Slovak troops, serving under the
United Nations flag in the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (UNTAES), particularly in the area of engineering,
has been recognized by the relevant authorities of the
United Nations. Having obtained this practical experience
in Eastern Slavonia, the Slovak Republic has offered its
engineering units to support and strengthen the demining
capability of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara.

Moreover, Slovakia has also been involved in
peacekeeping missions in Jerusalem, Angola and, recently,
in the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) in the Golan Heights. In this regard, I would like
to reiterate the intention and readiness of my country to
increase, in close cooperation with Austria, its participation
in UNDOF.

Regional arrangements have already become an
integral part of the common effort of the international
community to maintain peace and security in various parts
of the world. Slovakia supports increasing cooperation
between the United Nations and the regional organizations,
especially in the area of early warning, conflict
prevention, crisis management and resolution, and post-
conflict rehabilitation. As far as the European region is
concerned, the Government of the Slovak Republic has
recently approved the contribution of Slovakia, both
financial and in personnel, to the Verification Mission in
Kosovo and has also endorsed the participation of Slovak
troops in the Stabilization Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

By the same token, the United Nations and the
international community should provide assistance to
those regional arrangements which, for various reasons,
lack sufficient resources and expertise to face conflict
situations in their regions. We welcome all efforts for
improving peacekeeping training capacity aimed at
enhancing the peacekeeping capacity of individual regions
and their countries, in close cooperation with respective
regional organizations. Slovakia is ready to contribute to
these efforts through its Peacekeeping Training Centre,
providing, in particular, training for combat engineers.

No doubt, the consolidation of peace in the
post-conflict period is one of the most important steps in
reducing the risk of the resumption of conflict.
Peace-building efforts should address various factors of
conflict and contribute to the creation of conditions for
reconciliation, reconstruction and recovery. Post-conflict
peace-building activities must be aimed at promoting a
durable peace and sustainable development through, inter
alia, humanitarian and development activities, confidence-
building measures, the strengthening of democratic
institutions and respect for human rights.

We have learned from many examples that
humanitarian assistance plays a very important role at all
stages of conflict and that it is an irreplaceable
supplement to the comprehensive action of the
international community in the peaceful settlement of
disputes. In the prevention phase, it can significantly help
to reduce the threat of conflict; during an ongoing
conflict, it can prevent or reduce human suffering; and
humanitarian assistance in the post-conflict stage helps to
strengthen a durable peace. In most cases, the essential
element of humanitarian assistance is a mine-action plan.
Slovakia has done a lot, especially in mine clearance,
during its participation in peacekeeping. We are
developing our own mine-clearance programme and are
ready to provide our skills, techniques and equipment and
to participate in any activity of the international
community in this regard.

 

However, we believe that an essential element of the
settlement of conflicts is political will. The parties and
countries concerned must show the will to rely upon
political rather than military responses to problems and the
will for good governance. On the other hand, the
appropriate approach is also needed from the international
community and Member States should show the willingness
to act and to provide the United Nations with the necessary
resources to handle conflicts.

