Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I should like to thank the
Ukrainian presidency for the invitation to participate in
this open debate on an issue of such importance to the
international community.

Argentina condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and considers that terrorist acts not only
constitute a threat to international peace and security,
but are also a threat to human dignity, peaceful and
civilized coexistence, stability, the consolidation of
democracy, and the economic and social development
of nations. Our country, which was the victim of bloody
terrorist attacks in the 1990s, reiterates that terrorist
acts are criminal and unjustifiable, whatever their
motivation and wherever and by whomsoever they
are committed.

Terrorism cannot be tackled solely through the
enforcement of defence or security measures. Instead,
a comprehensive approach should be taken - such as
that reflected in the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy - based on the balanced
implementation of the four pillars of the strategy,
within the unrestricted respect for international
law, international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international refugee law.

Critical infrastructure are those that are
indispensable for the proper functioning of essential
services for society: health, security, defence, the
social and economic well-being of citizens and for
the effective functioning of the State, whose total or
partial destruction or disruption affects or significantly
impacts those services. We therefore welcome the
approach chosen for this debate, due to the urgency
of the threat posed by terrorism to the vital services
and infrastructure of our countries. In that regard,
there is a need for greater cooperation, coordination
and information exchange among agencies and
organizations within each country, as well as among
the various countries. There is also a need to adapt to
the changing nature of the terrorist threat, physical
and cybernetic.

We welcome resolution 2341 (2017), which the
Council adopted this morning and which is the first
to focus specifically on the issue of the protection of
critical infrastructure. We agree on the need to call on
States to develop and improve their strategies for risk
assessment and risk reduction and to cooperate in this
regard. Collaboration between the public and private
sectors in this area is also key to mitigating risk and
preventing attacks on this type of infrastructure.

Aware of the importance of addressing this problem
without delay, our authorities have set up a working
group within the Ministry of Modernization to draw
up guidelines for an action plan for the identification
and development of regulations and measures for
the protection of critical infrastructure, including
information infrastructure. The working group should
determine the criteria for identifying infrastructure,
the sectors involved, and the regulatory bodies and
companies or organizations responsible. The group
will also develop a working methodology to carry out
a risk assessment and establish measures to manage
those risks. An inter-institutional approach involving
all relevant sectors will be taken.

With respect to cybersecurity, we are of the
view that achieving adequate levels of security in
the digital universe is essential for information and
communication technologies (ICTs) to reach their full
potential. A strong commitment from the international
community is required to avoid and limit the misuse
of technological tools by various State and non-State
actors. We must take into account, however, that there
is a broad spectrum of non-State actors that carry out
network security attacks using ICTs. Those actors
range from terrorist groups and transnational criminal
organizations to individual offenders. Responses to
these threats require specific and separate international
legal instruments to articulate effective international
cooperation systems in the prevention, prosecution and
criminal repression of such conduct.

Finally, we reaffirm the central role of the United
Nations in the fight against terrorism, as the pillar of
the multilateral system of universal composition,and
having the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. We are convinced
that multilateral action, through the United Nations,
in accordance with the principles of the Organization,
will enable us to address the threat of terrorism in
full respect for international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, and to achieve a more
secure world for all.

