Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg congratulates the Nigerian presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this important
debate on security sector reform (SSR) and would like
to express its thanks for the invitation to participate in
it.
Focusing this debate on Africa is a timely step for
two reasons. It is on the African continent that the
Security Council formulates the majority of
peacekeeping mandates, and these mandates
increasingly include - and rightfully so - elements
of security sector reform.

SSR is an essential element on the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding agenda. An unreformed security and
defence sector or a badly managed reform can have a
profoundly destabilizing effect on a country emerging
from conflict. In my capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific
configuration for Guinea, I can testify to the fact that
an in-depth reform of the security and defence sector is
necessary for sustainable peacebuilding and the

strengthening of the rule of law. In Guinea as
elsewhere, certainly, SSR is intimately linked to the
other priority sectors for peacebuilding, in particular
national reconciliation. Undertaking an in-depth reform
of the security and defence sector requires political
will and unwavering support, including financial
support, by the international community. We will have
to respond to appeals from authorities in this respect.

Security sector reform is also intrinsically linked
to the reform of the judiciary. Citizens need to have the
appropriate means of recourse to have their rights
respected. We salute in this context the innovative
approach adopted in Liberia with regard to establishing
integrated security and justice hubs and to fully involve
women in the efforts undertaken.

The legitimacy of the State, whether it is
emerging from a conflict or not, hinges on the capacity
of its civilian authorities to control its military and
security authorities and on the capacity of the latter to
defend the human rights and dignity of the civilian
population. In this vein, in 2010 Luxembourg financed
a project implemented by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo aimed at professionalizing the
Congolese national police so that it can better
discharge its important task of protecting Congolese
citizens.

A country's security forces and law enforcement
agencies must also be a bulwark against corruption and
bad governance. To avoid mishaps, it is therefore
indispensable to establish an early link between SSR
and the implementation of a transparent financial
system, as well as a solid auditing system for public
finances.

When it comes to security sector reform, as for
all reforms, there is no substitute for national
ownership. It is in this spirit that Luxembourg has had
the honour to support, together with the United Nations
Development Programme, the meeting that was
organized by the African Union Commission in May to
allow its member States' experts to consider the draft
African Union policy framework on security sector
reform, which we hope will be adopted by heads of
State and Government at the next African Union
Summit, to be held in January 2012 in Addis Ababa.

It is in the same spirit that my country has
contributed for several years to the Office of Rule of
Law and Security Institutions in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in order to support its SSR
activities. In particular, we have supported the rapid
deployment of experts to advise countries engaged in
security sector reform, according to their needs and at
the request of their national authorities.

Many problems affecting the security sector are
by their very nature regional or international. My
country is convinced that in a spirit of effective
multilateralism, all must bear their share of
responsibility - the United Nations, the African
Union, African regional economic communities such as
the Economic Community of West African States, as
well as the European Union and bilateral partners. The
Treaty of Lisbon has further reinforced the European
Union's comprehensive approach to SSR by putting the
relevant policy instruments under one roof, the
European External Action Service. In its national
capacity and as a member State of the European Union
and the United Nations, Luxembourg is resolved to
maintain its commitment to SSR, including through its
participation in the work of the Group of Friends in
New York.

