Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would first
like to convey the apologies of Mr. Bernard Biando
Sango, Minister of Solidarity and Humanitarian Action
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He will be
arriving in New York a little late today and will not
be able to attend today's meeting despite his efforts.
He has asked me to assure Council members of his
solidarity and wish us success in our work.

Before I deliver my statement, my delegation would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative
to organize this meeting on the humanitarian situation
in my country. We are also grateful to Ms. Sigrid
Kaag, Minister for Foreign Trade and Development
Cooperation of the Netherlands, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, who visited
the Democratic Republic of the Congo together in order
to see for themselves the humanitarian situation on
the ground.

In the absence of Mr. Biando Sango, who would
have briefed Council members in detail on the
situation, I will keep my statement short. The fact is
that my country has been dealing with a humanitarian
crisis affecting thousands of people for more than two
decades. This situation is the result of recurring armed
conflicts, mainly in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and neighbouring countries, natural disasters
and other calamities, as well as various epidemics.

With regard to armed conflicts, it is the continuing
insecurity resulting from the activity of domestic
and foreign armed groups in the eastern part of the
country that is at the root of the massive and ongoing
displacement of formerly settled populations, who
lived mainly as farmers and livestock herders. There
is a similar situation in the greater Kasai area, where
there have been clashes with the traditional chief
Kamuina Nsapu's militia; in Tanganyika province,
with the conflict between Bantu and Pygmies; and
currently in Ituri, with the armed groups operating in
that part of the country. At the same time, the conflicts
in neighbouring countries such as the Central African
Republic, South Sudan and Burundi have caused
an influx of refugees from those countries, not to
mention those who preceded them at an earlier period
from other neighbours such as Rwanda and Uganda,
following armed conflicts and political disagreements
among the Governments in power in those countries,
as was the case with the Allied Democratic Forces, the
Lord's Resistance Army and the Forces de'mocratiques
de liberation du Rwanda.

This situation of armed conflict has been
compounded by natural disasters - torrential rains,
floods and landslides - and the resurgence of some
previously eradicated epidemic diseases, not to mention
food insecurity, which we should point out is mainly
due to a poor farming season resulting in lower crop
yields and a shortfall in maize production.

Despite the Government's efforts to restore peace
in areas affected by armed conflict, the humanitarian
consequences are still enormous. We are working to
come up with solutions. It goes without saying that any
contribution on the part of the international community
to help us address the situation is very welcome. In that
regard, I should point out that my country continues to
benefit from international solidarity efforts. A number
of donors, United Nations agencies and international
and national humanitarian organizations continue to
support us in helping our vulnerable members of society.

As I said, my Government welcomed Ms. Kaag
and Mr. Lowcock's visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and appreciated their discussions with
Government authorities. During their delegation's
high-level meeting with the Government, led by the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Transport and
Communications, standing in for the Prime Minister,
it was agreed that the classification of my country's
situation as a humanitarian emergency, which the
Government considers excessive, would be revisited.
While we recognize that we are dealing with emergency
situations, they in no way warrant a designation as
exaggerated as the international community claims.
We hope that the Council will take my Government's
position on the issue into consideration.

With that in mind, and with a View to harmonizing
the views on this issue, before the conference to be
held in Geneva we have therefore decided to convene
a meeting of our national framework for consultation
on humanitarian action, the State body responsible for
coordinating our humanitarian response, which is also
a forum for dialogue where humanitarian actors can
exchange information and take independent decisions
with a view to reaching a common understanding on
the conduct of humanitarian affairs in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

While the intervention of the Government and the
international community is providing an effective and
lasting solution to the humanitarian crisis in the parts of
my country affected by natural disasters, calamities and
epidemics, we do not believe that the same is true in the
areas where armed groups are operating. The Council
will agree with us that if we cannot eradicate all the
negative forces operating there, it will be difficult ifnot
impossible to put an end to the situation. That is why my
Government, which is committed to peace throughout
our territory, is relentlessly and resolutely pursuing
its efforts to completely neutralize and eradicate
all of these forces. Although our efforts are already
supported by the United Nations, through the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which already has
a robust mandate for that from the Council, we believe
that beyond the solutions my Government has proposed
and the contributions expected from the international
community, it would also be helpful to consider, as one
of the possible solutions to the problems underlying
the worrying humanitarian situation, particularly with
regard to the foreign armed groups, a political dialogue
between those groups and their countries of origin,
especially in view of the results achieved so far.

Ishouldnotconcludewithoutonceagainemphasizing
the significant and invaluable contributions made by
the financial sponsors and donors in responding to
our humanitarian needs in order to help the vulnerable
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
My Government is truly grateful for their support. I
would also like to thank you, Mr. President, and all the
members of the Council for their consideration of the
situation in my country.

The meeting rose at 12.15 pm.
