Mr. Okamura (Japan): Let me begin by thanking
Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing and for introducing
her twenty-third report on Darfur. We are convinced
of the importance of the fight against impunity and
the rule of law. That is why Japan has consistently
supported the activities of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). I would like to assure the Prosecutor of
Japan's full support for the work of her Office.

In 2005, Japan, as a member of the Council,
supported resolution 1593 (2005), which referred the
situation in Darfur to the ICC. In light of the serious
Violations of human rights committed in Darfur, we
believed that there was a role for the ICC in bringing the
perpetrators to justice. Japan respects the independence
and decisions of the ICC concerning arrest warrants
emanating from resolution 1593 (2005).

Despite the efforts of the ICC, it is regrettable that
justice has not been served on behalf of the victims
in Darfur. We note the Trial Chamber's finding in its
decision on the Banda case that the Sudan had failed
to cooperate with the Court. We stress that resolution
1593 (2005) decided that the Government of the Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur should
cooperate fully with the ICC and the Prosecutor. We
urge the full implementation of the resolution in order
to achieve justice in Darfur. It is appropriate for the
Council to follow up on this matter, particularly the
decision on the Banda case, as communicated to the
Council on 11 December 2015.

To make Darfur stable, there is no choice but to
move the political process forward. Japan welcomes
the signing by the Government of the Sudan, in Addis
Ababa on 20 March, of the road map addressing the
most important issues: the ceasefire, the delivery
of humanitarian aid and a truly inclusive national
dialogue. We call upon other parties to sign the road
map. In that regard, we appreciate the continued efforts
exerted by the State of Qatar, especially the holding
late last month of the recent Doha meeting with armed
groups and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

We are concerned about the access restrictions
currently in place in Central Darfur, and call upon
all parties to grant access to the conflict areas so
that humanitarian actors can quickly address the
humanitarian situation. We are also concerned
about the decreased ability of UNAMID to function,
especially in the light of such logistical issues as the
problem of containers. In order to resolve these issues,
we look forward to further cooperation between the
Government of the Sudan and UNAMID, in accordance
with the relevent Council resolutions, for the sake of the
Sudanese people in need.

Without the cooperation of States, the ICC cannot
execute its mandate. We urge all States, including
non-State parties and concerned regional and other
international organizations, to cooperate fully with the
ICC, in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), which
binds all United Nations Member States.

