Mr. Shah (India): I am very happy to see you
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month of
April, Sir. I would like to join previous speakers in paying
compliments to you and tribute to your predecessor as
President of the Council.

I would also like to thank you for this opportunity to
share our thoughts with you, and the other Members of
the Council, on the situation in a friendly country in our
neighbourhood.

The Secretary-General in his latest report has
referred to his appeal for an immediate cessation of
hostilities in Afghanistan. In this troubled land, the
primary need is for an unconditional cease- fire and
immediate cessation of hostilities. That should be the
principal objective of all efforts by the United Nations to
bring peace to Afghanistan. Only when hostilities end will
there be a reasonable chance for a peaceful dialogue to
commence. The Special Mission of the United Nations
has appealed for a cease-fire, and my delegation hopes
that Ambassador Mestiri will continue to work towards
achievement of a cease-fire as the immediate objective of
the Special Mission.

The Secretary-General has also stated in his report
that foreign interference is a massive obstacle to peace.
The fact of outside interference has been recognised by
the Security Council itself, most recently in its
presidential statement dated 15 February 1996. That
statement also called upon all States to prevent the flow
to the Afghan parties of weapons and other supplies that
can fuel the fighting. For his part, the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan has repeatedly brought to
the attention of the Security Council instances of blatant
interference, and of the supply of arms to rebels by a
neighbouring country. Security Council document
S/1996/ 151, dated 1 March 1996, a letter from the Afghan
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs, clearly identifies the
source of outside interference and support for the rebel
forces, and asks the Security Council to put an end to it.

In the statement of the President of the Security
Council issued on 15 February, the Council expressed its
serious concern that the continuing conflict in Afghanistan
provides a fertile ground for terrorism, arms transfers and
drug trafficking, which destabilises the whole region and
beyond. The spread of terrorism in our region and beyond
is a matter of deep concern to my country, which has
been a principal victim of State-supported terrorism and
its export across our borders. It is essential, therefore, that
the main focus of United Nations peace efforts in
Afghanistan be the cessation of hostilities, and prevention
of foreign interference and outside support for rebel
forces.

 

There is also the related problem of the illicit traffic
of arms and narcotics by criminal elements, which causes
instability in the region. There are ominous signs that the
cultivation of opium and the smuggling of narcotics out of
Afghanistan are now being organized as a means for some
groups to raise resources to purchase arms and spread
terror. If this trend is not arrested, we risk the danger not
only of a further intensification of armed conflict within
Afghanistan, but also of strengthening international terrorist
activity and the forging of new international criminal
networks.

The conflict in Afghanistan has created a humanitarian
problem of gargantuan proportions. The massive loss of
human life and the serious damage to the economic and
social infrastructure in that country have been graphically
documented. The suffering of the Afghan people has far
exceeded the bounds of even extreme human tolerance.
Their suffering is hard to describe; it is so pervasive that
one is left wondering in amazement how these innocent
people can continue to exist with any semblance of
normalcy. The latest report of the United States
Government entitled "Global Humanitarian Emergencies
1996" lists Afghanistan at the very top of those countries
facing the most severe current humanitarian crises. It
confirms that humanitarian conditions worsened during
1995. Most significantly, it notes that in 1995 only 44 per
cent of United Nations appeals for humanitarian assistance
to Afghanistan were covered. This compares with the
overall 71 per cent response.

This is most unfortunate and untenable. We cannot
forget or ignore the humanitarian and development needs of
Afghanistan. While the United Nations continues to work
for a cease-fire and an end to foreign interference, the
international community should mobilize the requisite
assistance for the Afghan people with the same vigour and
dedication with which it has approached similar tasks in
other situations.

India's relations with Afghanistan are historical and
longstanding. India stands for a united, stable, independent
and non-aligned Afghanistan. We oppose all foreign
interference and intervention in the internal affairs of that
country.

We continue to be seriously concerned about the
welfare of the Afghan people. In spite of our resource
constraints, we have made our own modest contribution
towards assistance for the people of Afghanistan. India's
assistance is and always has been of a humanitarian and
developmental nature. It is regrettable and unpardonable
that there are some who should know better but continue
to suggest otherwise.

The crisis in Afghanistan has several dimensions
which automatically, in turn, also define the role that the
United Nations must play in resolving that crisis. The
objectives are clearly spelt out in General Assembly
resolution 50/88. The cessation of hostilities and the
termination of foreign interference in the internal affairs
of Afghanistan must be its most urgent task.
Humanitarian assistance must be rushed to all parts of
Afghanistan and in particular to the long-suffering people
of Kabul. The United Nations must draw up a
comprehensive plan of assistance for the reconstruction
and development of Afghanistan that will have to be
implemented as soon as peace returns there.

I trust that the outcome of this open debate will help
the Council and the Secretary-General to focus on what
must be urgently done in Afghanistan with a View to
restoring peace and stability and promoting development
in that country.

