Miss Durrant (Jamaica): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for convening this open briefing on the mission of the
Security Council which visited Kosovo from 27 to 29
April. As a member of the mission, I wish to express my
personal appreciation to Ambassador Anwarul Chowdhury
for his inspired leadership of the mission as we sought to
fulfil the terms of reference given to us by the Council.

Our visit served to highlight the critical role of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in promoting peace, reconciliation and stability
and in creating viable and democratic institutions. My

 

delegation wishes to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Bernard
Kouchner, and to the men and women of UNMIK and the
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
represented throughout Kosovo for the commitment and
enthusiasm which they have brought to the unique, complex
and multi-purpose mission.

As the report indicates, our visit provided an
opportunity not only to meet with the administering
authorities, but also to engage with the representatives of all
ethnic communities, to listen to their concerns and to better
understand their expectations for the future. As my
delegation entirely shares the findings of the mission, I will
seek to highlight some issues which are of particular
concern. These include the volatile security situation and
the rule of law, the return of refugees and the issue of
missing persons and detainees.

While there has been substantial progress, violence
aimed at minority groups is extremely worrying and, if this
continues, efforts to achieve peace and reconciliation will
be to no avail. We encourage UNMIK and the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) to continue their efforts at consultations at
the community level. We welcome the high level of
coordination between UNMIK and KFOR.

Despite their limited numbers, the UNMIK Police
continue to do their best to provide security. Confidence,
however, has to be established between the various groups.
While we realize that this is an extremely difficult task,
there is no alternative. The leaders of different ethnic
groups must engage in dialogue and must display the
requisite commitment to the process of peace and
reconciliation.

I wish to highlight the need to address the critical
shortage of judges, prosecutors and correctional officers. In
this regard, I express appreciation to the United Kingdom
for the announcement it just made. This has to be addressed
if the rule of law is to prevail and an end put to the cycle
of impunity. My delegation was impressed by the training
given to the new police force as a demonstration of
capacity-building. But the UNMIK police also need
specialized units, and we hope that this matter will be
addressed by member States.
My delegation believes that it is the right of all
refugees and displaced persons to be able to return to their
homes in safety and without fear. There has to be a
structured approach that ensures reintegration and will
involve close collaboration between UNMIK, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
other organizations. We acknowledge the efforts of these
organizations and hope that the necessary assistance and
cooperation of host Governments will be forthcoming in
reintegrating the refugees. We believe that the issue of
returns must be dealt with in a measured and humane
manner.

Tackling the issue of missing persons is one of the
most fundamental factors in the reconciliation process. As
was alluded to in the report, this is an issue that cuts
across all ethnic groups and needs to be addressed
urgently and comprehensively. My delegation therefore
supports the finding in the report that the issue of the
appointment of a special envoy for missing persons and
detainees should be addressed urgently. We also note that
the report draws attention to the work of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and to the
need for additional funds to support the work of
exhumations and identification. As the report points out,
for example, the Tribunal's forensic experts are hampered
in their work by the lack of resources to finance DNA
tests.

Another issue of concern to my delegation is the
forthcoming municipal elections. We see the civil and
voter registration as activities of particular importance,
and we believe that all parties must feel that they have a
stake in the process. It is therefore necessary to create the
conditions for the participation of all ethnic groups, as
they must come to feel a sense of ownership and
participation in the democratic process.

I also wish to point out that many of the United
Nations Volunteers are providing excellent support for the
civil and registration process, and we wish to salute the
work of the United Nations Volunteers. At the same time,
we wish to emphasize the need for the General Assembly
to urgently address the question of the staffing table, and
we know that this is an issue which will be taken up by
the Fifth Committee during its resumed session.

I now wish to turn to the economic situation in
Kosovo. Economic recovery as a means of promoting
confidence and reconciliation efforts among the people of
Kosovo is another major challenge for UNMIK, because,
while there have been some improvements, the overall
economic picture continues to be grim. The economic
situation, coupled with inadequate physical, social and
economic security, further exacerbates the situation.
Attracting broad-based donor support and investment is
certainly one of the ways to move ahead. Unfortunately,

 

this will be difficult if other issues, such as the question of
property rights, remain unresolved.

Jamaica wishes to support the work of UNMIK in
developing an interim political framework, including the
creation of multi-ethnic institutions and a multi-ethnic
society, that will lead to peaceful coexistence. Although this
process is fraught with difficulty, we urge them to continue.
This process demands the cooperation of those with a stake
in the long-term development of Kosovo - namely, the
people of Kosovo of all ethnic groups. Ethnic hatred and
prejudice are unacceptable and will seriously undermine any
attempts at creating a sustainable and peaceful Kosovo.
This was the message that the mission sought to bring to
the people of Kosovo, at all levels, wherever we met them.
But we agree that changing attitudes is probably the most
daunting task facing the United Nations and the
international community in Kosovo. We need to assure the
people of Kosovo that the international community will
support their efforts to move from a culture of conflict to
a culture of peace.

Before concluding, I wish to address the issue of
Security Council resolution 1160 (1998). As Chairperson of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1160 (1998), I wish to draw
attention to paragraphs 15 and 34 of the report. These
paragraphs highlight the discussions that were held with
KFOR on the strengthening and monitoring of the
implementation of the arms embargo imposed by resolution
1160 (1998). As the report points out, there have been
improvements in the situation, and KFOR has continued its
recovery of arms inside Kosovo. We wish to emphasize the
need for the monthly information on KFOR's activities to
be presented to the Committee, as this will greatly assist the
Committee in its work.

In concluding, I wish again to pay tribute to the leader
of our mission and to the other members of the mission,
because I believe that this visit gave us an opportunity not
only to see for ourselves but also to bring back to the
Security Council our findings, and we hope that these
findings will be acted on in the near future.

