Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank the briefers - Ms. Nakamitsu
and Mr. Ballard - for their valuable presentations.
Likewise, I thank you, Sir, as President of the Council,
for organizing this open debate and for providing us
with a very interesting concept note, as well as the
information that you just provided to us in your capacity
as Chair ofthe Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

Uruguay aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Spain on behalf of
the Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004).

Uruguay is a country firmly committed to the
disarmament and non-proliferation regime and calls for
strengthening multilateralism as part of its efforts to
promote universal and complete disarmament. True to
its commitment, Uruguay has adhered to and ratified
existing regional and international treaties for such
purposes. Similarly, we promote and support those
forums designed to advance universal and transparent
negotiations in the field of disarmament, such as the
United Nations conference currently taking place at
Headquarter to negotiate a legally binding instrument
to prohibit nuclear weapons, Lleading to their total
elimination.

On many occasions we have addressed the theme
of weapons of mass destruction here in the Chamber.
It goes without saying that, in the framework of
adopting measures on preventing the use or threat of
use of such weapons, it is the obligation of Member
States to scrupulously respect their obligations under
international law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations.

Uruguay is concerned about the growing threat
of terrorism and the growing risk that these weapons
will fall into the hands of non-State actors, including
terrorist groups, which would bring about unpredictable
and devastating consequences for humankind. The
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction constitutes
a serious and real threat to world security. The use of
chemical weapons in countries of the Middle East and
Asia demonstrates how real and dangerous this threat
is.

Uruguay has followed with concern the continuing
attacks taking place in Syria, including most recently
in Khan Shaykun last April. In that regard, we support
the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-Finding Mission in
Syria and the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism to shed light on those incidents so that
the perpetrators thereof are brought to justice for
committing such grave crimes. The Joint Investigative
Mechanism has already identified the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham/Da'esh and the Syrian Government
as the perpetrators of some of those attacks in Syria.
There are reports that the same has happened in Iraq,
and therefore investigations should also be carried out
in that country to corroborate the facts.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is the main legally binding
instrument that we have that covers the three types of
weapons of mass destruction. The role the resolution in
preventing the acquisition and use of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors along with the work of
the 1540 Committee in its four areas ofwork are crucial
to combating the threat. The full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and resolution 2325 (2016)
requires the ongoing efforts of all States - at the
national, regional and international levels - as well as
greater assistance and cooperation in capacity-building
and in the exchange of best practices among States.
International cooperation must be strengthened even
further in order to prevent, deter, halt and eliminate the
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems by terrorist groups. Uruguay stresses
the need to enhance assistance and cooperation among
States, and among States and international, regional
and subregional organizations that are relevant to the
1540 Committee.

The primary responsibility of States is to take
appropriate steps at the national level, in line with their
national legislation and international law, to strengthen
export controls and to control access to intangible
technology transfers and to information that could
be used to develop weapons of mass destruction and
their delivery systems. Both importing and exporting
countries should exercise due control over their
operations and ensure the full security of sensitive
materials to prevent them falling under the control of
terrorist groups.

In conclusion, I would like to express Uruguay's
firm commitment to implementing the resolution. I also
thank the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) for their valuable visit to Uruguay in April,
which enabled us to begin drafting our national plan of
action for the resolution's implementation.

