Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank High
Representative Ashton for her briefing and welcome
her to the Council for the third time in this capacity.
Since she last briefed the Council, the European Union
(EU) was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. The award
recognizes the EU's powerful and historic contribution
over six decades in advancing peace and reconciliation,
democracy and human rights.

The EU is, of course, is a unique experiment among
nation States, born out of the most violent century in
human history. All of us have a keen interest in its
success. As the Council now more acutely knows, close
cooperation between it and regional organizations,
including the EU, can be a decisive component in our
collective efforts to maintain international peace and
security. Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations recognizes that. As a long-standing, integrated
regional organization that has learned many lessons
of its own over the years in developing and improving
normative frameworks for dealing with conflict and
post-conflict situations, the EU is strongly placed to
make a strong contribution in that regard.

I would like to thank High Representative Ashton
for her hopeful analysis on some of the contemporary
issues on the Council's agenda. The EU's engagement
on those issues is an indication of its own strong
contribution to international peace and security. We
endorse her condemnation of North Korea's latest,
third nuclear test. The Council itself is united in that
condemnation. There have been threats ofa second and
even a third nuclear test to follow the one earlier this
week. We must now develop a strong draft resolution
with tough new sanctions. We will certainly be working
closely with all Council members, including members
of the EU, to achieve that quickly.

We welcome the role the EU plays in Africa in
support of the African Union. The EU's assistance to
the African Union Mission in Somalia has been central
to the Mission's role in achieving security gains, which
in turn have helped bring Somalia to a point where it
can embrace the best chance it has had in a generation
to build sustainable peace and stability.

We acknowledge and appreciate the EU's efforts
to address the crisis in Mali through the EU training
mission and support to the African-led International
Support Mission to Mali (AFISMA) through the Africa
Peace Facility. Making AFISMA operational as soon as
possible remains vital whatever the final peacekeeping
configuration in Mali may be. Alongside that security
effort, the EU's very significant humanitarian and
development assistance is an important contribution to
restoring stability in that country.

On the Syrian Arab Republic, we share the EU view
that the international community must do everything it
can to promote a credible Syrian-led political transition
to realize the legitimate aspirations ofthe Syrian people.
We also support the EU's view that those responsible
for serious crimes in Syria should be held accountable.
We appreciate the very significant contribution the EU
is making to provide humanitarian assistance, and we
encourage the EU in its efforts to ensure that its aid is
delivered as effectively as possible. We will continue to
work together with the EU in support of Joint Special
Representative Brahimi, and agree that the Council
needs to provide clearer support soon to his complex
mission. We will also continue to work closely with the
EU to advance one particular aspect of our collective

humanitarian effort - the protection of medical
workers and facilities in Syria.
This is a decisive year for the Middle East peace
process. The prospect ofa two-State solution is quickly
disappearing. We agree with the High Representative
that it is time for new effort to resuscitate the peace
process. The continued support of the EU to the
Palestinian Authority and its active participation in the
Quartet remains essential. EU activism in support of
renewed negotiations will be influential.

Regional tensions in the Middle East will only
increase, as we know, unless Iran engages with the
five plus one process and cooperates fully with the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Australia
appreciates the EU's critical role in pursuing dialogue
with Iran to find a diplomatic solution to the international
community's strong concerns about its nuclear
programmes. We commend the High Representative
for her personal engagement on the Middle East peace
process and the Iran nuclear issue.

We also commend her role in relation to Kosovo, an
issue the Council will consider next week. By mediating
high-level dialogue, the EU has certainly helped to open
a new constructive phase in negotiations, which has
been achieving progress towards agreed solutions to
outstanding differences between Belgrade and Pristina.

Australia and the EU are very close partners in
global security. We work together in Afghanistan. We
cooperate closely on aid delivery through joint projects
in the Pacific and Indonesia, and this will soon extend
to delegated cooperation arrangements elsewhere,
including South Sudan and Fiji. We work closely in
international sanctions regimes.

We acutely recognize that the EU and its member
States play a very substantial role as partners to the
United Nations. Together they form the single largest
financial contributor to the United Nations system,
providing a sizeable proportion of the United Nations
regular budget, at almost 40 per cent, and to the United
Nations peacekeeping budget, at over 40 per cent. Of
course, its support is absolutely indispensable to United
Nations funds and programmes. That contribution
enables the EU to act as an essential multiplier of our
collective efforts on peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
conflict prevention.

The EU's efforts to promote democracy and the rule

of law are important. Its expertise helps build capacity
and promote reform in law enforcement, the judiciary
and border security. Through its election observation
missions in particular, the EU has helped to deepen
public trust in electoral processes and to deter voter
fraud, intimidation and violence.
Its actions to tackle piracy deserve particular
recognition. We commend the EU Naval Force for its
work off the Horn of Africa, which has contributed to
reducing Somali piracy to its lowest level since 2008.
We value the EU as a continuing partner in the fight
against terrorism and support its efforts to ensure that
counter-terrorism remains a key priority for us. We
welcome the EU activities on preventing terrorism by
addressing terrorist radicalization and recruitment.

To conclude, close engagement between the
Council and regional organizations is self-evidently
an essential component to securing international peace
and security. We encourage the Council to continue to
look for opportunities to work closely with the EU in
particular in that primordial objective.

