Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me start by thanking
Mr. Jean Arnault for a very informative briefing. As
well, I thank him and his team for their dedication
and commitment in helping Colombia to bring about
peace and reconciliation. He has our full support for
his efforts aimed at accomplishing the objectives of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia. I am also very
pleased to welcome Mr. Oscar Naranjo, Vice-President
of Colombia.

It has been more than a year since the signing and
entry into force of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC). We
are happy to see that the peace process has brought
about tangible positive results. Poland welcomes
resolution 2381 (2017), which expanded the scope of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
We believe that the role of the United Nations Mission
is critical to the next phase of the implementation
of the peace agenda, especially the reintegration
process of FARC combatants and the verification of
the temporary bilateral ceasefire with the Ejercito de
Liberacion Nacional.

A proper reintegation remains key in order to
guarantee that conflict does not reoccur and to ensure
a successful political, economic and social integration
of the members of the FARC. We would like to stress
the importance of the participation of women in the
political process. Durable peace can be achieved only
when all people - women and men - are equally
involved in the formulation of a solution - which, after
all, affects their lives.

The Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
played an essential role in maintaining the trust
between the Government and the FARC. We believe
that it should serve as a model for conflict resolution
in other conflict-affected areas. The success of the
peace process in Colombia remains essential for the
region of Latin America. However, it also serves as
an example of the positive involvement of the Security
Council and a much-needed success story of a United
Nations-brokered peace deal. Intense political will is
still required on both sides in order to drive the peace
process forward. We strongly believe that the parties
will remain united in their desire to bring about a
brighter future for all the citizens of Colombia.

Poland would like to underline the role of the United
Nations Mine Action Service through its programme in
Columbia, aimed at ending the suffering of Colombians
from widespread landmines. Last year, driven by
the outstanding work done by the United Nations
Mission in Columbia, Poland decided to contribute to
the multi-year appeal of the Department of Political
Affairs. We hope that that donation will also help with
preventive efforts in Colombia. We are also confident
that we, as the international community, will spare
no effort to provide assistance for lasting peace to be
achieved in Columbia.

In conclusion, allow me to join my colleagues in
congratulating Ambassador Matthew Rycroft. Poland
has been a member of the Security Council for only
10 days, but I can say that I am truly impressed by
his professionalism and his very constructive spirit. I
express my greatest appreciation.

