Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important debate.

We fully align ourselves with the statement made
by the representative of the United Kingdom on behalf
of the European Union, in which he stressed the need
to address the wider scope of issues associated with the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and identified
many existing gaps in international humanitarian law
in that area.

Even years after Srebrenica and Rwanda, we are
still witnessing attacks motivated by ethnic or religious
hatred or political confrontation, sexual violence, the
killing of civilians and other grave violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law in conflict
regions such as Darfur, northern Uganda, Cote d'Ivoire
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, among
others. We cannot be neutral or indifferent when other
human beings are suffering.

Slovakia is therefore deeply concerned about the
continued blatant disrespect for international
humanitarian law on the part of armed groups and State
and non-State actors in armed conflicts against
civilians. We welcome the continuing endeavour by the
Security Council and the entire international
community to strengthen the protection of civilians,
especially the most vulnerable groups, such as women
and children. The international community must
continue to adopt and implement feasible measures to
put an end to such grave violations of human rights and
humanitarian law.

The establishment of a culture of protection,
which Secretary-General Kofi Annan called for a few
years ago, should become a reality. The
implementation of the principle of the responsibility to
protect, which was outlined during the World Summit
this past September, into the international legal system
is Without doubt a major step in that direction. Further
development and enactment of the principle of the
responsibility to protect should also be continued
through a new Security Council resolution on the
protection of civilians.

In the World Summit Outcome, world leaders
agreed that, as appropriate, the international
community should encourage and help States to
exercise their responsibilities and support the efforts of
the United Nations to establish an early warning
capability. Those commitments must be reflected in
practical measures. In that regard, we welcome the
activities of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs undertaken as part of its
advocacy and dissemination work with regard to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. That work has
been organized with the support of the Security
Council and interested Member States and has included
a series of regional workshops on the protection of
civilians, in an effort to broaden the audience for
protection policies and mainstream them into the
decision-making processes of Member States.

On the other hand, as the organ with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council has a special
role to play in addressing the issue and in
strengthening the response capabilities of the
international community. It must ensure an immediate,
decisive and rapid reaction to emerging situations of
massive attacks on civilians and their livelihoods.
Political questions or selfish national interests should
not be obstacles to the international community's
taking action through the Security Council, including
through the application of the principle of the
responsibility to protect, especially in situations when
governmental institutions are unable or unwilling to
implement feasible measures for the protection of
civilians. Of course, the international community must
be equipped with credible and effective legal and
coercive instruments.

Only a few days ago, on 7 December, in the
region of western Darfur, armed militia forces attacked
the town of Kongo Harasa and destroyed all water
wells built by humanitarian workers. That is another
example of the kinds of atrocities committed against
civilians. We are convinced that attacks on basic
infrastructure necessary for survival, such as sources of
drinking water and crops, should also be considered as
direct attacks against civilians, and should therefore be
addressed by international criminal and humanitarian
law. The international community should not only
condemn attacks that target the very livelihoods of
people, but also prosecute those who perpetrate such
inhuman acts.

I wish to assure you, Mr. President, that Slovakia,
as an incoming non-permanent member of the Security
Council, considers the issue of the protection of
civilians as one of its priorities, and will devote
increased attention to that question during its tenure.

