Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your
accession to the presidency of the Council for this month
and for the outstanding way in which you have guided its
work. I also congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador
Lavrov of the Russian Federation, for his excellent work
last month.

We welcome the presence in the Council of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia, whose statement on
the development of the situation in his country is of great
interest in the context of our current deliberations.

The signing by the Liberian parties of the Abuja
Agreement on 19 August last year and the ensuing cease-
fire were events of major importance, marking a crucial
stage in the process of restoring peace to Liberia.

It should be emphasized that this was achieved only
after several years of effort and sacrifice by several parties,
particularly the countries of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and its Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), which, in cooperation with the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL), played a key role
in achieving the progress which eventually led to the
signing of the Abuja Agreement. The international
community warmly welcomed that event, and was
optimistic that the Agreement would be implemented.

Unfortunately, this optimism was severely dampened
after the outbreak of incidents in various parts of the
country, the most violent being the fighting at Tubmanburg
between a Liberian faction and ECOMOG forces, at a time
when the ECOMOG forces, in cooperation with UNOMIL,
were preparing to supervise the implementation of the next
stage in the Abuja Agreement - the disarmament and
demobilization of the belligerents.

According to the report of the Secretary-General dated
23 January 1996

"the developments in Tubmanburg confirmed the risks
ECOMOG had taken in deploying its troops without
the strength and resources necessary to carry out its
mandate effectively." (S/1996/47, para. 5)
That indicates how fragile the Agreement between the
Liberian factions remains without peace-keeping forces
having the necessary financial and logistic resources to
successfully perform their task.

Tunisia, as a member of the Central Organ of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, has
constantly worked in the African community and at the
international level to restore peace to Liberia. President
Ben Ali spared no effort after assuming the presidency of
the OAU to encourage the Liberian parties to sit down at
the negotiating table to resolve the conflict between them.

My delegation supports the good offices efforts
presently under way, involving representatives of the
national Transitional Government, the Liberian factions,
ECOWAS, the United Nations and the OAU.

We would earnestly appeal to the Liberian parties to
refrain from any action likely to compromise
implementation of the Abuj an Agreement, and to exercise
restraint so as to avoid any escalation following the latest
incidents, particularly since progress towards peace in
Liberia requires, above all, respect for the commitments
entered into regarding implementation of that Agreement.

It is equally true that, to consolidate the peace
process in that country, the international community must
honour its commitments to provide assistance to Liberia.
We would like to express the hope that the donor
countries will provide increased assistance in order to
respond adequately to the needs of the present stage of
demobilization of the combatants and their reintegration
into civilian life.

The assistance of the international community is also
necessary to enable the ECOMOG forces to continue their
efforts with the same effectiveness and efficiency.

We hope that extending UNOMIL's mandate for a
further four-month period, as proposed by the Secretary-
General, will, once sanctioned by the Security Council,
make it possible to continue efforts to consolidate peace
in Liberia in a framework of regional and international
cooperation, which remains of crucial importance for the
implementation of the Abuja Agreement.
