The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among the members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of Libya.

"In that regard, the Security Council endorses
the United Nations Action Plan for the resumption of
an inclusive Libyan-owned political process under
the facilitation and leadership of the United Nations,
which was presented by Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ghassan Salame at a high-
level event on Libya in New York on 20 September
2017. The Council welcomes the briefing provided
by His Excellency Mr. Faiez Serraj, Prime
Minister and President of the Presidency Council
of the Government of National Accord, on recent
political, security and humanitarian developments
in Libya. The Council reaffirms resolution 2259
(2015) and acknowledges Mr. Serraj's important
role in promoting national reconciliation.

"The Council welcomes the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General's objective
to support a Libyan-led transition that will lead to
the establishment of stable, unified, representative
and effective governance under the framework
of the Libyan Political Agreement (LPA). The
Council welcomes the swift movement to initiate
this process, specifically the meeting of delegates
from the Libyan House of Representatives and
High State Council under the auspices of Special
Representative Salame, which commenced on
26 September 2017. The Council looks forward to
further sequential implementation of the Action

Plan ahead of the holding of parliamentary and
presidential elections within a year.

"The Security Council strongly urges all
Libyans to work together in a spirit of compromise
and to engage constructively in the inclusive
political process set out in the Action Plan. The
Council reiterates the importance ofthe meaningful
participation of women throughout the process.

"The Security Council reaffirms that the LPA
remains the only viable framework to end the Libyan
political crisis and that its implementation remains
key to holding elections and finalizing the political
transition. The Council encourages the Libyan
parties to work quickly and cooperatively to amend
and fully implement the LPA to enable further
progress set out in the Action Plan. The Council
recalls paragraph 5 of resolution 2259 (2015)
and reaffirms that any attempt by Libyan parties
to undermine the Libyan-led, United Nations-
facilitated political process is unacceptable.

"The Council underlines that there can be no
military solution to the crisis and reaffirms the
need for all parties in Libya to exercise restraint
and refrain from any violence or actions that could
undermine the United Nations-facilitated process.
The Council calls on all Libyans to respect the
ceasefire, as called for in the Joint Declaration
issued after the meeting in Paris on 25 July 2017.

"The Security Council welcomes recent efforts
to strengthen an inclusive political dialogue among
all Libyans, including important efforts by Libya's
neighbours, international partners and regional
organizations, and stresses that all such initiatives
should be consolidated under the leadership of the
United Nations as called for by the United Nations
Secretary-General and echoed by His Excellency
Mr. Faiez Serraj, Prime Minister and President
of the Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord. The Council emphasises the
imperative for all Member States to support the
primacy of the United Nations mediation in Libya.

"The Council also welcomes the Secretary-
General's commitment on behalf of the United
Nations to building stability, security and national
unity in Libya, as well as his personal engagement
in support of the political process and economic
recovery.
"The Council expresses its concern at the
deteriorating security, economic and humanitarian
situation in Libya, and looks forward to further
details on the United Nations plans to continue
ramping up its presence in Libya as well as plans
for a new round of voluntary funding for the
United Nations Stabilization Facility for Libya and
recommendations to increase strategic coordination
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in
Libya.

"The Security Council further welcomes the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General's
commitment, on behalf of the United Nations
country team, to intensify the United Nations work
on the ground to help improve the living conditions
of all people in Libya, including migrants.

"The Security Council expresses concern over
the threat of terrorism and trafficking in persons
and illicit goods, which risk undermining Libya's
democratic transition. In this regard, the Council
reiterates the need for unified and strengthened
national security forces, under a unified, civilian
Government. The Council reiterates that all
parties must comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law as applicable.

"The Council welcomes the Libyan-led efforts
in fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL, also known as Da'esh) and other individuals
and groups on the United Nations ISIL (Da'esh) and
Al-Qaida sanctions list in Libya. The Council urges
all Libyans to unite in their fight against terrorism.

"The Security Council expresses its intention
to monitor progress on the implementation of the
United Nations Action Plan, and in this regard
requests the Secretary-General to provide such
updates in his reporting in line with resolution
2376 (2017)."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2017/19.

The meeting rose at 10.10 am.
