Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank today's briefers for their valuable inputs into
our discussion. I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our full support for the efforts of the Special
Envoy, Martin Griffiths, and Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock and to express our appreciation for the
work done by United Nations personnel in Yemen.

I would like to make three comments.

First, I wish to address the current situation in
Al-Hudaydah. I think that we are all united in the
view that the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement is currently of the utmost importance. We
strongly believe that consensus on the modalities
of the redeployment of forces is a matter of urgency
and that the protracted stalemate poses a growing risk
to the holding of the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah and
could lead to a further escalation of hostilities. We are
therefore encouraged by the important progress made
by the parties last weekend, and we commend the
agreement they reached on the first phase of the mutual
redeployment of forces.

We encourage the parties to build on this positive
development and to finalize the agreement on the
second phase of the process. At the same time, it is
vital that the parties refrain from taking any action that
could jeopardize the ceasefire or undermine efforts to
build confidence. We are alarmed by the recent surge
in violence across Yemen and condemn any acts of
violence against the civilian population. We would
also recall that all parties must respect international
humanitarian law, in particular as it pertains to the
protection of civilians, as well as international human
rights law.

Secondly, Poland remains concerned at the fact
that the Stockholm Agreement has not yet resulted in
an improvement of the dire humanitarian situation in
Yemen. There is still no access to the Red Sea Mills
grain silos and their critical grain store, and the main
road linking Al-Hudaydah port to Sana'a is still
blocked. We urge the parties to prioritize the opening
of humanitarian corridors and to allow access to all
humanitarian facilities without further delay. We expect
them to allow and facilitate the flow of humanitarian
and commercial imports - including fuel - into
Yemen and to ensure safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance and personnel to all parts of
the country.

Thirdly, it is also very important that the parties
accelerate efforts to implement the other important
steps to which they agreed in Stockholm, namely, the
exchange of prisoners and the settlement of the situation
in Taiz. We call upon the Government of Yemen
and the Houthi to continue to cooperate closely and
constructively with the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hudaydah Agreement and the Special Envoy in
that regard.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the parties' obligation
to guarantee the safety and security of the advance
team and all United Nations personnel and ensure their
unrestricted access and freedom of movement. We
strongly urge them to extend all possible support for
United Nations personnel in Yemen, including through
assistance in advancing the additional deployment of
United Nations staff and equipment.

