Mr. Pedersen (Norway): Despite continued turmoil

in the Middle East, some political developments give
cause for cautious optimism. The recent implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is a
victory for diplomacy and an important milestone for
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation efforts
internationally. The agreement demonstrates the
strength of joint political efforts and the importance
of political will and leadership. Norway is pleased to
have contributed to the implementation, in line with the
work being done in the run-up to the Nuclear Security
Summit to be held in the spring.

We are hopeful that the forthcoming talks in
Geneva will contribute to a political settlement of the
conflict in Syria. We support all efforts to that end,
and we are continuing to contribute to Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura's efforts to facilitate the talks.
However, while we work to find a political solution
to the conflict, we must step up our work to alleviate
the grave humanitarian situation. Norway therefore
urges the international community to be prepared to
make pledges when we meet in London next week for
the conference on supporting Syria and the region.
We need to clearly demonstrate our solidarity with
the millions of people in need of our support. We urge
the international community to mobilize the resources
needed to alleviate the humanitarian situation.

Let me now turn to my Palestinian and Israeli
friends. In line with political efforts throughout
the region, Norway urges both parties to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict to take all the steps necessary to
resume political dialogue and end the current stalemate.
The only viable route to achieving lasting peace and
stability is a credible political process aimed at a two-
State solution. The responsibility, and thereby the key
to resolving the conflict, lies primarily with the parties
themselves.

Norway encourages the Security Council to resume
its responsibility and provide constructive assistance in
the process. The situation as it is now cannot continue.
The current tensions call for immediate and coordinated
political steps by all sides. In order to make progress,
the following four actions need to be taken.

First, violence must stop. Everyone must strive to
lower the level of conflict.

Secondly, Israel should stop building new
settlements on occupied land and stop expanding
existing ones. Israel should refrain from land
confiscation and house demolitions. Activities of that
kind only serve to undermine any political process.

Thirdly, Palestine needs to strengthen its political
institutions and governance structures and implement
essential reforms. In particular, efforts on a far larger
scale than we are seeing today are needed to improve
the situation in Gaza. With respect to reintegrating the
governance framework under a single authority, the
parameters of the security agreements between Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organization must be fully
respected.

Fourthly, there is a need for urgent cooperation
between the parties on tangible measures to strengthen
the Palestinian economy and the reconstruction of Gaza,
with a view to advancing a political process. During the
current stalemate, Norway, along with the international
community, will make every effort to encourage the
parties to maintain the vision of the two-State solution.

While we are aware that donor countries are facing
ongoing budget reallocations and development budget
cuts, we urge all donors to maintain their current level
of aid to the Palestinian Authority. That is particularly
important during this turbulent period in the Middle
East. We cannot afford to see the Palestinian Authority
institutions start to unravel. Supporting long-term
institution-building is key to achieving stability.
Supporting viable Palestinian State-building remains
at the core of our engagement and commitment to
peace. Those efforts are vital in order to prepare for
the next meeting of the international donor group, the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians, which is
scheduled for April.

