Major-General Obi: I will touch briefly on the
issue of cooperation as it relates to the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA), and also on the requirement
for helicopters.

As far as the LRA is concerned, it is useful to
clarify that cooperation exists between the missions.
Here, I would like to say that the missions - the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad - jointly exchange intelligence
and have recently designated desk officers for this
purpose. We share intelligence on the activities of the
LRA. I would also like to say that the various missions
have what we call the Force Commanders conference,
which is held periodically. During these conferences,
issues such as the LRA are also addressed.

I would also like to say here that the issue of the
LRA was discussed at the meeting held in June in
Entebbe, which took place days after I assumed
command. At that meeting, it was generally agreed that
right now the LRA operates in small numbers, that it
moves across borders, and that it revolves around the
leadership and most of the time is surviving by instinct.
It also undertakes missions to recharge its ranks by
taking on new captives to increase its numbers.

It was also generally felt that the permanent
responsibility for addressing the issue of the LRA is
that of the host nations around the region, and that they
should coordinate their efforts. For our part, we share
information and generally address the issue as it relates
to civilian protection, because the LRA's activities also
affect the protection of civilians. In my own Mission,
our planning takes due consideration of activities
around the coastal border. We also encourage the
Sudan People's Liberation Army, which has permanent
responsibility for addressing the issue, while we
address the challenges as they relate to civilian
protection.

On the issue of helicopters, I would like to say
here that the Sudan as a whole is the largest nation in
Africa in terms of land mass, and that Southern Sudan
is bigger than most African countries. The UNMIS
military force is 10,000 strong. I believe that is related
to its mandate, which is mostly about monitoring and
giving support to the host nation. Sixty per cent of the
force is made up of enablers, while the other 40 per
cent includes such components as infantry - the
forces you really need for physical operations,
patrolling and the like.

Its deployment is over a very wide area. I can
give an example of one of my battalions in Juba, which
is one of my sectors. The battalion covers an area
larger than its own home nation. This means that its
team sites are located far apart, perhaps 70 kilometres
from each other. One finds oneself travelling long
distances by helicopter to go to one team site. Support
for this force obviously requires mobility. I should also
add here that Southern Sudan presents the very big
challenge of a lack of infrastructure capacity. There is
an absolute lack of roads. In the rainy season, the place
is muddy. Even on foot one can hardly move. One
needs special tires to drive in Southern Sudan. Thus, to
move in Southern Sudan one needs mostly air mobility.
Water transportation is limited to the Nile, and so will
not provide enough coverage.

Here I would like to add that UNMIS has been
asked by the parties to play a bigger role in supporting
the referendums. For this, UNMIS will now be
required to give support down to the county level.
During the last elections, our support was up to the
state level in the state capitals, of which there are 10.
But now we are dealing with 79 counties, so
preparation for the referendums requires
reconnaissance missions and the setting up of
infrastructure; after which the Force must be prepared
to extend into these areas to provide the security that is
required of us, since we must provide security to the
United Nations observers and protect civilians.

Now, with a limited force in a large area, and
with more counties to cover and more team sites that
we must address, we must do more frequent patrolling;
we must be in the air most of the time; we must operate

with mobile reserves that can react quickly and be
delivered where they are needed in the shortest
possible time. So our operations will be heavily
dependent on mobility, and that generally has to be air
mobility because of the terrain and the absence of
infrastructure. This makes the issue of helicopters a
priority, and they are limited as of now.

