Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
abstained in the voting on resolution 2304 (2016),
extending the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), in view of our reservations
concerning the growing tendency of the Council to
overstep the established principles governing United
Nations peacekeeping operations. A few weeks ago,
the Council adopted resolution 2303 (2016), on the
deployment of a police component to Burundi, without
the consent of the Government of the host country.
Following that adoption, the Government of Burundi
issued a statement rejecting the resolution.

The consent of any Government to deployment is a
practical and logistical necessity, as well as a legal one,
and yet, in the context of the conflict in South Sudan,
the Council has adopted a resolution that disregards the
position of the Transitional Government of National
Unity on the issue of deploying a regional protection
force. It also ignores the statement issued by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
on 5 August with regard to coordination with the
Government on issues relating to the size, weaponry,
mandate and timing for the deployment of the force.

The drafters of the resolution took the agreement
in principle of the Government of South Sudan as
a justification to define the detailed of the work of
the protection force on the territory of South Sudan
without direct consultations with that Government. It
even contains the threat of imposing further measures
should the Government fail to comply with its
provisions, amounting to a virtual act of extortion. The
resolution also prejudges the decisions of the regional
Chiefs of Staff in their upcoming consultations, which
embody the agreement in principle of the Transitional
Government of National Unity of South Sudan. It is
inconceivable that this Government should not be party
to a detailed agreement on the deployment of a force
that is to operate on its territory.

We stress here today, as we have done repeatedly
in the past, our full support for the work of UNMISS
and our utmost appreciation for its tireless efforts to
protect civilians, which require the Mission to be able
to perform its duties. Will the Security Council bear
the responsibility for the safety and security of those
forces? Do troop-contributing countries agree to
dispatch their forces to a country before agreement has
been reached and consultations have been conducted
with its Government?

We highly value the actions of IGAD and the African
Union to bring peace to South Sudan. We support
their keen interest in putting an end to the suffering
of the people of South Sudan. IGAD members have
courageously upheld their responsibilities with regard
to the suffering of their brothers and sisters there. We
would have liked to see an agreement on the detailed
operational steps adopted by the Security Council in
close consultation with the Government of South Sudan
before the Council approved the deployment of the
regional protection force. Our delegation participated
in the consultations on the resolution constructively and
in good faith. We attempted until the very last moment
to reach a compromise on the text that could ensure
the agreement of all parties and unite the Council
with a view to a unanimous adoption of the resolution.
However, and regrettably, our last-ditch attempts were
not fruitful.

Egypt will not take a superior position with regard
to its brothers in South Sudan. However, in view of
our geographical proximity and common history,
we fully grasp the untold suffering of all citizens
there - women, children, the elderly and everyone
else - and the absolute necessity of putting an end to
such suffering immediately. We are making bilateral,
regional and international efforts to give our brothers
in South Sudan a fair opportunity to enjoy a dignified
life and a future of peace and stability. The civilians
in South Sudan have suffered immeasurably, but the
question remains: How can we achieve that common
objective? We continue to believe that the Council must
exercise further care and wisdom in dealing with the
situation in South Sudan. Utmost caution is needed
to avoid adopting approaches that may undermine the
political process or throw the country and the entire
region into an uncontrollable cycle of violence.
The suffering of our brothers in South Sudan can be
ended only through the common efforts of the Security
Council and the African Union to give momentum
to the political efforts, support the monitoring and
assessment efforts, and assist all parties in complying
with the provisions of the peace agreement with a view
to building confidence, realizing sustainable national
reconciliation and dealing with the root causes of the
conflict. Any other measures will be only temporary in
nature and will soon fall short.

