Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): We have before us a draft
resolution on the situation in Myanmar, and we are
called on to make a decision as to whether or not to
adopt this text, which addresses vitally important
issues but raises several basic questions.

The first question is one of both substance and
procedure - the draft resolution touches on issues such
as democratic transition, promotion and protection of
human rights, and on social issues such as HIV/AIDS and
trafficking in narcotics and people. However, these issues
do not make Myanmar a threat to international peace and
security. They inflict suffering on the people of Myanmar
and create problems for its immediate neighbours, but
they do not make the situation in Myanmar a clear and
present danger to the rest of the world.

Hence, even if Myanmar is culpable of all these
charges, that does not make the situation in that
country a proper subject of a United Nations Security
Council resolution, especially when compared to
situations elsewhere. For there is no denying that there
are situations in various other places that are much
worse, where so many more people are dying through
the direct use of armed force and therefore a much
greater threat to world security. These situations should
be given higher priority here in this Council. There are
other bodies in the United Nations, such as the Human
Rights Council, that are more appropriate venues for
addressing the problem of Myanmar.

The other basic question is whether the proposed
draft resolution is likely to be effective in achieving its
goal. No doubt it is directed at very important goals,
namely, the restoration of democratic institutions and
practices in Myanmar, the achievement of justice for
the victims of human rights violations and the
attainment of national reconciliation so that Myanmar
can move forward as a member of the world
community in good standing. Indonesia and all its
fellow members of Myanmar in the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) share these goals.

But we must pause to think whether the proposed
draft resolution would help to achieve that goal. There
have been Security Council resolutions that did not
achieve their objectives. Before adopting this draft
resolution, let us be sure that it is going to be effective.

Indonesia, as a member of ASEAN and on a
bilateral basis, has done its best to persuade Myanmar
to show concrete and tangible progress towards
restoring democracy and human rights. In the context
of ASEAN, we have engaged Myanmar on this issue,
not on a "you-and-I" basis, but on the basis of "us", as
a regional organization in the process of transforming
itself into a security community, bound together by
shared values, including, and especially, the values of
democracy and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

We have tried to help Myanmar within the
context of the ASEAN family. We have persevered in
engaging Myanmar and in encouraging it to restore
democracy and demonstrate its respect for human
rights, for if there were progress on the ground, we
could be of greater help to Myanmar. But that is not the
case.

As a member of ASEAN, as a neighbouring
country and as member of this Council, Indonesia must
now recognize that the issue of Myanmar is no longer
07-20880
just a bilateral or a regional issue but an international
one. It is not a question of solidarity or lack thereof. It
is a question of principle. Myanmar must respond to
the imperative of restoring democracy and respect for
human rights. That is a matter of principle. It is not a
matter of winning or losing in the voting on the
Council. And it is a matter of principle that we
consider whether a resolution by the Security Council
will be effective in addressing the problem, or whether
this Council is the appropriate body to address the
problem of Myanmar.

That does not mean that we cannot act. The
United Nations must address the problem of Myanmar,
and so must the regional organization to which both
Myanmar and Indonesia belong. This is best done
through cooperation. The United Nations and regional
organizations can work together to address the
situation in Myanmar in accordance with the United
Nations Charter.

Hence Indonesia supports the good offices of the
Secretary-General on Myanmar and welcomes the
recent Visit of Professor Ibrahim Gambari to the
country in the light of those good offices. In our view,
the visits have injected new vigour into the efforts of
the United Nations to assist Myanmar in its democratic
transition. On our part, we will do everything in our
power to work within the framework of cooperation
between the United Nations and ASEAN to help bring
about positive change in Myanmar.

In the light of the considerations which I have
just mentioned, my delegation will abstain in the
voting on this proposed draft resolution.

