Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome and thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel
for her briefing on the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

We start by regretting that Security Council
members were unable to reach an agreement on the
terms of a draft presidential statement to be adopted
today on the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel. We would like to appeal to the members of
the Council to demonstrate flexibility and take into
account the needs for action by the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).

Angola commends the work of the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel in
the prevention ofconflicts and good offices in mobilizing
resources for crucial programmes and projects and in
assisting the countries of the region, which face very
complex and difficult circumstances. As mentioned
in the report (S/2015/866) of the Secretary-General,
the political, security and humanitarian situation,
aggravated by recurrent conflicts, an unpredictable
climate, epidemics, drug trafficking, transnational
organized crime and the activities of armed and
terrorist groups, gravely affect the lives of millions
of people across the region of the Sahel, with chronic
food insecurity and malnutrition requiring dedicated
attention by the international community.

A positive development is the commitment by the
Sahel countries to find common solutions to grave
problems affecting them, since the prevailing situation
is a threat for the entire region and beyond. This has
driven the Sahel community to a sense of ownership
in their common endeavour, which constitutes the
right approach to tackle the challenges they face. The
United Nations, and the Security Council in particular,
should join forces with the international community in
addressing the challenges facing the Sahel countries
and afford the necessary political support and material
resources to a region living in conditions of extreme
poverty.

Several countries of the region have either held or are
in the process ofholding elections, a process that should
lead to the consolidation of democratic institutions and
be supported by the international community through
the provision of electoral assistance to enable them
to organize free, transparent and peaceful elections.
However, conflicts and criminal activities weaken the
social fabric of the countries in the region, making it
extremely difficult to implement programmes on good
governance and development.

The Sahel region is facing huge security challenges,
mainly due to the prevailing insecurity in Mali and
Libya and the uncontrolled movement of armed and
terrorist groups. In Mali, despite the signing ofthe peace
agreement, armed groups, terrorists and extremists
continue to destabilize the north of the country,
indiscriminately attacking civilians, the Malian armed
forces and United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali personnel. The recent
terrorist attack in Bamako is proofthat peace in Mali is
still a long way off.

In Libya, the presence of two parallel Governments
and their inability to fight the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham and other terrorist organizations fuel
insecurity and instability in the Sahel. It is crucial
for the parties in Libya to conclude the political
process by empowering a national Government as a
means of stepping up the fight against terrorism. The
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, should strengthen their assistance to the
countries of the region. The decision of the countries of
the Group of Five for the Sahel to enhance cooperation
for sustained social and economic development and for
security to combat terrorism and transnational crime
deserves the financial and logistical support of the
international community to enable them to continue
to address the threat posed by terrorists, drug and
human trafficking and mass migration of people from
sub-Saharan Africa to the north and to Europe.

A case of a successful subregional initiative was
the creation of the Multinational Joint Task Force by the
Lake Chad Basin States and Benin, whichjoined forces
to fight Boko Haram. The success of the Task Force's
operations led to the recovery of areas previously under
terrorist control and to the release ofthousands ofpeople.
In addition to conflict-related violence, the report of
the Secretary-General underlines how the Sahel is
affected my food insecurity, malnutrition, epidemics
and natural disasters. We are deeply concerned over the
fate of millions ofpeople living in such dire conditions.

To conclude, we commend the Office of the Special
Envoy for promoting the participation of women and
youth in the implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and call on United
Nations agencies, international organizations, donors
and partners, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the European
Union to contribute to the implementation of projects
in the Sahel that address serious structural weaknesses
in those countries. That would enable the Integrated
Strategy and the Special Envoy to coordinate in
achieving stability and development in the region.

Finally, we deem it important for the Security
Council to receive more regular briefings on
developments in the region. We commend the countries
of the Sahel for their joint efforts to resolve outstanding
challenges and for their continuing work with the
international community in the maintenance of peace
and security and for the region's development.

