Ms. Bird (Australia): As today's meeting has heard,
the human cost of the illicit transfer, accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons is horrific and
widespread. In conflict and other situations of armed
violence, civilians consistently suffer the most. Civilians
are deliberately targeted by rebel groups, terrorists,
gangs and rogue Governments using these weapons.
Women and girls suffer disproportionately. In post-
conflict situations these weapons perpetuate a vicious
cycle of insecurity and violence, which undermines
reconciliation, investment and development.

Given the importance and the complexity of
this issue, we need an international response that is
comprehensive, coordinated and collaborative. Within
the United Nations, the Security Council could do more
by designing and monitoring peacekeeping and special
political mission mandates to address small arms
challenges, including by making better use of police
components. The Council's mandates should integrate
arms embargo implementation, stockpile security,
surplus disposal, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, and security sector reform. The
participation of women should be addressed across all
of these components.

As a practical example, arms embargo
cells - such as that in the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire - and the active use of the International
Small Arms Control Standards play a useful role in
improving coordination. The Council can also take
concrete steps to improve the effectiveness of its arms
embargoes.

First, the Council should consistently mandate
sanctions expert groups to investigate and collect
information on arms-trafficking routes, patterns and
key players in the arms trade. Expert groups need the
cooperation of all United Nations agencies and all
States.

Secondly, the Sanctions Committees must be
mandated and should act quickly to designate arms
traffickers and their facilitators.

Thirdly, the United Nations system should be
better positioned to mobilize capacity-building for the
host Government, as well as neighbouring States, to
stop arms and ammunition from reaching the conflict.
Targeted travel and financial sanctions can play an
important role in implementing arms embargoes. The
final report of the high-level review of sanctions will
be published soon. We expect that it will provide useful
guidance to the United Nations system and States in
order to strengthen the effectiveness of arms embargoes.

All States have a responsibility to prevent arms
transfers to illicit users, abide by arms embargoes,
strengthen legislation, and improve cooperation among
law enforcement agencies, including through regional
and international organizations such as INTERPOL.

As resolution 2117 (2013) makes clear, the
misuse of small arms and light weapons has resulted
in the commission of serious international crimes.
The responsible and transparent regulation of the
international trade in conventional arms is essential to
meeting our shared responsibility to protect populations
from the most devastating international crimes,
including mass atrocities. The Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT) will help us meet this shared responsibility, and
we urge States that have not already done so to ratify or
accede to the Treaty.

Finally, we call on the Council to regularly review
the implementation of resolution 2117 (2013) and the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/289). We need vigilance and momentum if
we are to alleviate the heavy toll of human suffering
caused by small arms.

