Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I welcome the
opportunity to speak to the Council about the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to brief
you on the progress made in the post-electoral transition
process and the main challenges we continue to face.

More than six months after the December 2018
elections, it is a good moment to review the progress
made and examine the political situation in the country.
I believe that an impartial analysis of the current
environment gives rise to both satisfaction and concern.

I would like to reiterate the message of hope
and optimism that I have consistently brought to the
Council. President Tshisekedi has clearly expressed
his intention to initiate bold reforms, which, if fully
implemented, should lead to strengthening Congolese
institutions and improving the living conditions of the
Congolese people.

We have also noted a gradual improvement in
relations between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its neighbours since the inauguration of
President Tshisekedi. In keeping with his determination
to transform the Great Lakes region into a haven of
peace and development through the promotion of
good neighbourly relations and regional economic
integration, the Head of State is actively engaged in
diplomatic initiatives with the countries of the region
to achieve that goal.

I will continue to work closely in that regard with
the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and with
relevant regional organizations to support the Congolese
authorities in implementing the commitments contained
in the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

Although the Prime Minister was appointed on
20 May, we are still awaiting the formation of a new
Government. Painstaking negotiations on that subject
are continuing between the two platforms of the ruling
coalition - the Cap pour le changement of President
Tshisekedi and the Front commun pour le Congo of
former President Joseph Kabila.

We understand that the process is unprecedented
for the country. Nevertheless, I call on stakeholders
to overcome their differences so that they can quickly
meet the expectations of the Congolese people. The
absence of an operational Government is detrimental to
the establishment of strong relationships with partners
and the implementation of important governance
and institutional reforms that could contribute
to the consolidation of a transitional process that
remains fragile.

In recent months, I have met with key stakeholders
in the process and urged them to preserve the gains
made during the elections and the peaceful transfer
of power and to make the necessary concessions to
finalize the composition of the Government. I would
also like to point out that we have seen constructive
approaches at the local level, with significant initiatives
to promote stability and development being taken by
some governors.

(spoke in English)

In the context of the eventual exit of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the Mission has closed a number of field offices in
areas where there is no longer a serious threat of
armed conflict. That will permit us to concentrate our
resources on providing support to the strengthening
of State institutions and to the protection of civilians
in areas where conflict and activities of armed groups
continue to have a devastating impact on civilians.

The report (S/2019/575) before the Council
provides a detailed account of the security situation.
Over the course of the past weeks, however, the level
of violence has increased in several areas in the eastern
part of the country. I am concerned in that regard with
the current situation in Ituri province, where spoilers
are seeking to exploit ethnic tensions in order to
instigate intercommunal violence. In addition, attacks
by the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) continue to
exact an intolerable toll on civilians. Armed groups in
Masisi, including the Nduma defense du Congo-Renove
(NDC-R) of Guidon Shimiray Mwissa, are responsible
for atrocities, notably conflict-related sexual violence,
committed against the population.

Violence continues to be the main cause of
humanitarian needs in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. As a result, the country is currently facing
simultaneous emergency situations, including mass
displacement and protection threats.

In Ituri, more than 350,000 people have been
displaced in Djugu, Mahagi and Irumu territories
following renewed violence. The deterioration of the
security situation is interrupting the return process
that had been gradually under way since 2018, causing
new displacements towards Bunia and forcing the
humanitarian community to reorient its assistance to the
most vulnerable populations. Important gaps remain.
To date, 733,000 people are in need of assistance in
Ituri province.

In South Kivu, the surge of intercommunal
violence and armed group activity has displaced up
to 180,000 people, while the Ebola epidemic remains
an ever-increasing concern and has claimed the lives
of more than 1,700 people to date. Recent isolated
cases, both in Goma and across the border in Uganda,
have heightened concerns about its spread outside the
Beni and Butembo areas, leading the World Health
Organization to declare the epidemic a public health
emergency of international concern.

I take this opportunity to underline that the
problems faced in eradicating that disease are not only
epidemiological in nature; they are linked as well to
a variety of political and social factors, including the
activities of armed groups such as the ADF and Mai
Mai, along with continuing high levels of community
distrust ofthe response to the epidemic. That confluence
of factors has resulted in a deadly environment for the
people working to counter Ebola, to the point that some
of them have been specifically threatened and killed by
armed groups.

I would like to thank countries and donors for their
generosity, which has helped to fund the Ebola response,
and I call on everyone to generously support the fourth
strategic response plan for the Ebola virus disease,
which was just presented to member States in Geneva
last week. I would also like to underline the serious need
for financing the response to other epidemiological and
humanitarian crises that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is facing. The measles outbreak, for example,
has already claimed the lives of more than 2,000 people
since the beginning of this year, even more than Ebola.

In response to those challenges, we are leading a
One United Nations approach that combines a number
of different tools. At both the national and provincial
levels, we are engaging with a variety of stakeholders
to defuse social and political tensions. Our military
and police components continue to provide support to
the Congolese security forces in efforts to secure the
affected areas and adequately respond to the activities
of armed groups. The Mission is supporting the
Congolese authorities in executing an arrest warrant
against NDC-R leader Guidon and strengthening the
performance of Congolese justice to fight impunity.

For their part, United Nations agencies are working
under the coordination of my Deputy, who serves as the
Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator, to
provide an effective response to the humanitarian crisis.
MONUSCO is also providing political and logistical
support to the newly appointed United Nations Ebola
Emergency Response Coordinator.
I would also like to draw the Council's attention to
the opportunity presented by the increasing number of
armed combatants who have expressed their willingness
to lay down their weapons since President Tshisekedi's
assumption of office. The groups in question include the
Kamuina Nsapu in the Kasais, as well as Mai Mai and
Twa militia in South Kivu and Tanganyika. MONUSCO
is working closely with the Congolese authorities to
support their response to that opportunity, including by
helping to mobilize funds from the World Bank and the
Peacebuilding Fund.

In the context of my good offices, I have placed
a priority on encouraging the authorities to adopt a
community integration approach for ex-combatants,
advising against any broad-based plan to integrate
them into the security forces. The broad integration
of ex-combatants into the army and police forces in
previous years has resulted only in the degradation
of their capacities, the hijacking of security policy by
parallel networks and the incentivizing of the creation
of illegal armed groups.

There is still a great deal of work that lies before
us as we continue the process of charting MONUSCO's
future drawdown and exit. I believe that the
independent strategic review, which recently completed
its information-gathering mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region, will later this
year present a report to the Council that outlines clearly
the Challenges that remain in that regard.

In the face of those issues, MONUSCO is making
the best use of the funds made available to the Mission,
even though our budgetary challenges are stretching
our resources to the limit.

I thank the Council for its support, while
underscoring that the continued support of the Council
and Member States for MONUSCO will be critical to
the ultimate success of the Mission and its ability to
exit the Democratic Republic of the Congo under the
appropriate conditions.

