The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Argentina.

On behalf of my country and my delegation, may I
say that the presence of Mr. Leonardo Santos Simao,
Foreign Minister of Mozambique, honours us here today.
We are most grateful for his informative statement and
especially for his firm reaffirmation of his country's
desire for tolerance and pluralism.

His presence here is a symbol not only of peace, but
also of the complexity of the efforts that have sometimes
been required to achieve and maintain it. That is why we
are particularly enthusiastic about taking part in this
meeting of the Security Council, which does not often
have the satisfaction of celebrating, as it is today, the
establishment of a Government elected in its country's
first democratic and pluralistic elections, as is the case
with Mozambique.

After 15 years of setbacks and struggle, it is clear
that the determination to achieve peace and reconciliation
has prevailed in Mozambique. The Argentine Republic
commends the people of Mozambique for their civic
maturity, their insight and their ability to leave behind a
harsh past, look together to the future, and work towards
that future. It is a future which, to be sure, will not be
without its difficulties, but the positive involvement and
effort of all members of Mozambican society will, we
believe, make it possible to build that future successfully.
The people of Mozambique deserve no less.

We also hail all who have been involved in this
process for their tolerance and flexibility - virtues sadly
lacking nowadays - and for their political will to achieve
the peace of which I have spoken.

The new democracy will need to be strengthened. To
that end, the parties concerned must pursue the process of
national reconciliation based on a multi-party system and
observance of democratic principles, making it possible to
put in place lasting peace and political stability and to
continue rebuilding the country.

My Government wants to highlight the international
community's positive efforts, coordinated by the United
Nations, which provided decisive support and assistance
to the peace process in Mozambique. We pay tribute to
the leaders and personnel of the United Nations Operation
in Mozambique (ONUMOZ). Members will recall that my
country had the honour of participating in the Operation,

 

with its Air Force hospital. We highlight and applaud the
contribution to the Mozambican peace process made by the
Organization of African Unity and by neighbouring
countries.

The Government of Mozambique will need to be
tireless and determined in its reconstruction and
development efforts; we are certain it can count on the
necessary assistance and cooperation from the international
community.

In conclusion, I convey to President Chissano and to
the Government and the entire people of Mozambique our
best wishes for a bright, peaceful future; to that end, they
can rely upon the friendship and cooperation of the
Government and the people of my country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

