Mr. Rivard (Canada): It is deeply concerning
that there remain so many civilians around the world
who are victims of deliberate and targeted attacks.
The ongoing conflicts in Syria and Mali serve as
immediate reminders of the threats that far too many
people continue to face. Other contexts, such as the
Sudan and South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Afghanistan - where threats to people,
basic human rights, to their physical security and to
their lives continue unabated - should serve as stark
reminders of the work that remains undone.
The conflict in Syria continues to take a terrible
toll on the civilian population. Despite collective
condemnation of the Al-Assad regime and calls to
end the violence, the humanitarian crisis in Syria is
worsening. There are now 4 million people who require
humanitarian assistance, and half ofthose are children.
Those numbers are staggering and should remind the
Council of the urgent need to act. Health care and
educational facilities continue to be targeted, and there
are disturbing reports of cases of rape and other forms
of sexual violence. The growing number of deaths
and the unwillingness of the regime to allow full, safe
and unhindered access to humanitarian organizations
underscore the appalling impact of the Al-Assad
regime's effort to repress the people of Syria.

The resulting outflow of Syrian refugees is causing
considerable strain on the countries ofthe region, and we
commend their generosity in hosting so many refugees
on their soil. Humanitarian organizations, such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the United
Nations agencies and many local Syrian organizations,
are making heroic efforts to meet the urgent life-saving
needs of those affected by the violence. Their efforts
are to be commended. However, those efforts continue
to be obstructed by the regime. Canada, along with the
international community, calls on those in a position
of power in Syria to immediately ensure full, safe and
unhindered access to all communities in Syria so that
humanitarian actors can do their life-saving work. That
includes expediting administrative, visa, travel and
customs procedures in order to facilitate the rapid and
unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid.

Canada is also deeply concerned by the current
crisis in Mali and its impact on the civilian population.
Malians living in the north have, over the past year,
been subjected to brutal treatment by terrorists and
armed groups. The humanitarian situation in Mali
is deteriorating. Over 385,000 Malians remained
displaced, both within Mali and in neighbouring
countries, and 2 million people are at risk of food
insecurity. Amid that crisis there are disturbing reports
of human rights abuses and other crimes against the
local population, including extrajudicial killings and
amputations, accounts of rebel groups recruiting child
soldiers and an alarming rate of sexual violence against
women and girls. As a result ofthe insecurity, thousands
of Malians have chosen to flee their country and seek
refuge outside its border. We commend neighbouring
Governments for their generosity in welcoming those
seeking safety. We recognize the burden that this
places on host countries and call on them to continue to
provide refuge for those fleeing the crisis.
(spoke in French)

While Syria and Mali are perhaps the most blatant
examples of the current obstacles to the protection of
civilians, there remain a number of other cases that
merit our attention and require sustained action on our
part. We must act to defend the rights of vulnerable
religious minorities persecuted for their convictions
in armed conflict situations. In that respect, we call
on United Nations specialized agencies to take better
account of the persecution of religious minorities in
order to prevent the displacement of populations. The
terrible consequences of violence and conflict for
women and children, including rape as a weapon of
war, also require our urgent attention.

Canada remains steadfastly determined to improve
the living conditions of girls and women. We have
therefore contributed to peacekeeping units for African
women, helped women to participate in peace processes,
and assisted victims of sexual violence by improving
their access to justice, particularly through courts and
truth commissions. Similarly, Canada's diplomatic and
development efforts are progressing, especially given
the need to put an end to early and forced marriages,
which have affected millions of girls throughout the
world.

The protection of civilians is essential to the
promotion of liberty, democracy, human rights and the
primacy of law. We must do a better job of applying
the many directives and best practices that have been
developed in Security Council resolutions in order to
improve specific measures aimed at protecting civilians.
Moreover, reports of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians can be very useful in focusing
attention on issues related to protection. At the same
time, we must clearly and firmly identify countries
and actors who commit violations against civilians,
including suicide attacks, and hold them accountable for
their actions. Canada will not be silenced in identifying
and condemning those who commit deliberate, wanton
acts of violence against civilian populations.

