The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Argentina.

I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing, and I reiterate
my gratitude to the representatives of Israel and
Palestine for their statements.

Jerusalem is of enormous importance for Christians,
Muslims and Jews. I do not think I err in saying that
Jerusalem has genuine meaning for all men and women
of good faith. It is thus that the emergency holding of
this meeting of the Security Council is amply justified,
at a time when tensions in Jerusalem - which, again, is
of great importance for everyone alike -are escalating
in a dangerous and destabilizing manner, with violence
having already cost civilian lives.

How unfortunate that, while we are still in the midst
of discussions about yet another reconstruction of Gaza,
we again face an urgent need to draw attention to actions
that take place in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Particularly worthy of our resolute condemnation are
the announcements that Israel plans to move forward
with the construction of more settlement units in
East Jerusalem, including in Ramat Shlomo and Har
Homa. Unfortunately, those announcements are neither
surprising nor isolated events. Most lamentable of all
is the fact that they do not surprise us because they are
part of the continuing campaign of settlement in East
Jerusalem, accompanied by seizures, attacks against
civilians, demolitions and the forced displacement of
Palestinian residents.

Moreover, settlement expansion coincides with
a series of violent events, access restrictions, acts of
incitement and attempts to alter the status quo of the
holy places in Jerusalem - for men and women of faith
and for men and women of goodwill. In the current
climate of frustration and a stagnation in the dialogue,
we are dealing with irresponsible actions with potential
destabilizing effects for the engire region.

We know that all these practices as a whole violate
international law, are contrary to peace, continue to
change the situation on the ground and jeopardize the
viability of the two-State solution. How can we tolerate
practices that cannot be tolerated? Why not require
once again that they be reversed immediately? Why not
warn that they could lead to a new tragic escalation of
violence?

The Security Council, joining the majority position
of the international community, has on many occasions
said that all legislative and administrative measures
taken by Israel and the actions taken that tend to change
the legal status of Jerusalem are null and void, cannot in

fact change that status and constitute a serious obstacle
to peace. The Council has also deplored Israel's
persistent attempts to change the physical nature,
demographic composition, institutional structure and
very status of the Holy City of Jerusalem.

But it is clear that simple words of condemnation
are not enough and that the history between the Security
Council and Jerusalem is a series of unobserved
resolutions. Things are that way because we are losing
sight of the fact that Jerusalem is just one facet of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and that the acts that have
brought us together today are expressions of a broader
reality, of an illegal occupation that has lasted for
almost half a century.

Argentina believes that the Security Council must
stop condoning, through its inaction, acts of provocation
and actions that are incompatible with peace. We believe
that we should do our utmost to salvage the two-State
solution while it is still possible to do so. If we drop our
masks and double standards, there are things that the
Council can and must do to meet that objective, thereby
fully living up to its responsibilities.

The Council can accept Palestine as a State Member
of the United Nations. The Council can conduct a
long-postponed visit to the region. And it should take
up - in a high-minded, serious fashion and with a spirit
of commitment - the Arab draft resolution, which
would put an end to the occupation within a specific
time frame, as part of the Council's efforts to achieve
the full independence of the Palestinian people and
guarantee the right of the State of Israel to live in peace
with its neighbours within secure and internationally
recognized borders. To that end, Argentina continues
to be ready to work on the draft resolution.

We are convinced that, with the necessary political
will and political ethics, the Security Council will be
able to help create conditions that will lead, once and for
all, to a peaceful, fair, tolerant and lasting coexistence
between Israelis and Palestinians.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.15 pm.
