The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
July, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Mr. Anwarul
Karim Chowdhury, Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of June
2001. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Chowdhury for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 5 of resolution 1330 (2000)
(S/2001/505)

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 5
of resolution 1330 (2000), document S/2001/505.

Members of the Council also have before them
document 8/2001/652, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2001/652) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.
In favour:

Bangladesh, China, Colombia, France, Ireland,
Jamaica, Mali, Mauritius, Norway, Russian
Federation, Singapore, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in Chinese): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1360 (2001).

I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.


