Mr. Fowler (Canada): Allow me to thank Secretary-
General Annan for a thoughtful and incisive assessment of
the humanitarian situation in Iraq, an assessment which
we share.

The presence of the Secretary-General at the outset
of our debate this morning serves to underscore the
seriousness of the issue before us. He has admirably set
the scene for the discussion we are having, and we are
grateful he could be with us. It is not, of course, every
day that we have the opportunity to discuss Iraq in this
form and according to this format, and for that,
Mr. President, I would very much like to commend you
for your initiative in this regard.

Canada welcomes the report presented to the
Security Council on the implementation of the
humanitarian aspects of resolution 1284 (1999). In that
regard, I would like to acknowledge the presence of the
Executive Director of the Office of the Iraq Programme,
Mr. Benon Sevan, and express our appreciation for his
work and that of his staff in putting together the report
and in working with the Council to implement resolution
1284 (1999). I would also like to welcome Ms. Carol
Bellamy, Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF). Her agency's outstanding
work in Iraq has recently been observed first-hand by a
team of Canadian diplomats, who came away extremely
impressed with UNICEF's work in Iraq and with what
UNICEF has achieved with few resources. Our team also
came away with a vivid impression of just how much
more needs to be done.

It is Canada's position that the Council should do
whatever it can within the mandate of existing Security
Council resolutions to improve the humanitarian situation
in which the Iraqi people find themselves. Let me say that
the debate over who is to blame for the humanitarian
situation in Iraq at this point - following, that is, the
invasion of Kuwait by Iraq and 10 years of
comprehensive economic sanctions - sanctions as part of
a ceasefire agreement successfully reversing that
invasion - is, frankly, not useful. The concern which we
share about smuggling and abuse of the oil-for-food
programme raises the question of whether the sanctions
might be better focused and targeted in order to be more
humane and more effective.

We all know that Baghdad could have had sanctions
lifted at any time over the past 10 years if it had chosen
to comply with its Security Council obligations. It has not
done so, and it must do so. Until it does, comprehensive
economic sanctions cannot be fully lifted. The Council
must continue to set a clear path towards the lifting of

 

sanctions based on Iraq's compliance with relevant Security
Council resolutions. We believe that resolution 1284 (1999)
does that and provides for the interim step of a suspension
of sanctions if Iraq makes progress acceptable to the
Council on a list of key remaining disarmament tasks. It is
therefore in Iraq's interest to accept the terms of resolution
1284 (1999) and begin to work towards the resolution of
this file.

Perhaps the most important features of resolution 1284
(1999) are the humanitarian provisions which Canada
actively supported and which were meant, in our view, to
alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people regardless of
whether its Government chooses to cooperate with the
Council on the other vitally important issues. The
improvements called for in resolution 1284 (1999) provide
for a more targeted and more efficient process for the
administration of the Iraqi programme - for example, by
streamlining the approval process for humanitarian items
and by adding a much-needed cash component for the
central and southern parts of the country.

We share the Secretary-General's hope expressed in
the report that the resolution will enhance the impact of the
programme in alleviating the humanitarian situation in Iraq.
To achieve its full potential, the resolution must be
implemented fully in both letter and in spirit. We note the
progress made so far with the assistance of the Office of
the Iraq Programme and urge all Member States to ensure
that the terms of resolution 1284 (1999) are put in place as
quickly as possible.

There are two main issues in this regard that the
Secretary-General, UNICEF and other programmes and
agencies have emphasized. One is the need to generate
increased revenue, and the other is the need to lift holds on
contracts for essential humanitarian supplies and goods.
Security Council resolution 1284 (1999) raised the ceiling
on Iraqi oil exports, but as the Secretary-General's own
expert report concludes, achievement of the humanitarian
objectives laid out in resolution 1284 (1999) will depend in
large measure on Iraq's ability to continue to generate
sufficient oil revenues to fund the programme. The findings
of the oil expert group dispatched to Iraq are clear. Without
increased funding for and improved delivery of oil spare
parts, the Iraqi oil industry will be unable to sustain current
production levels. Therefore, Canada supports the
recommendation of the expert group and the Secretary-
General to increase, on a permanent basis, the allocation for
oil spare parts to $600 million for every phase. We hope to
see the draft resolution on this matter, presented by the
United States of America, adopted by the Security
Council as quickly as possible.

Increased revenue will be meaningless if essential
supplies do not actually get delivered to the Iraqi people
who so clearly need them. Throughout the Secretary-
General's report, there are repeated examples of the
degree to which holds have seriously undermined the
objectives of the Iraq Programme. We share the general
conclusion that holds are a key impediment to the
implementation of the humanitarian programme and
believe every effort must be made to reduce the number
and the length of holds on humanitarian contracts,
notwithstanding oft-repeated concerns relating to the
adequacy of available information or concern about end
use. In both cases, streamlined procedures in New York
and in Iraq can be put in place. Improvements in the way
applications are made and information is provided,
coupled with enhanced observation mechanisms, as
proposed by the Secretary-General, are key first steps.

While we remain concerned about dual-use
programmes and understand the need to remain vigilant,
all Members must take a harder look at the kinds and the
numbers of the holds they place on various applications
so as to weigh their potential impact on the broader
humanitarian programme against the risk - the real
risk - of diversion for proscribed purposes. Dual-use
concerns need to be kept focused and realistic. We look
forward to real movement on this issue - and soon.

As for Iraq's role in implementing Security Council
resolution 1284 (1999), we applaud the Secretary-
General's consistent refusal to let the Government of Iraq
off the hook in his assessment of many of the problems
that have plagued the implementation of the Iraq
programme. Canada knows from recent first-hand
experience the difficulties that can be encountered as a
result of Iraqi efforts, deliberate or otherwise, to block the
delivery of much-needed supplies. The Secretary-
General's report makes very clear the areas where Iraqi
cooperation can improve. We strongly urge the
Government of Iraq to accept the recommendations
contained in this report and ensure that the
implementation and administration of the humanitarian
programme receives the full support of the Government
in Baghdad.

While we look forward to improvements in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, we also realize that
the Security Council must also make progress on the
other elements of its resolution 1284 (1999), including, of

 

course, with regard to prisoners of war. This will require
Iraq's acceptance of the resolution in full. When Iraq
accepts the resolution, we are hopeful that a new
relationship between Iraq and the Council can be
established, and, therefore, our message is clear. Resolution
1284 (1999) marks a new phase in the Council's approach
to Iraq. It will help further alleviate the suffering of the
Iraqi people, and it offers a clear path towards the
suspension and lifting of sanctions, which we are
committed to pursuing. However, Iraq must also establish
its commitment to the resolution before such a new
relationship can be begun.

