Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Bintou Keita for both her briefing
and the handout on benchmarks; it is particularly
useful. We talk a lot about benchmarks in the Security
Council when it comes to peacekeeping missions, but
we do not always analyse performance against those
benchmarks as clearly as she has done here. I therefore
thank her very much for that.

Like other speakers today, we continue to appreciate
the support that the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) has offered to the
Government of Haiti in its efforts to strengthen the rule
of law and further develop the Haitian National Police.
We also welcome the progress that the Mission has
made as it works towards its two-year exit strategy, and
in particular we welcome the joint transition planning
with the Government, the United Nations country team
and external partners.

I endorse all the points that have already been
made today by the representatives of France and the
Netherlands when it comes to strengthening the police,
improving justice and increasing respect for human
rights. I would also echo the points made just now
by the representative of Bolivia about the importance
of tackling sexual violence in Haiti, including sexual
exploitation and abuse. But let me just make three
additional points.

First, it is very clear that the political and security
situation in Haiti remains extremely fragile, as evidenced
by the recent events in July, and the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/795) points to an increase in gang-related
Violence and raises human rights concerns linked to the
police. We would therefore encourage the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative and MINUJUSTH
to closely monitor such risks to security and stability
over the coming 12 months, in close cooperation with
the Haitian Government, to avoid backsliding into
conflict. With regard to the governance or stability
pact that the report mentions, we strongly encourage
the Haitian Government to advance the sector-based
dialogue that the report has addressed to support the
identification of priority steps to agree on the pact as
an urgent priority.

Secondly, regarding the benchmarks and the
MINUJUSTH transition, as I said, we welcome the
detailed assessment of progress in the report, but we
share the concerns that progress against the benchmarks
has been uneven. I was particularly struck by the details
on the benchmark about the number of police officers
per one thousand citizens. When the Security Council
Visited last June, I remember there was a particular
focus on increasing the number of police officers, and
at that point there was some optimism that the number
would go on increasing. Given the centrality of that
particular indicator, it is very concerning that, over a
year since the Council's Visit, the performance on that
indicator is actually worse. We now have just over 12
months before MINUJUSTH is expected to leave Haiti,
which leaves little time to make sure that the transition
is a success. As we have said before, Haitian ownership
and delivery of those critical reforms is essential if the
transition is to be successful. We therefore believe that
it is vital that all parties, and especially the Haitian
authorities, intensify their efforts to ensure that those
benchmarks are met.

Thirdly, and finally, we urge the Secretary-
General to be realistic and clear about the division of
responsibilities across the United Nations system and
to support the United Nations to fill the gaps identified
in the capacity and capabilities of the United Nations
country team, which will be key to a successful
transition. On issues such as the development of draft
legislation, which will clearly require longer-term
support beyond the MINUJUSTH mandate, we wonder
if it may be worth considering whether it already makes
sense to transition that work to the United Nations
country team. We note that the forthcoming United
Nations strategic assessment mission, due in February,
will be critical to facilitating the timely planning and
implementation of the transition, and we look forward
to the report of that assessment mission.

