Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Sir, for convening this
open debate on an issue that requires all of us to ensure
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations.
We are especially pleased that France took the initiative
in calling this debate. France continues to lend its
support to the African continent at a critical moment
when this issue is particularly relevant. Thanks to
France's intervention in two brotherly countries - Mali
and the Central African Republic - we were able to
avoid a new cycle of massacre and suffering.

As we discuss the issue ofthe protection ofcivilians,
we note that significant progress has been made on the
normative front, thanks in particular to the continued
attention and commitment of the Council, supported
by all States Members of the United Nations, but also
by non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and civil
society. Many resolutions and presidential statements,
along with the establishment of specific mandates to
protect civilians in some missions, have enabled the
establishment of a robust legal framework. However, it
is clear that, despite those advances, the state of civilian
populations continues to deteriorate, with a continued
increase in the number of victims and displaced
persons and refugees, as well as widespread violations
of international humanitarian law. This bitter fact is all
the more distressing when a multidimensional mission
is deployed in the field. We hope that the call of the
Istanbul Humanitarian Summit will lead to increased
respect for international humanitarian law.

Although today's debate is part of the regular
review of the protection of civilians, this time from the
perspective of peacekeeping operations, we must keep
in mind that it was just a few years ago that there were
strong misgivings and suspicions concerning this issue.
It is in that regard that it is important to reiterate certain
key principles.

First, protecting civilians is primarily the
responsibility of States. However, it is clear that in times
of conflict the capacity of States is either inadequate
or nonexistent. In such cases the international
community has a responsibility to support them, either
through capacity-building and by giving them the
means to meet their responsibilities or by deploying a
peacekeeping operation.

Secondly, in accordance with the principles of
peacekeeping, any intervention by the international
community should respect the principles of equality,
independence, sovereignty and respect for the territorial
integrity of States.

Moreover, the troop-contributing countries have
a responsibility to protect civilians. But that is a
responsibility shared both with the Security Council
and with the Secretariat. Again, the principles are
clear- non-use of force except in self-defence and
defence of the mandate. To enable troops to carry out
their mission successfully, the Council must consider
the realities on the ground and devote adequate means.
The Secretariat must also strengthen cooperation
with troop contributors and involve them more in the
planning stages.

Allow me now to express the views ofmy delegation
on the avenues for discussion proposed by the concept
note (S/2016/503, annex).

First, we consider it desirable to support a preventive
approach, that is to say, missions should deploy
protection measures so that civilians are not targeted
by armed groups. That can be done, for example, by
strengthening protection for camps. To achieve that,
cooperation with local communities, authorities and
NGOs is essential.

Secondly, we must adapt the composition of the
force for the different protection stages. Mixed units
composed of military and police forces would allow
for a better response to the various situations that
peacekeeping forces may face. For example, it is agreed
that police forces are better suited and equipped for
dealing with crowd control.

Thirdly, humanitarian assistance is an important
element in the protection of civilians during armed
conflict. Support for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to those in need must remain a priority
for missions.

Fourthly, the presence of a peacekeeping operation
should facilitate the establishment of an environment
conducive to the protection of civilians, in particular by
contributing to strengthening the rule of law.

The protection of civilians was thoroughly
discussed during the recently concluded reviews of
the peacebuilding and peacekeeping architecture
of the United Nations. Morocco fully supports the
recommendations of the High-level Panel on the Review
of Peacekeeping Operations, especially with regard to
troop-contributing countries.
Moreover, the conduct of Blue Helmets charged
with protecting civilians must be irreproachable. In
that regard, Morocco reiterates its full commitment
to fully implementing the zero-tolerance policy put
forward by the Secretary-General. Concrete steps
have been taken in that regard by Morocco, including
deploying national investigators in its contingents. The
cases brought to their attention are treated with with the
utmost diligence and firmness.

Again, better cooperation with the Secretariat is
necessary, as this is ultimately a shared responsibility.
We welcome the efforts made so far in that regard by
the Secretariat, and we reiterate our full readiness to
continue to cooperate constructively with Special
Coordinator Ms. Lute and with unity of conduct
and discipline.

It is now time that the concept of civilian protection
go beyond mere physical protection to ensure that it can
alleviate the suffering of vulnerable populations, which
is the true purpose of protecting civilians.

Moroccan troops deployed for more than
60 years as part of peacekeeping operations have always
considered the protection of civilians as a key part of
their mission. That aspect is properly supported during
the predeployment training provided to Moroccan
contingents destined to serve under the United Nations
banner. In addition to the tasks they are mandated to
do, Moroccan contingents have continued to provide
support to local communities, particularly in Somalia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire
and, more recently, in the Central African Republic.
These efforts generally involve either in-kind or
financial resources and medical campaigns. Moroccan
troops are also involved in the implementation of quick-
impact projects.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Morocco's
commitment to the imperative of protecting civilians
in armed conflict, whether by troops under the United
Nations banner or by supporting capacity-building
for States.

