Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from French): The Security Council is meeting for a second
time today to deal with problems of the Middle East
region, a region that we had thought was entering a new
era of peace and stability. This interest is a tribute to the
Council. More specifically, this evening we are dealing
with the tragic events experienced by our fraternal
country of Lebanon during these past days, calling into
question the hopes that we all had for peace in a country
which for so long now has suffered and still suffers in its
blood and its flesh.

This morning the Prime Minister of Lebanon,
Mr. Hariri, informed His Majesty The King of the tragic
events that had taken place. The Kingdom of Morocco
and its sovereign expressed their condolences to him, and
I renew those condolences to the delegation of Lebanon.
The tragic situation that has been created in southern
Lebanon is of great concern to my country, because it has
dimmed the prospects and hopes for peace in the region,
and the situation could degenerate into an uncontrollable
conflict. The innocent civilian victims, particularly the
women and children, give this conflict a terrible, tragic
dimension.

My country wishes to salute the international efforts
to put an end to the military operations against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon. We hope
that this unfortunate development, which we deplore, will
call attention to the need finally to implement Security
Council resolution 425 (1978) and once and for all
eliminate a hotbed of tension which has lasted too long.
The Security Council has a role to play here, and it must
do everything possible now so that these tragic events are

 

not repeated and so that Lebanon can salve its wounds and,
through urgent and significant humanitarian aid, rebuild
what has been destroyed.

The principles contained in the resolution remain the
basis for a just, lasting settlement of the conflict between
Lebanon and Israel and for regional stability. It is high time
to prevent new confrontation and to return to that
resolution, which has been somewhat forgotten. It is time
now to resume and complete negotiations finally to bring to
all the countries of the region mutual respect and security,
which means all countries' ensuring that the security of
their neighbours is respected.

My delegation reiterates once again that we will
continue to support the peace process, which must succeed.
Respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon, the return of the Golan to Syria, in keeping with
the relevant United Nations resolutions, and respect for the
legitimate interests of all the parties concerned - these are
the requirements for establishing the comprehensive nature
of the Middle East peace process on the basis of
international law, opening the way for a Middle East where
relationships are finally based on law, justice, development
and prosperity. Morocco is determined to do everything
possible to contribute to translating this dream into reality
in the region.

