Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to begin, Sir, by warmly congratulating you on your
assumption ofthe presidency ofthe Security Council for
this month. We also very much appreciate the skill with
which the Ambassador of Egypt led the Council during
the previous month. I would like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his teadfast efforts in the
process in Kuwait. We await his visit in the next few
days to lend greater impetus to the efforts to establish
lasting peace in Yemen. The Government of Yemen
also expresses its gratitude to the Emir, the Government
and the people of Kuwait for their outstanding efforts
to promote peace in Yemen. Those efforts will remain
etched in the memory of future generations of Yemenis.

Since the announcement by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, on 18 April, of the date for
negotiations, in spite of the circumstances surrounding
the negotiations, the Government of Yemen has
actively committed itself to furthering the efforts
of Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed. In the next few
days, we will examine all the documents submitted
by the Special Envoy in accordance with the Kuwait
plan. That plan is based on the constant position of the
United Nations on the crisis in Yemen, namely, that it
be based on the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its associated implementation mechanism as well
as the relevant resolutions of the Council, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).

We have great faith in the people of Yemen and
in our Constitution, as well an awareness of our legal
responsibility, in the face of the suffering of our people,
to put an end to the tragedy, which has been taking place
for a year and a half and is the result of a coup d'etat
against the legal constitutional Government. That has led
to significant destruction and diminished our country's
resources, thereby setting back our development.

Over the past few days, we have considered the
ideas put forward by the Special Envoy, in particular
with regard to withdrawal, the need to release all
detainees and re-establishing State authority so that the
political process can resume on the basis of the general
framework. We have also considered the five major
points on which the Kuwait negotiations are based.
Those negotiations have faced serious significant
challenges that have to do with the lack of seriousness
demonstrated by those who carried out the coup d'etat.
They must renounce the unilateral measures that they
continue to undertake.

What we have proposed in Kuwait amounts to a
path to lasting peace, not half measures, which could
lead to a resumption of the crisis in Yemen and result
in the kinds of risks that could threaten the existence
of our country and stability in the Gulf and the
Arabian peninsula. The road map must include the
following elements.

There is a need to withdraw heavy weapons
and return them to State authority in all areas of the
country. The Houthi militias must withdraw and
rejoin the relevant military and security institutions.
All measures adopted in the constitutional statement
following the coup d'etat must be rescinded. And State
institutions must be fully re-established. Those are
the preconditions for expanding State authority and
resuming the political process that the Houthi coup
d'etat disrupted, so that the transitional period can
resume and we can hold elections to establish a federal
State and usher in a new Yemen.

The peace to which we aspire would mean an end to
the destructive war that has impacted our people. From
the moment the negotiations in Kuwait began, we have
called for a full cessation of hostilities in all of Yemen's
provinces. Since 10 April, we have sought to promote
the work of the De-escalation and Coordination
Committee. However, the other side has continued to
wage war without pause and to carry out assaults on all
fronts, while the Houthi militias have continued their
attacks in the southern provinces.

On 3 June, I sent the Secretary-General a request
for intervention on behalf of the Government of Yemen
to counter the massacres carried out by the Houthi and
pro-Saleh militias at the public market in Ta'izz, where
60 women and children were killed. The war criminals,
who killed women, children and the elderly in Ta'izz,
will be prosecuted under national and international
law. The perpetrators of these crimes include General
Abdullah Abdul-Malik al-Houthi, the military
commander of the Houthi militias; Brigadier General
Hamoud Ahmed Dahmash, head of the Twenty-Second
Armoured Brigade of the Republican Guard; General
Zakaria Al-Muta'h, Commander of the Republican
Guard; and General Hamoud Al-Harithi, Commander
of Central Security Forces.
Since their capture of Sana'a, rebel forces have
worked systematically to destroy the national economy
by wasting approximately $5 billion in foreign currency,
which they stole from the reserves of the Central Bank,
to support their criminal actions against our people.
The rebel forces tried to manipulate the derivatives
prices for oil in order to make money on the black
market. We have undeniable evidence of the earnings
collected by the militias, as well as of the illegal funds
they obtained by using trucks to transport oil under the
pretext of supporting the war effort.

With regard to the fight against terrorism, in May
and June the Houthi and pro-Saleh militias released
some 52 Al-Qaida elements who had been incarcerated
in national prisons. Recently, the remaining prisoners,
terrorist elements who had already been sentenced
to prison, were also released. This clearly illustrates
the close links between Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula and the Houthi and pro-Saleh militias. This
is particularly troubling since Al-Qaida controlled the
port of Al-Mukalla and was involved in the smuggling
of weapons and oil to benefit the militias. The Yemeni
Government, together with the coalition forces and
Yemen's partners, coordinated the fight against
terrorism in order to carry out fatal attacks against
Al-Qaida in Al-Mukalla and all other positions in
which Al-Qaida was deployed in the southern province
of Yemen. The Yemeni Government will continue to
pursue Al-Qaida and Da'esh forces and will provide
the legal evidence of the link between those forces and
the terrorists.

In conclusion, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to the suffering of the activists, journalists
and politicians who were detained by the Houthi
militias in certain regions under their control. The
militias reject the freedom of expression and their
prisons and detention centres are overflowing with
thousands of prisoners who are subjected to bodily and
psychological torture. Many families do not know where
their sons are detained or the status of their health,
which constitutes a flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
In a gesture of good faith and in order to comply with
the request of the Special Envoy, during the month
of Ramadan the Government released some victims.
We call on the Council to continue to put pressure
on the militias to release Major-General Mahmoud
al-Subaihi, Minister of Defence of Yemen, and all
individuals under house arrest or arbitrarily detained,
in accordance with sub-paragraph (f) of paragraph 1 of
resolution 2216 (2015).

Lastly, we reaffirm our determination to work
towards achieving a lasting peace in Yemen, based on
the negotiations in Kuwait, which are being conducted
by the Special Envoy. We would also like to thank

the Gulf Cooperation Council and in particular the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for its historic position in
support of Yemen.

