Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank China for having convened this debate on
Somalia, which will launch a process of reflection on
ways of stabilizing the country and achieving peace as
the expiration of the mandate of the transitional federal
institutions approaches. I should like also to thank
Mr. Mahiga and Mr. Diarra as well as the Prime
Minister of Somalia for their respective contributions. I
also align myself with the statement to be made later
by the European Union.

The Transitional Government, allied factions and
militias and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) have launched an offensive against the
Al-Shabaab rebels. We welcome the efforts deployed
and the sacrifices made by the contingents involved
and the success achieved on the ground in Mogadishu
and in southern Somalia. The Ugandan and Burundian
forces are bravely carrying out their mission within
AMISOM. and have paid a heavy price in recent weeks.
France, for its part, has taken on the transportation and
care of a number of wounded AMISOM. soldiers.

That offensive will contribute to weakening the
extremists and ensuring security in a large part of
Somali territory and of the capital. However, this
military approach cannot be a solution in and of itself;
it must be part of a broader political strategy. From this
perspective, we cannot but acknowledge that the
progress made has been insufficient.

The transitional federal institutions have fuelled
counter-productive institutional rivalries. They have
not been able to increase their representativeness, nor
have they managed to provide the people with the
minimum level of services they require. We must,
however, welcome the first initiatives of the new
Government. A budget has been submitted to the
Parliament, security for civilians has been set as a
priority objective, the fight against corruption has been

11-2583]
strengthened, and civil servants are now being paid.
This represents important progress that must be
acknowledged and strengthened.

We need a new political strategy for Somalia.
What must its priorities be? First, a renewal of the
institutional framework, as the State cannot continue to
have transitional status. In order to prevent the absence
of an institutional framework in August, the Somali
authorities must undertake the finalization and
adoption of a constitution. The transitional federal
institutions, in particular the Parliament, must be
reformed in order for all stakeholders of Somali society
to be represented, in keeping with the Djibouti
Agreement and on the basis of the most inclusive
dialogue possible with all parties, including the
provincial administrations, representatives of civil
society and those militias that are willing to renounce
violence.

Along those lines, we deplore the unilateral
decision taken by the transitional Parliament to extend
its own mandate. We commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga,
for the work undertaken in the area of consultations
and encourage him to revitalize the mechanisms for
agreement set out in the Djibouti Agreement. A
dialogue with the regions - Puntland in particular -
and with allied groups, including Ahlu Sunnah Wal
J ama'a, must be relaunched.

The second priority must be security and the
provision of basic services for the Somali population.
The Somali authorities must assign priority importance
to working to benefit the people. Support for the
transitional institutions must translate into tangible
achievements on the part of the Somali people.

How can these objectives be attained? First, the
role of the United Nations will be key. A strengthened,
permanent and coherent presence of the United Nations
will be required in Mogadishu. We call upon the United
Nations agencies and programmes to deploy urgently
their resources in the service of the people and the
accessible territories. The work of the United Nations
must take the form of concrete achievements that will
benefit the Somali people; much remains to be done in
this respect.

We are also aware of the lack of resources of the
Somali Government. The financial support of the
international community, as called for by the Prime
Minister, reflects a practical need in a political context
and must be forthcoming. Finally, to seal the
partnership between the Somali institutions and the
international community, a new, joint road map focused
on the respective objectives of the Somali institutions
and the United Nations, including a timetable, could be
created. Such a tool would allow for the creation of a
coherent, agreed-upon strategic framework for the
post-transitional period. Regular follow-up would be
essential. Support by the international community for
Somali institutions must be commensurate with the
concrete results obtained.

I should like to conclude by addressing the issue
of piracy. The report submitted by Mr. Lang (S/2011/30, annex) has recalled the urgency of finding solutions
with respect to the judicial and penal treatment of
pirates. Given what is at stake for the international
community and for the region, we welcome the
intention of the Russian Federation to submit, in the
near future, a draft resolution to the Security Council
aimed at the implementation of the proposals made in
the report seeking to place Somalia at the centre of a
mechanism aimed at combating impunity.

