Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States welcomes the decision of the Security Council
to extend the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM). This brief extension is intended to
give the Council additional time to ensure the renewal
of the JIM. mandate for another year.

The Council faces some very difficult decisions
around its core responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security. This should not be
one of them. All of us need only recall the situation
before the JIM. was created to address chemical
weapons allegations in Syria. The Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons was able to tell
us that chemical weapons were used, but there was
no mechanism to ascertain who was using them. As a
result, users of chemical weapons felt that they enjoyed
complete impunity. The international system had a
huge gap in its prevention and response architecture.

The work of the JIM. is critically important
to identifying the individuals, entities, groups or
Governments involved in chemical weapons attacks.
That information is invaluable to the Council, to the
international community and to the victims of those
dreadful attacks. Last Thursday's Council briefing
by the JIM. panel and Under-Secretary-General Kim
Won-soo was deeply sobering. As we all know, the JIM
affirmed yet another incident in which the Al-Assad
regime used chemical weapons. That was the third
attack in which the JIM. has reached that conclusion.
There is credible evidence that there have been many
more chemical weapons attacks by the regime. In
other words, an independent, impartial body of experts
operating under a mandate of the Security Council has
determined unambiguously that a State Member of the
United Nations has repeatedly used chemical weapons
against its own people.

The JIM. has also found the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) at fault for the chemical weapons
attack on Marea. We have seen the allegations of
additional use and agree that use by terrorists poses a
profound threat. Use by ISIL is yet one more affirmation
of the importance of the United States-led coalition's
fight against that monstrous group. We reaffirm the
importance of the JIM. maintaining its mandate to
investigate alleged use by any actors, whether they by
the Syrian air force or terrorist groups.

Lest we lose sight of the effects of such weapons,
I will give one example from the many first-hand
accounts. Here is what a doctor observed after an
incident on 10 August in which a helicopter reportedly
dropped a barrel bomb containing a toxic chemical on
Aleppo's Zabdiya neighbourhood. He said that at first,
two children and their mother arrived at the hospital.

"The children were unconscious and
unresponsive. Their mother was shivering,
coughing and wheezing. She could barely breathe
and was drooling heavily from her mouth. Her
clothes were covered in a wet substance with a
sharp smell, like chlorine. The two kids went into
cardiac arrest after around 15 minutes. We tried to
resuscitate them, to no avail. Five minutes later, the
mother also died."

The question is, why would the Council not want to
know who was involved in those attacks? Why would
we stop the work of the JIM. when there are multiple
credible allegations of the use of chemical weapons that
have yet to be fully investigated? And why would we
stop a group whose findings could one day help to hold
accountable those involved in such grotesque acts? The
answer is simple. We must condemn and hold responsible
whomever is involved in those chemical-weapon
attacks. The JIM. is a key tool for helping us to do that.
We cannot pinpoint its precise deterrent value, but we
can say that in the year since it was created, the number
of reported attacks has significantly decreased.

Now, even a single chemical-weapon attack is one
too many, but why would any Council member risk
going back to the world we had before the JIM, when
there were many more such attacks? Why would we
create a new gap in the international system? Others
may argue that we should broaden the JIM's mandate
so as to focus on multiple countries. To take time
and resources from the JIM's work in Syria would
constitute a significant distraction and further delay
its critical work. The JIM. was set up in Syria for a
specific reason - to find out who was involved - and
for that reason it should remain focused on Syria. We
look forward to discussions in the next few days. It is
imperative that the JIM. be allowed to continue this
critically important and unfinished work.

