Mr. Wirajuda (Indonesia): Mr. President, at the
outset I wish to commend you for organizing today's
important debate. I am sure that this meeting, under
your able guidance, will be fruitful.
We live in a world torn by conflict. Conflicts are
raging in the Middle East, in Afghanistan, in the
Americas and in Central Europe, and they will never

come to an end if dialogue does not take the place of
violence. But dialogue is not easy to bring about
between active combatants. There has to be someone
trusted by everyone involved to bring about and guide
the dialogue: a mediator who must have the skill to
guide the process to a just and comprehensive
conclusion that is acceptable to all concerned.
Mediation as a process and as an art is therefore of
immense value to the long-term survival of humankind.

Let me now speak of Indonesia's experience in
mediation. In the early to mid-1990s, for three years, I
had the personal privilege of chairing the mixed
committee that conducted the bulk of negotiations
between the Government of the Philippines and the
Moro National Liberation Front. The process led to the
signing in 1996 of a final peace agreement that ended
two decades of a separatist rebellion in the southern
Philippines.

Earlier, in the late 1980s, Indonesia launched a
process towards the peaceful solution of a decades-
long civil war in Cambodia. The process began with a
series of informal meetings in Jakarta in which the
warring factions participated. It later involved the
United Nations as well as 19 nations, and led to the
peace agreement signed in Paris in October 1991, and
eventually to the rebirth of the Kingdom of Cambodia.

In the early 1990s, Indonesia launched a series of
annual informal workshops on managing potential
conflict in the South China Sea. There was a danger
then that rival and overlapping claims to all or parts of
the South China Sea could lead to armed conflict.
Hence, Indonesia invited workshop participants from
all the claimant States, and the informal process led to
joint undertakings that served as confidence-building
measures. Since then China and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) have adopted a
declaration on the conduct of parties in the South
China Sea, and the area in general has become much
more stable.

Much was achieved in these processes largely
because Indonesia, as a non-claimant State, was trusted
by all sides. We had only one clear agenda, and that
was to ensure for ourselves and for our neighbours a
more peaceful environment.
Apart from the fact that we earned the trust of the
parties involved, it helped that the process we mediated
began with considerable informality and that it was
often conducted away from the limelight of the mass
media.

The experience of Indonesia in mediation cannot
compare with the vast experience of the United Nations
and its many special representatives, special envoys
and eminent persons. Supported by a mediation unit,
the United Nations can look forward to many more
achievements in the service of peace. Properly funded
and with the endorsement of Member States, the unit
could also enlarge the capacity of the United Nations to
detect potential conflicts and prevent their outbreak.
The United Nations and regional organizations could
team up in mediation efforts. The United Nations has
the resources and the experience; regional
organizations have intimate knowledge of the socio-
political terrain. That combination could be very
powerful. We in ASEAN are ready for such a
partnership with the United Nations. As we form an
ASEAN Community, all ASEAN members are
committed to the peaceful resolution of dispute and
conflict, including through the use of mediation.

Indonesia is not only committed; it is also a
passionate advocate of mediation, for we too have
reaped the benefits of successful mediation. There is
peace today in our Aceh province because of successful
mediation by the Helsinki-based Crisis Management
Initiative. Thus, we have learned our lessons in
mediation very well. Others in our region and beyond
have shown interest in drawing upon those
experiences.

