Mr. Cevik: I thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council for the first time in my capacity as Chief Monitor of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine (SMM) of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. I will provide Council members with an update on the security situation in eastern Ukraine, recent developments concerning the implementation of the Minsk agreements, and the impact of the conflict on civilians. A comprehensive ceasefire, which is the first point of the Minsk protocol, the Minsk memorandum and the package of measures, remains an essential element for progress. After the latest recommitment to the ceasefire, which the sides agreed to on 21 July 2019, the SMM recorded a significant drop in the level of violence. It lasted for 40 days, before the number of ceasefire violations reached the pre-recommitment level. Since | January, the SMM has recorded another significant decrease in the average number of ceasefire violations. However, isolated spikes in violence have continued to occur. Today the SMM recorded a very serious incident in the western part of the Luhansk region, in the broader area to the east and west of Zolote, where there was a spike in the number of ceasefire violations, including over 2,300 explosions. The Mission is further analysing information gathered today, which we will include in our public reports. As in the past, these flare ups can lead to an erosion of the earlier positive trends and increase the risk of escalation. During the summit of 9 December, the Normandy Four agreed that a full and comprehensive ceasefire needed to be implemented. The political commitment to aceasefire, expressed at the highest level,has yet to be translated into concrete implementation on the ground. Since | January, the daily average number of ceasefire violations recorded by the SMM is around 520, which is still far too high to ensure a ceasefire regime that is manageable. Additional measures, if implemented in good faith, can help transform the situation where violations of the ceasefire become the exception. At the same time, weapons that should have been withdrawn according to the Minsk agreements continue to be used. They were also used today, during the incident I mentioned earlier. Since the beginning of the year, the SMM has observed 647 ceasefire violations attributable to the use of artillery, including multiple-launch rocket systems, tanks and mortars. Since | January, the SMM has observed weapons in violation of withdrawal lines on approximately 200 occasions. The SMM reported the presence of artillery greater than 100 millimetres in calibre on 91 occasions, and multiple-launch rocket systems on 72 occasions. Not only do weapons located close to populated areas draw fire, but they - together with ammunition left in the area - pose a significant threat to the safety of civilians. Against the backdrop that I have just laid out, we have seen in recent months a renewed momentum, engagement and important steps for the implementation of some of the commitments undertaken. The sides have disengaged forces and hardware in all three pilot areas of Stanytsia Luhanska, Zolote and Petrivske, as foreseen in the framework decision of the Trilateral Contact Group relating to disengagement of forces and hardware of September 2016. The disengagement process has had an important positive impact in Stanytsia Luhanska, enabling much- needed repairs of the bridge. The broken pedestrian bridge was a symbol of the conflict; we all remember pictures of the elderly struggling to cross. The new bridge is now an example of what can be achieved with political will. It is also a powerful reminder that, once again, with political will, progress is possible and that this progress can have a tangible positive impact on civilians. In the other two pilot disengagement areas of Zolote and Petrivske, forces and hardware have been withdrawn. Other important activities, including mine clearance, are ongoing. In Petrivske, an area in which SMM's access is significantly restricted, ceasefire violations are still taking place. The situation will continue to require attention. The summit of the Normandy Four in December agreed on a number of measures on the security track. In the working group on security issues of the Trilateral Contact Group, participants are engaging on the implementation of these measures, focusing in particular on disengagement, as a precursor to a more durable cessation of fire and demining. Discussions on the identification of three new disengagement areas are progressing, with a preliminary, overlapping interest on one specific area. Participants also outlined proposals for disengagement in a number of other areas, with a view to completing the process by the end of March, as agreed by the Normandy Four. On demining, one of the other commitments undertaken in the Paris Summit, proposals for an updated plan still need to be discussed in detail. Similarly, detailed discussions are still needed on the possible opening of additional entry-exit checkpoints for civilians travelling across the contact line What lies ahead in the coming months is crucial. There is an urgency to maintaining the momentum and to meeting the deadlines set by the Normandy Four leaders. The Special Monitoring Mission is continuing to work to follow up on information concerning casualties among the civilian population. In 2019, according to the information gathered by the Mission, shelling with heavy weapons was the major cause of civilian casualties, with 75 people injured as a result of such incidents. However, mines and other explosive objects have been the cause of the majority of the fatalities; 11 people were killed by mines or unexploded ordnance in 2019. The Mission's presence, monitoring and reporting are crucial to provide objective and impartial information on the situation on the ground. That presence is also important to support the sides in the implementation of their commitments. Freedom of movement, which is enshrined in the Mission's mandate and the Minsk agreements, is therefore essential. Yet the Mission is often limited by obstacles to its freedom of movement, overwhelmingly in areas outside Government control, in particular in the southern part of the Donetsk region. These daily restrictions are unacceptable and need to cease.The key elements to address the security situation are set out in the Minsk agreements. The Normandy Four, in December, defined a number of steps that can pave the way to the full implementation of the agreements. Time is of the essence for the resolution of the conflict, which has now entered its sixth year. The active interest and support of the Council will remain crucial. In closing, I wish to express my appreciation for the close cooperation with United Nations agencies in Ukraine, both in Kyiv and in the field.
