Mr. Herczyr'iski (Poland): I would like to start by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his
comprehensive briefing, as well as Ambassador Tanin
for his remarks today.

As this is the first Security Council debate on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) after his assumption of the post of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in
Afghanistan, I would like to wish Mr. De Mistura
every success in his mission and to assure him of the
full support of my Government for his efforts. At the
same time, I wish to thank former Special
Representative Kai Eide for his commitment and
leadership during the past two difficult years.

Poland aligns itself with the statement made

earlier by the representative of the European Union. I

would like to make just a few additional comments
from the Polish perspective.

The period since the last Security Council debate
on Afghanistan, at the beginning of this year, was
indeed an eventful one. The London Conference was
the opening of the next stage of transferring greater
responsibility for the reconstruction and stabilization
of Afghanistan to Afghan authorities. While the
international community still stands ready to be
actively engaged in Afghanistan, it is important to
stress the need for greater Afghan leadership. In that
context, we especially welcome the commitments made
by President Karzai to undertake more vigorous actions
in such areas as security, State-building, the fight
against corruption, and counter-terrorism and counter-
narcotics efforts. We look forward to the conference in
Kabul later this year to be hosted by the Afghan
Government, which will serve as a follow-up meeting
to the commitments made in London.

Poland closely follows the Afghan-led process of
reconciliation and reintegration. The success of the
peace and reintegration programme outlined by
President Karzai during the London meeting will need
broad support, as the Secretary-General rightly
observes in his report (S/2010/l27). In that context, let
me recall the proposal made in London by Polish
Foreign Minister Radoslaw Sikorski about the
readiness of Poland to host a series of meetings that
might be helpful in overcoming the lack of mutual trust
between Afghans. Poland stands ready to share its own
experience in the area of successful political transition.

We are concerned by the difficult security
situation in Afghanistan. We particularly deeply regret
the increase in the number of civilian casualties as
compared with previous periods. In that context, I
would like to stress what the Secretary-General's report
clearly states, namely, that civilian deaths attributed to
anti-Government elements rose by 41 per cent
compared to 2008, whereas measures taken by
international forces to reduce civilian causalities
contributed to their reduction by 28 per cent.

In the circumstances of a difficult security
situation, the intensification of training of Afghan
national security forces farmy and police - is crucial
and urgent. With this in mind, Poland will increase the
number of its training and mentoring teams from 6 to
16, so that almost 20 per cent of our troops present in
Afghanistan will be directly involved in the
improvement of the operational capacity of the Afghan
army and police.

Turning to UNAMA, it is impossible not to
mention the worrying picture presented by the
Secretary-General in relation to the current vacancy
rate, which has now increased to 42 per cent. Speeding
up the recruitment process, boosting the morale of the
United Nations personnel, and increasing enticements
are now essential if the Mission is to effectively fulfil
its complex mandate. At the same time, we are highly
aware of the difficult security circumstances that the
personnel of UNAMA are faced with. I would like to
underline my Government's full support for all the
efforts aimed at the enhancement of the security of
United Nations staff.

International engagement in Afghanistan will be
successful only if we act together on the military and
development fronts. In this context, let me stress that
the appointments of the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, the new European Union
Special Representative and the new NATO Senior
Civilian Representative in Afghanistan serve as an
excellent opportunity to establish effective ways of
cooperation between these three major international
organizations involved in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that my
country's involvement in Afghanistan follows from our
deep sense of responsibility for the situation in that
country, which still poses a threat to international
peace and security. We hope that the decision of the
Government of Poland to increase the number of Polish
troops to 3,000 - 2,600 military personnel in
Afghanistan and an additional 400-troop reserve
deployable in case of emergency - will contribute
significantly to the building of peaceful and prosperous
Afghanistan.

