Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Chairperson-in-office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for his
briefing, in which he not only reviewed the activities
of the organization that he is chairing but also notes
the priorities of his country's chairmanship. We also
thank the Lithuanian presidency, which again brings
us together to discuss the ever-important topic of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.

As we pointed out in the Council, for Chile collective
action is essential in order to deal with long- standing and
emerging threats. Such action is strengthened through
the involvement of regional and subregional bodies.
That is the sense in which my country understands
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
which leads us to promote active multilateralism with
an effective capacity to incorporate the contribution of
regional and subregional organizations, always subject
to coordination by the United Nations.

Chile wishes to commend the substantial
contribution that the OSCE has made to maintaining
international peace and security, putting into practice in
Europe and beyond the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter with regard to cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
In that context, we welcome the announcement of
the Chairperson-in-office with regard to the holding
of a conference in May to review the role of regional
organizations in accordance with Chapter VIII, in line
with the repositioning of the issue made by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon.

The OSCE originated from the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe, first held in
Helsinki in 1975, when the possibility of a nuclear
holocaust was not a theoretical exercise, as the preamble
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons warns. The organiziation made it possible to
strengthen trust, an essential prerequisite in order to
prevent conflict and address the security dilemma.

One of the lessons of the long crisis that led to the
First World War, of which we will commemorate the
one-hundredth anniversary this year, is the pernicious
effect of arms races. In fact, one ofthe most emblematic
results of the OSCE is the Treaty on Conventional
Armed Forces in Europe, which is the kind of approach
to that issue that best serves the interests of global
security.
The OSCE has played an important role in bringing
people together through dialogue, even in the difficult
times during the Cold War. The expansion in the
number of its States members and its partners in the
Mediterranean and Asia shows the importance of the
bridges of understanding that it has built and of its
holistic view of security. That view includes not only the
issue of defence, but also, and primarily, development,
the environment and human welfare. The inclusiveness
and diversity of its 57 States members is a reflection
of that.

The three pillars of the United Nations - peace
and security, human rights and development - are
indivisible and mutually reinforcing. Fragility in one
of them inevitably affects the other two. That holistic
view should guide us in this universal Organization and
in regional and subregional organizations.

One point I wish to emphasize is the importance
of conflict prevention and early-warning systems. That
is a central issue, and one that complements the OSCE
principles in the context of a comprehensive approach
to security that goes beyond military and national
perspectives to a multidimensional approach capable
of meeting the current challenges of the international
system.

I would also emphasize the importance of
establishing cooperative ties in the field of prevention,
mainly through education and the establishment or
strengthening of networks.

The OSCE has effectively addressed a varied
agenda that is, by and large, in line with the three
pillars of the United Nations. In this second decade of
the twenty-first century, it would be risky to restrict
the security agenda to the military dimension of
global politics. Security is achieved by addressing
issues of development, the environment, an expanding
and strengtheing democracy, the rule of law, human
rights, including minority rights, the dialogue between
civilizations and the fight against terrorism. The OSCE
is making an important contribution in that regard,
one that has made the human security paradigm an
operational concept.

Once again, we reiterate to the Council the
relevance, through the use of complementarity and of
comparative advantages, of regional and subregional
organizations in the work of the United Nations on
international peace and security.

