I welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic, Ms. Sylvie Valerie Baipo Temon, at today's meeting. I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Ambassador Chergui and Mr. Vervaeke for their insightful briefings. It is encouraging to see the positive developments in the Central African Republic with respect to the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation. We commend the efforts made by the Government to that end. It is vital that this momentum be maintained, especially at the present crucial juncture, with important elections approaching. We are therefore deeply troubled by the reported violations of the Agreement, which may undermine recent achievements, and the ongoing acts of violence committed by armed groups threatening the safety and livelihood of civilians. Against this backdrop, we would like to stress the following points. First, we call on all signatories to fully respect the Agreement and work towards a favourable political climate by building trust and constructively engaging in dialogue. This approach will pave the way for the success of the upcoming presidential and legislative elections, which is a critical juncture for bringing peace, stability and sustainable development to the people of the Central African Republic. We support the call of the Secretary-General for a ceasefire in response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and urge all parties to heed this call. Secondly, we stress the importance of maintaining support for Central African Republic, both technically and financially, so that it can continue its peace process and electoral preparations as well as strengthen its capacity to protect civilians, address humanitarian challenges, minimize the impact of COVID-19 and so forth. We commend and express our support for the contribution of the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States, as the guarantors of the Agreement, as well as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic and other international and regional partners for their work. Thirdly, we would like to emphasize the importance of ensuring the safety and security of peacekeepers and humanitarian workers. They are on the ground to help and should never be the target of attacks.
