Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): At the outset, allow me
to thank the Polish presidency and to express my
appreciation for the initiative to convene this important
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and on the context of the global state of the
protection of civilians. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his recent
report on the issue (S/2018/462), as well as the other
briefers who enriched the debate earlier today.

While fully aligning ourselves with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union,
I would like to offer a few additional remarks.

Today's open debate on this topic is not only of
the utmost importance but, unfortunately, is very
timely as well. Every day we bear witness to an
unprecedented downgrading of the value of civilian life
and human dignity. The Council has an important role
to play - including in this particular context, which
can hardly be overemphasized. Attacks on civilians, as
well as on civilian infrastructure - whether targeted
or accidental - seem to be a common part of warfare.

The inability or unwillingness of States to protect
their own civilians - their own people - is a major
failure of their primary responsibility. That happens
even though we have made considerable progress in the
legislative framework, as its implementation somehow
falters. Therefore, we need to do more to achieve
tangible progress on the ground and, in that regard, I
would like to mention three particular areas of focus.

First, we the Member States must reaffirm our
commitment to the values and principles of international
law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law. We have to respect and uphold it and
we have to claim and ensure our key role to protect our
people. It goes without saying that violators of these
norms are to be held accountable, whether by national
authorities that have the primary responsibility for
their prosecution or within the international justice
framework. We believe that achieving the universal
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court would
be the first step.

Secondly, the role of the security sector in the
protection of civilians is also substantial, and Slovakia
is a long-standing supporter of the issue of security
sector reform and governance. A failure of the security
sector often results in security threats and violations
against civilians, as well as human rights abuses.
Security-sector institutions, if well-developed and
representative of the diversity of the population, can
address specific needs of various groups within the
population and thereby play a crucial role in prevention
as well. I would like to place special emphasis on the
word "prevention" here, which is closely linked to the
issue of the protection of civilians.

Thirdly, there is an urgent need to unconditionally
protect the safety and security of humanitarian
aid, whether we are speaking in terms of personnel
or infrastructure. According to the World Health
Organization, 322 attacks targeted health care in
conflict areas in 2017, with the majority of those
being intentional. The fatal impacts of those attacks
are multiplied by the use of explosive and chemical
weapons, often in densely populated areas. The
implementation of the framework set out in resolution
2286 (2016) and the relevant recommendations of the
Secretary-General is imperative in that regard.

Next year we will celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of the Security Council's engagement with
the protection of civilians through the specific landmark
resolution 1265 (1999). It will be a good opportunity
to look back and reflect on the positive developments
that have been made, but also to redouble our efforts
towards the full and universal implementation of
recommendations put forward in numerous reports
of the Secretary-General and raised during today's
open debate.

We cannot, so to speak, gamble with the principles
of humanity: our action when protecting civilians
must be decisive and resolute at both the national and
international levels.

