The President: I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Germany. Let me first thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his statement and, through him, the United Nations team in Colombia for their work under very difficult circumstances. I would also like to thank Ms. Carabali Rodallega for her very powerful statement and for her courageous work as a defender of human rights in her country. I very much appreciate the presence of Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, as she is of German descent. But, more important, her participation is a powerful sign of Colombia's commitment to the peace process and to the support of the Security Council, so I thank her again for attending this meeting. I will make six brief points. First, as many who spoke before have said, we are deeply concerned about the death toll among human rights defenders. We see that social leaders and human rights defenders who support the Final Peace Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, indigenous and Afro-Colombian groups and women human rights defenders continue to be at particular risk. I was struck by the figure mentioned by Ms. Carabali Rodallega in her statement with regard to the fact that since the beginning of this year, 160 social leaders and human rights defenders have been murdered in Colombia - 160 individual fates. I just want to repeat the names of some of those whom she mentioned: Karina Garcia, Cristina Bautista and Paola del Carmen Mena Ortiz. Secondly, we commend the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition for continuing its honourable work. Let me recall that last year, as the Council, we met with the representatives of the Comprehensive System, and they are doing laudable work. We look forward to a possible role of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia in verifying compliance with the sanctions of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. Thirdly, we welcome the renewed commitment of Cuba to maintaining its status as a guarantor of the peace agreement with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, Fourthly, the coronavirus disease has had a particular impact on Colombia, as in other countries. The security situation of women and girls has been especially affected. We also see a marked increase in sexual and gender-based violence and ongoing violence against women leaders and female former combatants. We are also appalled that the report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/603) notes an increase of 150 per cent in domestic violence. My last point, which many have already raised but which is key - and we saw that last year when we were there - is the fact that it is crucial that the presence of State institutions be extended to remote and conflict- affected areas and that there be a State presence to end impunity and to create a secure and stable environment for all Colombians. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I call on the of Colombia.
