Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing this morning.

The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the return
to direct negotiations between Israeli and Palestinian
leaders since our most recent open debate here in
July (S/PV.7007). We extend our appreciation to the
United States, particularly to Secretary Kerry and
Special Envoy for the Israeli-Palestinian Negotiations
Martin Indyk for their steadfast commitment. That
determination has enabled the parties to return to the
table. We welcome the parties' commitment to intensify
negotiations in the coming weeks, and we applaud the
bold leadership demonstrated on both sides.

The United Kingdom welcomes the Palestinian
Economic Initiative. We are taking a leading role in
fostering private-sector-led sustainable economic
growth in support of Palestinian State-building efforts.
We look to Israel to take the necessary steps to further
ease restrictions on both the West Bank and Gaza, to
enable the step change in the Palestinian economy that
Secretary Kerry is rightly advocating.

It is important to build confidence among the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples that their common goal
of peace is within reach. Over the past few weeks,
there have been a number of concerning events, such
as the murder of three Israelis, including two serving
Israeli Defense Forces soldiers in the West Bank, and
we condemn that unreservedly. There has been a rise
in price tag attacks across East Jerusalem and the West
Bank, including acts of setting fire and vandalizing
Palestinian property. Those responsible for these crimes
must be brought to justice. We are also troubled by
the rising tensions around the holy sites of Jerusalem,
sites that hold religious significance and are politically
sensitive. We call on all parties to maintain the status
quo and engage in dialogue to ensure calm.

Going forward, the international community must
do all it can to support both parties in working towards
our common goal of reaching a negotiated two-State
solution that ends the conflict once and for all.
Concerning Syria, for the first time, with the
adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), the Security Council
imposes binding and enforceable obligations on the
Syrian regime, with the threat of action under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations in the event
of non-compliance. Resolution 2118 (2013), the first on
Syria in 17 months, requires the full implementation of
the Executive Council decision of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, whereby Syria's
chemical weapons must be verifiably eliminated within
the first half of next year. The voluntary destruction
of those chemical weapons, which until recently the
Al-Assad regime denied that it possessed, is a huge
step forward on the issue. Resolution 2118 (2013) also
formally endorses the Geneva communique of last year
(S/2012/523, annex), calling for a transitional governing
body with full executive powers.

Today, my Foreign Minister hosted a meeting
in London of 11 Foreign Ministers and a senior
delegation from the Syrian National Coalition of Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces, led by President
Al-Jarba. The communique issued after that meeting
welcomed progress on preparations for a "Geneva
11" conference, which could take place in November.
Participants underscored that Geneva II should lead
to a transitional governing body with full executive
powers, agreed on by mutual consent. They agreed that
once such a body is established, Al-Assad and his close
associates with blood on their hands will have no future
role to play in Syria. The United Kingdom will continue
to work closely with the Syrian National Coalition,
which is committed to the Geneva communique and
an inclusive and democratic Syria, and which rejects
extremism.

Well over 100,000 people have been killed, and
hundreds of thousands of Syrian civilians continue to
suffer from the regime's brutal use of conventional
weapons and gross human rights violations committed
on a daily basis. The United Kingdom calls on all Member
States to support the Third Committee resolution on the
human rights situation in Syria. We must send a clear
message to the Al-Assad regime that the international
community is united in its condemnation of such human
rights violations.

We have seen the Security Council come together
on humanitarian access with the adoption of a
presidential statement (S/PRST/20l3/15). That should
now be translated into visible change on the ground.
The humanitarian situation remains dire. More than
6.8 million people are displaced, and every 15 seconds
a Syrian becomes a refugee. That is almost 5,000
people every day. The United Nations estimates
that up to 2.5 million people in areas under siege
cannot be reached by humanitarian agencies. The
use of siege by regime forces in Moadamiya, Homs,
Aleppo and Al-Hasakah is unacceptable, and I echo
Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos's call for an
immediate pause in hostilities in Moadamiya to allow
humanitarian agencies unhindered access in order to
evacuate the remaining civilians and deliver life-saving
treatment and supplies.

The United Kingdom recognizes the scale and
despair of the humanitarian crisis. During the general
debate of the General Assembly, we announced a
further $160 million in humanitarian assistance, which
now brings the United Kingdom's total Syria-related
humanitarian funding to $800 million. That is the
largest sum that we have ever committed to a single
humanitarian crisis. The international community as
a whole pledged more than $1 billion in new funding
during September. That is a welcome step, but more
must be done.

Finally, concerning Lebanon, as July's Security
Council presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/9) and
the recent meetings of the International Support Group
have demonstrated, there is genuine international unity
in support of Lebanon's stability. The United Kingdom
has tripled its own humanitarian and security assistance
to Lebanon this year, and we call on the Lebanese
parties to take urgent steps to form a new consensus
Government to tackle the significant challenges they
face.

We are at a critical juncture in both the Middle
East peace process and the Syria conflict. Both crises
require bold, responsible leadership on the part of the
parties to conflict and active engagement on the part
of the international community in order to secure an
end to conflict and a better future for the people of the
region.

