Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): We too wish
to thank the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), Ambassador Heraldo Mufioz of Chile for his in-
depth briefing on the related activities of the
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund during the
period under review.

The overriding purpose of Security Council
resolution 1645 (2005) is to strengthen the capacity of
the United Nations to prevent conflicts and to assist
countries emerging from armed conflict in their efforts
towards sustained recovery, reconstruction and
development.

In that connection, the Vietnamese delegation
wishes to underscore that, in its initial years of
evolution, the PBC has consolidated its core advisory
role and leant significant support to critical
peacebuilding priorities. The Commission has made
strong efforts to enhance public awareness and
outreach, capacity-building and policy guidance. It has
also strengthened the common platform for closer and
more effective cooperation among the relevant United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, as well as
among regional and subregional organizations. A more
notable strength of the Commission is its capacity to
help initiate funding for the countries on its agenda to
respond to emergency financial difficulties.

Viet Nam commends the Commission's work in
its third year of development. The PBC, through its
country-specific configurations and integrated
peacebuilding strategies, has yielded concrete and
important results under challenging circumstances in
Burundi, the Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau
and Sierra Leone. Sierra Leone and Burundi, the first
two countries on the Commission's agenda, have surely
recorded real progress in consolidating peace, while
Burundi has made headway in its peace process
through the inclusive political dialogues. Sierra Leone,
for its part, has now emerged as a country firmly on the
path towards stability and development, with
significant reforms having been undertaken in the
socio-economic and security sectors.

Three years after the establishment of the PBC,
the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office, in accordance with the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1), peacebuilding is steadily
expanding in scope and depth. With its comparative
advantages residing in its unique representative
membership and convening power for various actors
and stakeholders, the Commission has become a viable
institution for promoting the nexus between security
and development, as well as a strategic vision for
consolidating peace and avoiding relapses into
violence in post-conflict countries.

There remain, however, a number of persistent
challenges to the Commission in its activities. These
challenges range from supporting political processes
and reconciliation to sustaining safety and security, and
from strengthening the rule of law to facilitating the
provision of basic services and the revitalization of
economies destroyed by armed conflict and war.

In all these areas, more tangible and measurable
results continue to be a central element of all its work
on the ground. The Commission will be more effective
in furthering the international peacebuilding agenda if
its activities are better tailored to the needs and
priorities of recipient countries. To this effect, the PBC
should redouble its efforts to improve its rules of
procedures and working methods, intensify interaction
with countries on its agenda, and rationalize its
institutional relationships with the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council, in accordance with the respective competence
of each body as defined by the Charter.

In view of the aftermath of the global economic
and financial crisis, the Peacebuilding Fund should
build upon its revised terms of reference and truly
serve as a catalytic, responsive and focused resource
for peacebuilding support. Overall, the efficient
functioning of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture rests upon the capacity to deliver a real
impact on the ground.

At the same time, bringing to bear the full force
of the United Nations system in support of a country
emerging from conflict requires unity of purpose and
action in all areas of peace and security, human rights,
the rule of law, development and humanitarian affairs,
as well as coherence among preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Greater
emphasis on education and training, job creation,
agriculture, infrastructure, private sector reform and
other development agendas can ultimately address the
root causes of conflicts and break the vicious cycle of
poverty, marginalization and violence.

The upcoming 2010 review process will be a
good opportunity to take stock of achievements, gaps
and impact in the exercise of the Commission's core
mandates. It will also be a good opportunity for the
PBC to build on lessons learned and experiences to
date so as to help the Commission better adapt to
prevailing global realities and better support the
countries that are or will be on its agenda.

