Mr. Powell (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting of the
Security Council.

We gather on this solemn anniversary as
representatives of our own countries, and also as
representatives of the international community.
Together we honour the dead of 90 nations who were
murdered on this day one year ago: men and women of
every continent, culture and creed; of every region,
race and religion. The full cycle of seasons has come
and gone for the loved ones of the victims. Their grief
is still fresh. For them, the past 12 months have been a
chronicle of absences, a calendar filled with daily
reminders of loss - missing faces, missing voices,
missing embraces - absences as poignant and palpable
as the twin towers missing from the New York skyline.
On this day of remembrance, we extend to the family
members all over the world our deepest condolences
for their sorrow.

Here in the United States, 11 September is scared
deeply into our national consciousness. The attacks on
our soil drew us closer as a people. They also drew us
closer to people of kindness and good will across the
globe. We will never forget the outpouring of sympathy
and solidarity we received from throughout the
international community. On behalf of President Bush
and on behalf of the American people, I wish to
express my country's abiding gratitude to all those who
reached out to us at our time of national trial.

Amidst the fire and smoke, amidst the confusion
and shock, some things became very clear to us in the
United States, and to the entire international
community. It was clear that the terrorists did not just
strike America. They attacked the values of the
civilized world that are enshrined in the United Nations
Charter. It was clear that terrorism is a threat to
international peace and security; and it was clear that
all the world's nations had to take concerted action if
this menace was to be eradicated once and for all.

And so, in defence of shared values and out of a
sense of shared vulnerability, the world answered
President Bush's call for a great global coalition
against terrorism. The Security Council, the General
Assembly and every single regional and subregional
organization represented at this world body condemned
the attacks. Members of the United Nations made
binding commitments to combat terrorism, and in the
past 12 months much has been accomplished. Together
we have taken decisive steps to weaken terrorism's
deadly grip on various parts of the globe, not least on
Afghanistan.

Coalition forces, led by the United Sates, have
liberated the Afghan people from the dual tyranny of
Al Qaeda terrorists and the Taliban. With the assistance
of the international community, Afghanistan now has
an interim governing authority, an agreed path to a
representative Government. The world community is
working with Afghanistan's new leadership to meet the
humanitarian needs ofthe Afghan people, including the
needs of millions of returning refugees and internally
displaced persons. With the contribution of donor
nations across the globe, the international community
is helping the Afghan people begin the enormous task
of recovery and reconstruction. For the first time in
over two decades, the men and women of Afghanistan
look to the future with hope.

Elsewhere in the world the international
community is making it harder by the day for terrorists
to support their operations, acquire weapons of mass
destruction, move about freely, find sanctuary,
communicate and plot. Thanks to our combined efforts,
every day somewhere in the world terrorists are being
arrested, their cells are being broken up, their financial
bloodlines are being severed, their plans are being
disrupted and their attacks are being foiled. Indeed, the
actions we have taken to date against terrorism have
shown the power of our collective will.

But from the beginning all of us recognized that
our fight has to be more than a response to the
particular events of 11 September. It is about
eliminating terrorism as a global menace. We must be
prepared for a long, hard effort measured in years, not
in months. For our part, the people of the United States
understand that, long after the void in New York City's
skyline has been filled by a fitting monument, long
after it is possible to tell where the rebuilt walls of the
Pentagon meet the old, long after nature has mended
the gash in that Pennsylvania field, our country must
still remain vigilant and resolute, not just for our own
sake but for the well-being of people everywhere.

Terrorism is antithetical to the better world for
which we have worked since the United Nations was
founded. We are all in this together. So, on behalf of
President Bush and the American people, I solemnly
recommit the United States to our common fight
against terrorism. We join all other Members of the
United Nations in the effort to build a world of peace,
prosperity and freedom where terrorism cannot thrive.

