Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Ms. Pillay and Mr. Dieng
for their briefings on the findings of their visit to crisis-
torn South Sudan. We share their profound concern at
the mass violations of human rights and the norms of
international humanitarian law by both parties to the
conflict, including the monstrous killing of civilians
on ethnic grounds. This is particularly troubling in
the light of the diverse character of the young society
of South Sudan. Among the most glaring examples of
the clashes between these two camps were the crimes
perpetrated in Bentiu and Bor, which could amount to
war crimes.

We hope that the visit by Ms. Pillay and Mr. Dieng
will push the parties towards practical implementation
of their stated intentions to prevent such crimes in the
future and to bring tojustice all ofthose responsible. We
trust that next week's report from the United Nations
Mission to South Sudan (UNMISS) on the human rights
situation there will be substantive and make a genuine
contribution to tackling challenges with regards to
establishing the truth and combating the deep-rooted
culture of impunity that reigns in the country.

We welcome the activities of the African Union
commission of inquiry on South Sudan, which
should effectively complement United Nations
efforts in this area, including with the development
of recommendations for addressing the root causes
of the conflict and fostering a process of national
reconciliation. We are particularly concerned at reports
of an impending humanitarian catastrophe in South
Sudan. The number ofpeople displaced by violence now
exceeds 1.2 million. Approximately 5 million people
require humanitarian assistance, and the number is
growing rapidly. The genuine threat of mass starvation
in the country looms large.

We agree that the path towards addressing the
grave humanitarian and human rights situation lies
in a political settlement of the armed conflict. The
leaders of both warring parties must finally set aside
their own ambitions and begin seeking a solution to
the crisis through peaceful means by implementing
the agreement of 23 January. We strongly welcome the
vigorous efforts of international partners, especially the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, seeking
a negotiated solution and ceasefire. The international
community, represented inter alia by the Council, must
duly support those efforts in a timely fashion.

With regard to the recent and growing calls for the
adoption of targeted Security Council sanctions against
so-called saboteurs ofthe peace process in South Sudan,
this is an issue that should be addressed extremely
warily and cautiously. This subject needs to be fully
fleshed out, taking into account both internal and
regional factors. Our extensive collective experience
shows that sanctions are far from a panacea and never
have been an effective instrument for achieving political
settlements to conflicts. What they can do, however,
is undermine the spirit of cooperation. Moreover, it is
important to canvass the opinions of leading regional
actors on such an initiative.

The latest tragic events have again called into
question the effectiveness of the leadership of the
United Nations Mission to South Sudan. Despite a
budget of almost $1 billion, a large contingent and
robust mandate, it has proven unable to fully guarantee
the protection of civilians, even on the grounds of its
own compounds, which, incidentally, are not designed
to host tens of thousands of civilians for long periods.
The scheduled mandate review and increase in the
maximum force strength should be geared specifically
towards improving the performance of its activities and
implementing the tasks mandated to it by the Security
Council.

In conclusion, we must note that the current events
in South Sudan are just the latest sad result of the
fanciful scheming of Juba's main partners, who have
sought to hide the truth and cover up for their stooges.

