Mr. Lake: On behalf of UNICEF and the children

whom all of us here serve, I thank the Council for

convening this debate on a subject of urgency, and

especially for adopting this important resolution
(resolution 1998 (2011)) this morning.

A few months ago, I met a 16-year-old boy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. "Years earlier", he
told me, "they came to my village and took me away
and, from that day on, I was a soldier". That was
literally true. But looked at another way, on that day he
lost his childhood. His childhood was taken from him
at the point ofa gun.

On the same visit, I met a young girl who had
lived through the horror of rape by an armed soldier.
She, too, was violently robbed of her childhood, and of
so much more. As we have heard today, and as the
Secretary-General's report (S/2011/250) describes in
grim detail, their stories are painfully repeated in
conflict areas around the world. Millions of children
bear the brunt of war. They are killed, maimed,
orphaned, forced to flee their homes, sexually
assaulted, pressed into the service of armed groups and
exposed to unspeakable violence. Those horrific acts
are not only violations of international and
humanitarian law; they are violations of our common
humanity. Today, the Council has affirmed that attacks
on schools and hospitals are attacks on children and
must be treated as such, for these grave violations are
alarmingly common.

As has been described, schools have been burned
and bombed, classrooms used to billet soldiers and
schoolyards used to bury the dead. Unexploded
ammunition and mines litter playgrounds, threatening
life and limb. Hospitals have been looted and
immunization campaigns interrupted. Children have
been taken, literally, from their classrooms to the
battlefield.

The human costs of these attacks are beyond
statistical calculation. The economic costs are also very
high, forcing communities to rebuild schools and
replace stolen supplies and equipment when conflicts
come to an end - a cost that most can little afford, few
budgets provide for and humanitarian aid rarely covers.
The costs to society are also staggering. As Radhika
Coomaraswamy just noted, almost one half of all
children out of primary school in the world today live
in conflict areas in countries that are often among the
world's poorest places. Those same children are less
likely to see a doctor or visit a health clinic and are
more likely to be deprived of their most basic needs.

The great educator Maria Montessori once said
that education is the most effective way of opposing
war. It is also an indispensable foundation for peace
and prosperity. And it is at the very heart of equity. In
times of peace, education gives disadvantaged children
the chance to break the cycle of poverty and to
contribute to their societies. It is no different in times
of war, and may be even more important then.

Schools restore a sense of normalcy and teach
children the skills they need to survive and thrive,
helping them rise above the horrors that they have
witnessed. Without those skills, they are more
vulnerable to violence. And so the vicious circle of
poverty, despair and conflict continues. We must not
fail these children. It is up to all of us to take action to
protect the schools where they learn and the hospitals
where they heal. To do so is to protect their individual
futures and the futures of their societies.

We are making progress in meeting this challenge
thanks to the commitment of the Secretary-General, the
strong resolve of the Council and the ceaseless efforts
of so many. In particular, all of us owe so much to the
tireless and admirable work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Radhika
Coomaraswamy, as well as to Ambassador Peter Wittig
and the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and, increasingly, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) as more children
are swept up in violent conflicts.

Today, the Council has acted on that progress and
is building upon it. Adding attacks on schools and
hospitals as a trigger for listing parties in the
Secretary-General's annual report will heighten
awareness of these grave violations and the terrible
impact they have on the lives of children. We hope that
this will spur Governments and groups to do more to
prevent attacks on schools and hospitals through
defining concrete plans to end those violations. If they
do not, creating clearer links to sanctions committees
will strengthen the Council's ability to take action.
Impunity is as intolerable in a civilized society as
justice is indispensable.

Our purpose today is one of principle, but it must
also be one of practicality. Monitoring, reporting and
listing alone are not enough. Sanctions alone are not
silver bullets. While denunciation gives expression to
the outrage we all feel, it alone will not move
Governments. Those are necessary conditions, but
insufficient to achieve lasting change. To do that, we
must also find practical new ways to prevent these acts
from occurring. Action plans are an important part of
this. The United Nations should have access to all
Governments and groups that want to pursue them.

Furthermore, today's resolution should lead to
necessary discussion on the military use of schools and
hospitals, thus encouraging more Governments to
follow the lead of Nepal and the Philippines in
protecting schools as zones of peace.

Finally, even as we strengthen the legal
framework to increase our response to these abuses, we
must never lose sight of the children who have been
abused and those who are at risk. Too often, I believe,
we refer to the children caught in conflict simply as
victims to be pitied. But as so many of us have seen,
they are remarkably and poignantly resilient, and brave
beyond imagining. They deserve our admiration,
perhaps even our awe. They have hopes and dreams
like children everywhere, even when virtually
everything has been taken from them. They do not need
our pity. They need practical support and programmes
designed to help them make the most of their potential
and a positive contribution to their societies.

The young boy whom I met in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo had returned to his life as a
soldier twice and then been released. He continues to
be at risk of recruitment because he lacks the skills and
resources to withstand it. He intends to find another
community in which to live and he is receiving more
training for civilian life. But his future is very
uncertain.

On the same trip, I met another young man who
was kidnapped at the age of 11 and forced to fight for
years before he escaped. Fortunately, he found a way to
use his training. Today he operates a carpentry shop, is
married and has a child of his own. I will never forget
his pride as he told me that he had made the chair I was
sitting on, or the hope his example has inspired in
others at the training centre where he was trained, who
now go to visit him as a symbol of their hope for the
future.

In 2009 we commemorated the twentieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, and it has been more than a decade since the
adoption of the Optional Protocols, which ban some of

the worst forms of exploitation and abuse against
children. I urge those Member States that have not
done so to sign, ratify and implement those
indispensable instruments.

Let us never forget, however, that human rights
are not an end in themselves. The lives of people, of
children, are our purpose. Rights are a context for
upholding human dignity and for creating the
conditions for human progress. It is the practical steps
we take to protect these rights - and the impact of our
actions - that can change the world. Today, we are
taking another step forward, and I cannot thank the
Council enough for its commitment to children affected
by armed conflict and for making this critical issue a
priority.

