Mr. Qhobela (Lesotho): At the outset, let me
congratulate Botswana most warmly upon its assumption of
the presidency of the United Nations Security Council for
the month of February. Given his well-known and tested
leadership qualities and his diplomatic skills and rich
experience, we have full confidence that your country's
Ambassador will guide the work of the Council to a
successful conclusion during his tenure of office. He can
therefore count on my delegation's full support and
cooperation in the discharge of his onerous international
functions.

Last month's President, His Excellency Mr. Cardenas,
Permanent Representative of Argentina to the United
Nations, discharged his duties and responsibilities with
diligence, and therefore deserves commendation.

The Kingdom of Lesotho subscribes fully to the
statement made by the Foreign Minister of the Republic of
Malawi on behalf of the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). However, we wish
to offer a few observations and views of our own.

It is an honour for me, on behalf of the Government
and people of Lesotho, to take this opportunity to address
this body on an issue that remains of great concern to us in
the southern African subregion and the African continent at
large. It is of concern to us not only because it threatens the
very foundations of democracy but because it again touches
on the fundamental principle of the right of humanity to
life.

When the Government of Angola and UN ITA signed
the Bicesse Agreement on 31 May 1991 in Portugal, the
whole world, particularly Africa, commended the event,
which - it was thought - could bring to the Angolan
people the peace, national reconciliation and democracy
they had long desired. The Angolan people, in turn,
demonstrated their acceptance of the objectives of that
Agreement by participating enthusiastically and in an
orderly manner in the legislative and presidential elections
of 29 and 30 September 1992, considered free and fair by
the international community. Unfortunately, the refusal by
UNITA to accept the electoral verdict and the
simultaneous launching of armed actions by UNITA
marked yet another cruel chapter in the history of that
country.

We welcomed the signing of the Lusaka Protocol on
20 November 1994. This was the product of lengthy
negotiations, which culminated in the agreement for a
cease-fire in Angola. We welcome this move, and wish to
express our hope that it will usher in a new era of peace,
national reconciliation and reconstruction in Angola, and
also contribute to the necessary climate for development
in the entire southern African subregion.

My delegation wishes to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General in
Angola, Mr. Beye, for the patient and skilful manner in
which he discharged his mandate. We also wish to
commend President Chiluba of the Republic of Zambia
for the role he played in facilitating, and by being host to
the negotiations that led to, the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol.

Our task here today as emissaries of the OAU
Council of Ministers is to highlight the need for the
United Nations to support and consolidate the peace
process in Angola by prompt deployment of the third
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) to ensure the implementation of the peace process and
to act as a deterrent against any possible violations of the
cease-fire that might result in a degeneration in the
present situation.

Already, some African States, like Zambia and
Zimbabwe, have declared their preparedness to participate
significantly in the peace-keeping effort by contributing
troops under UNAVEM. III. We are informed that the
Republic of South Africa has offered to assist in the
clearing of land-mines under the umbrella of the United
Nations. It is in this regard that we would appeal for

 

these countries to be provided with the required logistical
support through UNAVEM. III.

We wish at this stage to underscore the commitment
of the Angolan Government to reaching a peaceful and
negotiated settlement and to complying with the letter and
spirit of the Lusaka Protocol. Not only did the Lusaka
Protocol mark the beginning of a critical stage towards the
final resolution of the internal conflict in Angola, it also
reaffirmed the conviction of the Angolan Government that
there was no military solution to the post-electoral crisis in
that country. In this regard, the Kingdom of Lesotho hails
the Angolan Parliament for having passed a law granting
amnesty for crimes committed against the State's internal
security establishments, and other offences related thereto
committed in the context of the post-electoral military
conflict.

The humanitarian situation in Angola is desperate. A
large part of Angola has been sapped of its vitality and
bears the deep scars of years of war. Southern Africa, and
Africa in general, would appeal to the international
community to assist Angola with humanitarian aid and
technical and financial support in order to ensure that the
demobilized soldiers, displaced persons and refugees are
socially reintegrated and that the programme of national
reconstruction is implemented.

At this juncture, I should like to refer to the draft
resolution. It is our considered opinion that time is of the
essence in UNAVEM. III's being implemented. It would
indeed be a pity if we missed the boat and had to prolong
the suffering of the Angolan people. We are further of the
opinion that many conditions set in the draft resolution tie
the hands of the Secretary-General in effectively and
efficiently implementing the mandate of UNAVEM. III.

In concluding my few remarks, I wish to reaffirm the
solidarity of Lesotho and Africa with the people of Angola
as they forge ahead to enter the next millennium as a
citadel of peace and democratic stability. We hope that this
body will in its wisdom find it necessary to react speedily
to Africa's plea so that the brotherly people of Angola can
enjoy peace and prosperity in the years ahead.

