Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
for his briefing at the beginning of this meeting.

The State of Kuwait believes in and is committed
to the Charter and principles of the United Nations,
respect for the sovereignty of States, non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States, and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations confers upon the Security Council the
responsibility for the maintenance ofinternational peace
and security, whereby it can act on behalf of Member
States to carry out that mandate. Article 25 stipulates
that the Members of the United Nations agree to accept
and carry out the decisions of the Security Council.

What we have witnessed in the Syrian crisis is
an impasse concerning the international community's
efforts and the flagrant violation of its resolutions. We
have followed very closely and with great concern the
dangerous developments in Syria relating to recent
military operations in response to the use by the
Syrian authorities of chemical weapons prohibited
by international law. We underscore that those
developments are the result of the impasse in the
international community's efforts embodied by the
Security Council to reach a political settlement to the
bloody conflict in Syria, which has gone on for more
than seven years. It has led to hundreds of thousands of
casualties and millions ofdisplaced Syrians and resulted
in the major destruction of civilian infrastructure in
several cities.

The chemical weapons issue long enjoyed a unified
approach in the Council, which condemned the use
of all chemical weapons in Syria regardless of who
uses such weapons. Moreover, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2118 (2013) unanimously, imposing
measures under Chapter VII ofthe Charter in case ofthe
non-compliance of various parties with its provisions
or the continued use in Syria of chemical weapons,
which, as we have said, are internationally banned
weapons. In order to ensure the implementation of that
resolution, in August 2015 the Security Council adopted
resolution 2235 (2015), established the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism to determine those
responsible for any crime involving the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. In fact, the Mechanism identified the
perpetrators of such crimes on several incidents.

The unfortunate divide in the positions of the
Council encouraged the parties to the crisis to continue
their violations of resolutions of international legitimacy,
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, as well as relevant Security Council
resolutions. The most recent resolution 2401 (2018),
adopted unanimously, is another example of resolutions
being violated. It calls for the immediate cessation of
hostilities in order to allow for humanitarian access to
the besieged areas. Unfortunately, that humanitarian
resolution was not implemented, as we know. The State
of Kuwait regrets this escalation and calls on members
to overcome their differences within the Security
Council and to restore the unity of the Council so that
it can shoulder its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.

We also call on members to bridge the existing
gap by establishing a new, independent, impartial
and professional mechanism to investigate the use of
any chemical weapons in Syria and to determine who
is accountable for such crimes. We reiterate our full
readiness to participate in any effort aimed at achieving
a compromise among the positions of members of the
Council so as to ensure that those who are responsible
for these crimes will be held accountable and punished,
and to preserve the non-proliferation regime.

It is certain that there is no military solution to
the Syrian crisis. Intensive efforts must be made to
spare the Syrian people further suffering. We reiterate
our principled and firm position regarding the Syrian
crisis, which is in line with the position of the League
of Arab States calling for the preservation of the unity,
sovereignty and independence of Syria; putting an end
to acts of violence and the killing; avoiding bloodshed;
saving Syrian lives; and reaching a peaceful settlement
under the auspices of the United Nations on the basis
of the 2012 Geneva First Communique, and resolution
2254 (2015), through a process of political transition
with the involvement of all Syrian parties so that the
Syrian people can achieve their legitimate aspirations.

