Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I am
very grateful to Mr. Kalomoh for firing the starting gun
on this.

I think we have a report this year which is
genuinely interesting, certainly by comparison with
previous years, and I echo Ambassador Levitte and
others who give the right credit to Ambassador
Mahbubani, Minister Lee and the Singapore team for
not just driving us to do this, but for providing the
main substance for how to do this. I really think it has
been a very valuable exercise and I admire the way that
Ambassador Mahbubani has led it. I shall come in a
moment to comment on some things in his statement,
because, along with Jean-David Levitte, I would very
much hope that this will be an interactive discussion
and I shall have some things to say about it.

It has been an extraordinary year for the Council
in a number of ways. Of course, 11 September set the
tone and Afghanistan was an extremely important
theme, but, after several years on the Council, I get the
sense that we are really beginning to move in the right
direction in a number of ways. In this past year, we
have also been almost uniquely busy. The previous
record for the number of open meetings was set in
November 2001, under the Jamaican presidency. The
United Kingdom, for a number of reasons beyond our
control, pipped that in July and we had 29 open
meetings. No doubt, that record will fall quite quickly
soon in the future, but the intensity of what is being
demanded ofthe Council by the nature of the world, by
globalization and by at least some partial successes of
the Council is, I think, to be remarked on.

Quantity on its own is clearly not enough,
however, and I just want to comment on two other
aspects: the quality of the Council's work and
transparency. Quality is going to have some subjective
judgements attached to it, but I want to preface what I
say with a comment about the nature of the Council
and its place in the firmament of the people and
institutions dealing with maintaining international
peace and security. We are primarily responsible, but
let us not make the mistake of believing that we have
to be solely responsible. This Organization, the United
Nations, works best - and really only works at all -
if every Member State takes up its own responsibilities.
This is a forum of nations and the Security Council,
being also made up of 15 nations at any one time, is
working from national instructions and is not able on
its own, in those circumstances, to get everything right
without a great deal of coordination and cooperation.

I think Afghanistan has been a very good example
ofthis over the past year because, not least through our
being able to tap into the brilliant diplomacy of
someone like Lakhdar Brahimi, we have been able, as
the United Nations, to create the framework for things'
going right in Afghanistan. However, the United
Nations on its own, and certainly the Security Council
on its own, has not been able to produce the
instruments for that being done. It has been necessary
to draw on a number of other sources of that - quite
clearly, from the power and energy of the United States
in settling the security in Afghanistan; quite clearly,
from the enormous work done by the humanitarian
agencies; and quite clearly, from the money poured into
all that business by those Member States that had the
capacity to do so and were determined not to see
Afghanistan go wrong. But the coordinating activity of
the Security Council and the legitimacy and the
framework that it gave to all those exercises were
indispensable and very well judged as we went along.

In Africa, which remains the area where we have
to do most of our work in rather more complex
circumstances, I think that we are also learning how to
have an effect, not least through our influence on those
who themselves have to be the instruments of success
in bringing Africa to greater peace and prosperity.

I think that turning Sierra Leone around, and
seeing that crystallized in the elections that were held
during the past year, was a particular point of
satisfaction for the Security Council, after bad
experiences in 1999 and 2000. But it was not possible
for the Security Council to do that without an
enormous contribution on the ground from the
peacekeepers involved there, from the leadership of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, from the
Government of Sierra Leone itself, from those nations
that particularly wanted to add their own input and see
it go right and from civil society, the non-governmental
organizations and the United Nations funds, agencies
and programmes which were coordinated on the
ground, not least under the advice of the Security
Council mission of October 2000. That is another
example of how the Security Council reaches out to
other instruments and plays a coordinating, motivating,
monitoring and driving role.

Sometimes we cannot get that right. In the Middle
East we have much more of a problem because of the
polarization of politics. Although the Security Council
can always do better in these areas, it is necessary to
remember that, beyond the Security Council, every
Member State involved in a crisis or other situation has
to play its own role in the understanding of the
collective nature of United Nations business. States
cannot play a unilateral role in the modern world, but
they must play a role that adds power to the collective
objectives of the United Nations. If that is not
forthcoming in a particular situation, the Security
Council is hamstrung.

I think that it is worth noting that, as we have
made improvements over the past two or three years,
the habit of consensus in the Council has empirically
grown. We pass almost all of our resolutions by a vote
of 15 to none. We all know that that adds power to the
effect of the Council's work, and it is something that
we have learned to go for and that we should stick to in
every application that we possibly can. Resolutions
1352 (2001) and 1382 (2001) on Iraq are examples of
that. It would be very good if we could continue that
experience. It has happened in a number of other areas,
not least with regard to resolution 1397 (2002) on the
Middle East peace process, from which we should draw
lessons to see where the Security Council is best able
to work effectively in the most complex situations. But
we will not always be able to manage that.

I agree with Ambassador Levitte that our
missions have evolved remarkably, and I pay tribute to
what he himself has done on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, with his three annual forays into that
particular difficult maelstrom - we will miss him in
that respect.

But we have had an effect on the parties on the
ground by personally visiting their offices and showing
that we were determined to require them to implement
the agreements that they themselves willingly entered
into. That is another example of interaction between
the Council as a collective body and the individual
responsibilities of Member States.

We should note also that there are some major
areas where the Security Council has been prevented
from entering. We can think of a number of serious

crises - crises within States, which have an
international character, and between States, where there
is still a huge danger of conflict - which have not

been brought to the Council. I cannot think of any such
crises that have benefited from not being brought to the
Council. Of course, there are some issues that the
Council does not resolve; but I do not believe that
avoiding the Council is empirically the right way to go.

On transparency, I am with France and Norway,
and certainly with Singapore: we can do more. I would
not mind virtually all of our meetings being open,
except when we are negotiating closely on texts or on
issues which just cannot afford to be in the public eye.
But I think that transparency adds to the collective
nature of the Security Council, which works for all
States Members of the United Nations, and if the
Counter-Terrorism Committee has been able to make
some advances in that area, it is only because I
perceived that Member States were very willing to
respond to the necessary business of meeting their
obligations under resolution 1373 (2001). I attribute
that transparency to Member States for responding in a
transparent atmosphere, rather than to any new
initiative from within the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. It has helped us to stay together in the
Committee but, much more importantly, it has helped
the United Nations membership to stay together on
perhaps the most important new initiative that the
Security Council has taken in the past year.

I look forward to an interesting and interactive
debate within the General Assembly. I think that that is
the point of this report - to have a good debate in the
General Assembly. Of course, non-Council members
can sling arrows at the Council if they wish, but I hope
they will also pay attention to the realities of how we
have to work in the context of each conflict, and I hope
that they contribute to the continuation of achievable
improvements in the Council by making constructive,
as well as critical, remarks.

I would add a further question to the four
questions that Ambassador Mahbubani posed in his
statement, relating to whether the Council has
responded adequately to the greater demands put upon
it by the process of globalization. I think that we have
to recognize, as he did in his presentation, that the
world is moving faster than the Council -Ambassador
Levitte referred to that. The Council is catching up, but
we must move further if the world is not to move on
ahead of us.

As for the detailed improvements that he
suggested in his conclusion, yes, I agree with them. But
I am not sure that the informal working group on
procedure is quite the point. The point is for
Ambassadors in this Council to use their individual
responsibilities and powers to make a difference in the
way that this Council produces results. If it is the
Ambassador of France who is suggesting a British
pragmatism, who am I to suggest that that is not the
way to go forward? I believe that he has touched on the
right point there: we do not need to institutionalize; we
need to achieve results in practice. I think we are
beginning to show how to do that, and I will certainly
do the best I can to follow the spirit of Mahbubani and
Singapore and achieve those results.

