Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to welcome Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), to thank
him for his briefing and to congratulate him on his
appointment. We wish him every success in his new
duties. I wish to take this opportunity to commend the
work of his predecessor, Mr. Joachim Riicker. I also
wish to thank His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremic',
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and His
Excellency Mr. Skender Hyseni for their respective
statements.
We must express our concern at the statement by
the Secretary-General, in paragraph 2 of his report
(S/2008/458), that

"the ability of UNMIK to operate as before and
perform its functions as an interim administration
has been fundamentally challenged owing to
actions taken by both the authorities in Pristina
and the Kosovo Serbs".

Indeed, Kosovo is at a crossroads. The stability of
Kosovo is experiencing dangerous setbacks in which
ethnic divisions still hinder our best intentions to
implement a solution that is acceptable to all parties,
and the wounds remain unhealed.

We are somewhat reassured to learn that, as he
indicated on 20 June (see S/PV.5917), the Secretary-
General requested his Special Representative to
progress with the reconfiguration of UNMIK, as
described in his special report (S/2008/354), with a
view to preserving what has been achieved, to adapt
the mission to a new reality and to tackle the new
operational needs in Kosovo as well as others that may
emerge.

However, there still remains the problem, also
raised by the Secretary-General, that the Security
Council has not been able to provide guidance on this
issue. The process of separation, however worrying the
circumstances in which it has come about may be, is
for all intents and purposes irreversible. In the light of
this fact, for the Security Council to stand on the
sidelines of these developments and others in other
parts of the world will only detract from its credibility
and could in itself become a destabilizing factor,
eroding institutional progress on the ground. With the
failure of the Council to endorse a new mandate, the
lack of an expiry date for resolution 1244 (1999), the
Secretary-General's initiative seems to us to be doubly
prudent and reasonable.

While the leaders of Serbia and Kosovo reaffirm
their commitment not to resort to force to put forward
or defend their arguments, impunity and disregard for
human rights still loom large. To forget and to keep
silent must not disguise a history that has plunged
many innocents into blood and fire. Therefore, the
delegation of Panama congratulates Serbia on the arrest
of Radovan Karadzic. We view this as a major step
towards effectively tackling impunity for crimes
against humanity.
The Council must contribute to the correct
disengagement of UNMIK, in keeping with the
circumstances on the ground, and thus help ensure that
cultural identities are expressed in the service of peace
and not of war. Consistent with our position that
regional organizations must have a central role in
resolving the problems in their regions, our delegation
hopes that the differences between Serbs and Kosovars,
which have been reiterated again today, can be
resolved within the European Union, an international
organization that offers the best future for both
peoples.

