Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation is grateful to the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Ruud Lubbers, for his detailed briefing and for his
replies to questions posed by members of the Council.

There is no need for me to speak of the
importance of the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
the context of peacefully giving a new life to victims of
war and conflict in many countries and regions. That is
perfectly obvious. Today, the world community's
attention is focused on hot spots where the most urgent
tasks include the large-scale return of refugees and the
provision of international assistance to internally
displaced persons. Mr. Lubbers has detailed the steps
being taken by UNHCR to address these problems from
the Balkans to East Timor.

Let me first focus on the situation in Africa,
where these problems are at their most serious. They
intensify the strong ethnic component of conflicts in
Africa, first and foremost in the Great Lakes region.
The mere presence on the territory of a neighbouring
State of a large number of refugees of a given ethnic
group - such as the case of Rwandan Hutus in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - very often
exacerbates regional tensions. Nor can we ignore the
activities of armed groups whose members migrate
along with the refugees; this makes it all the more
difficult to protect the latter people.

Even though in its consideration of Virtually all
conflicts the Security Council unfailingly pays due
attention to refugee problems and to support for the
efforts of UNHCR and other international humanitarian
organizations, the situation remains extremely tense.
Millions continue to be cut off from their homelands,
deprived of the basic necessities of survival. Russia
sternly condemns the targeted forced migration of
people in the course of a conflict, as was practised, for
example, by UNITA in Angola. This cuts people off
from the means of production - primarily from the
land - and exacerbates the already difficult social and
economic problems faced by the countries in question.

We are gravely concerned at the recent increased
frequency of attacks and the use of force against
international humanitarian personnel. Such crimes
cannot be justified, and those guilty of them must be
properly punished. Ensuring the safety of humanitarian
personnel requires more than just the presence of the
military contingents that the Security Council sends to
protect them; it also requires strict adherence to the
principle of impartiality in the provision of
humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian assistance must
not be used as an instrument to put political pressure
on any party to a conflict. Otherwise, instead of being
an effective tool for stabilizing a situation and
supporting a process of political settlement, it could
risk becoming a factor that foments conflict. That is
what once took place in Somalia and in Rwanda.

Today, urgent humanitarian action is needed to
solve the problem of refugees in and around
Afghanistan; Mr. Lubbers spoke of this in detail, as did
a number of members who have spoken before me.
Unfortunately, the situation there remains extremely
difficult. Tens of thousands of Afghans are going
hungry; several areas of the country are nearing
extinction, and diseases are raging.

Russia was among the first countries to lend a
helping hand to the Afghan people. During the past two
months, my country has delivered some 10,000 tonnes
of humanitarian supplies to Afghanistan. A field
hospital is in operation and is being presented to the
Afghans free of charge. The Salang tunnel has been
reopened to traffic. In Moscow, Russian organizations
and other offices are now completing work on matters
relating to the next phase of Russian assistance to
Afghanistan, which will be more considerable and
more varied. We call upon the parties from which the
refugees originate and upon the countries that shelter
them to create conditions conducive to voluntary
repatriation. At the same time, in a number of cases,
local integration or settlement in third countries would
be among the options for the settlement of refugees
who, because of prevailing conditions, are unable to
return home.

We believe that the chief function of the Security
Council is to create a political framework within which
to prevent, defuse and, ultimately, resolve refugee
problems. In practical terms, we need the cooperation
of UNHCR, whose activities must be completely
apolitical, humanitarian and social in nature.

In conclusion, I would like to focus on one
important problem that has been raised during our
discussion. Combating the threat of terrorism requires a
comprehensive, multifaceted and long-term strategy on
the part of the community of nations. Resolution 1373
(2001) calls upon States, before granting refugee
status, to adopt appropriate measures with a view to
determining whether individuals seeking asylum have
planned, assisted in or committed terrorist acts.
Clearly, the denial of asylum and protection to
terrorists must be universal and applied without double
standards. From that perspective, we believe that we
should take a fresh look at the situation in refugee
camps with a view to preventing their being converted
into breeding grounds or a "natural resource" for
terrorism.

