Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): My delegation
is profoundly troubled by Russia's veto of the draft
resolution (S/2014/189) on the illegality of the
referendum in Crimea, and we are worried about its
consequences for the future of peace and security in
the region and internationally.

On 31 May 1997 in a ceremony at the monument
of the Liberator Soldier in Kiev, the late President
of Russia, Boris Yeltsin, during his historic visit to
Ukraine solemnly declared, "Ukraine is an independent
country, and we will hold this promise sacred". Russia
"does not lay claim on any part of Ukraine or on any of
its cities".

And yet, in defiance to the Budapest Memorandum,
whereby the Russian Federation reaffirmed its
obligation to refrain from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence
of Ukraine, contrary to the Treaty on Friendship,
Cooperation, and Partnership between Ukraine and
the Russian Federation of 1997, which affirms that
both countries agree to respect each other's territorial
integrity and confirm the viability ofthe borders existing
between them, and in violation of the obligations and
commitments undertaken by Russia during its accession
to key regional and international organizations,
Ukraine is about to be carved up. While the United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Council of Europe and individual world
leaders have been trying hard in the past few weeks
to get Russia to engage with Ukrainian authorities in
order to avoid a veritable crisis over Crimea, and while
the Ukrainian authorities repeated their readiness to
accept international monitors and mediation efforts,
Russian troops and equipment were being amassed in
Crimea, accompanied by aggressive anti-Ukrainian
propaganda and hurried anti-constitutional acts by
the Crimean Parliament to prepare the ground for an
illegal referendum and eventual annexation of Crimea
by Russia. Tomorrow a farce of a referendum will be
held, in flagrant violation of the Ukraine and Crimean
Constitutions and international law.

The historical inhabitants of the peninsula, the
Crimean Tartars, who see their future in and with
Ukraine, said they would boycott this illegal happening.
All others who care for the sovereignty and indivisibility
of the country, including Crimea's Ukrainians, will
be left voiceless by this hastily concocted plebiscite,
because the "yes" option to Crimea's future in Ukraine
is simply not on the ballot.
Our Russian colleague has spoken about self-
determination and the independence of Crimea. Let me
quote the self-proclaimed Prime Minister of Crimea,
Aksyonov: "No, we will not have independence", he
said to the press,"Crimea shouldjoin Russia", and it may
happen in the next week or so. It is in that context that
the Council has voted for a draft resolution condemning
the illegal referendum in Crimea, saying yes to the
non-use of force in relations between the States; yes
to the sovereignty, territorial integrity, inviolability
and political independence of Ukraine, and by way of
extension, of any sovereign State. My country's yes
to the draft resolution is a yes to non-aggression, to a
nation's free choice of its destiny and its alliances, to
democracy, to the rule of law and to the internationally
accepted rules of behaviour based on the norms and
principles of international law.

Today's veto is not business as usual. By vetoing
the draft resolution, built on the core tenants of the
Charter of the United Nations, which clearly states that

"All members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity of political independence of
any State, or in any other manner inconsistent for
the Purposes of the United Nations"

and that

"The parties to any dispute, the continuance
of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security, shall, first of all,
seek a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort
to regional agencies or arrangements or other
peaceful means of their own choice".

The Russian Federation is challenging the very
principles on which this Organization, the United
Nations, is built and which supported the international
system for the past seven decades. We deplore this
veto. The world cannot allow a repetition of 1956,
1968 or 2008 in Europe. We call on all Member States
and regional and international organizations not to
recognize the results of the referendum in Crimea
and not to recognize any alteration of the status of
Crimea carried out in clear and obvious violation of
the Constitution of Ukraine, a United Nations founding
Member.

We call on Russia to disown the illegal referendum
in Crimea. International observers, monitors and
mediators have been invited by the Ukrainian
Government and must be allowed to do their job. We
also urge Russia to reaffirm its treaty obligations
vis-a-vis Ukraine, including respect for its sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence, and to
withdraw without delay its armed forces to the areas
of their permanent stations. Only political dialogue
and full respect of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law can put an end to the crisis and
prevent further bloodshed.

