Mr. Ybafiez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by thanking His Royal Highness Crown
Prince Al Hussein Bin Abdullah II of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, for convening this debate. Our
Minister wanted to be here, but unfortunately the
difficult situation in the Mediterranean has prevented
him from coming. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his presence and briefing and the
key note speakers for their interesting statements.

The Security Council needs to play an important
role in the face of the episodes of radicalization that
are taking place in many places around the world.
Extremist and violent ideologies have penetrated
many levels of our society. The world is witnessing the
unprecedented growth of this threat. Terrorist groups
established on the basis of extremist and dehumanizing
terrorist ideologies, such as Daesh, Al-Qaida and Boko
Haram, have demonstrated a great recruitment capacity,
including among young people.

When we analyse the role of young people in the
radicalization process, we tend to refer to them either as
a problem - they are perpetrators and terrorists - or
as an intrinsically vulnerable group - they are Victims,
without addressing the participation of youth in
peacebuilding. Young people are not a homogenous
group with an intrinsic vulnerability and they do not
usually begin armed conflicts. This problem concerns
all of us in the Chamber equally.

In Europe, we have been struck by the fact that, of
the 20,000 foreigners who are part of Daesh, at least
one-fifth are from Europe. The vulnerability of certain
social groups, their socioeconomic situations, their level
of education or their condition as minorities in which
they feel marginalized are factors that can have an
impact on feelings of alienation and exclusion, turning
these groups into fertile grounds for the emergence of
hatred, resentment and radicalism. The high rates of
unemployment, in particular among young people, no
doubt contribute to this phenomenon.

In other parts of the world, this hatred and
resentment have different origins. That is the case
in conflict zones. We often see the international
community withdraw from conflicts too early when
there is believed to be a sufficient level of economic
and social functionality. The international community
therefore often withdraws without addressing and
solving the post-conflict trauma experienced by part
of the local populations. Sometimes these populations
try to seek revenge while other populations, owing to
the lack of means to support themselves, are led to
use violence again. We are focusing on responding to
the emergency without dealing with the deep-rooted
causes and consequences of the conflict. There is no
doubt that the time has come to focus more attention
on the medium to long-range dimension of conflict
management.

The complexity of the radicalization processes
described requires a multifaceted approach. Youth and
education are two closely linked areas for intervention.
Approximately 1.8 billion young people around the
world should and can play an important role in our
societies. We need to underscore their added value and
promote the complete social integration of those with
immigrant backgrounds.

Unfortunately, the facts have demonstrated
that education is indeed a necessary but not always
sufficient condition to prevent adherence to extremist
and violent ideologies. That is why I want to underscore
the importance of intercultural and interreligious
education. We need to promote an education based on
universal values and respect for diversity and human
rights. Sports can also be a very useful tool for peace
and development. Athletic activities among young
people from different countries, cultures or beliefs and
the participation of the most well-known athletes and
sports teams in campaigns aimed at young people to
promote tolerance can be very effective tools. There
are many examples of athletes who cooperate with the
United Nations in awareness-raising campaigns. That
is the case of basketball player Pau Gasol, who is a
goodwill ambassador of UNICEF in Spain.

We need to ensure that increasingly more young
people are leaders in their communities inpeacebuilding,
reconciliation and post-conflict rebuilding. It would
be useful to have training projects in this area. The
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission, which is
being reviewed this year, should include strategies that
prevent radicalization.

The media play an important role in awareness-
raising in society and among young people in particular.
We need to foster a partnership with as many media
outlets as possible in combating violent extremism.
Media literacy for young people will form critical and
peaceful perspectives.

Authorities and religious leaders play an important
role in preventing radicalization. Schools of religion
have a great deal of authority and capacity to influence
their students' concept of life. As representatives of
Governments, we have a responsibility to ensure that
all religious schools teach tolerance and respect for
others and to take the legal and judicial measures that
are necessary against those who do not comply with
them. There should be a network of pro-peace religious
leaders in the areas of conflict where it is most urgent
to take action. The King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz
International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural
Dialogue, whose Board of Directors is made up of
religious leaders, is working in this direction.

I would also like to underscore the work carried
out by the Egyptian university Al-Azhar, which has
established an observatory to analyse all the fatwas
that have been issued over the past year. That centre
found that 200 fatwas could incite young people to
join terrorist groups. To counter that, it has launched a
campaign in the media and on the Internet in which it
explains that Daesh is a terrorist organization. We need
more actions of this kind.

Women in general and young people in particular
can also play a crucial role through their participation
in any strategy against Violent extremism and in peace
processes. The empowerment of women diminishes the
probability that violent extremism will expand.

The main source for the recruitment of young
people by radical groups takes place through the
Internet. We have many examples of good practices
to counter their propaganda, examples of messages of
tolerance and understanding towards other cultures.
For example, I could mention the video disseminated by
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya through
Twitter prior to the recent round of negotiations among
Libyans in Skhirat. We need to strengthen international
police, judiciary and legislative cooperation so as to
ensure that terrorists do not use modern media for their
purposes without consequence.

I also want to emphasize the importance of civil
society and, in particular, the role that Victims of
terrorism can play as a moral reference for young
people. The 2014 revised United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review refers to this.

In my View, it is essential to share good national
practices. We support the process established by the
United States in this regard at the recent Washington,
D.C., Summit Against Violent Extremism. In
February, Spain approved a national strategic plan to
counter violent radicalization, which recognizes the
vulnerability of young people to radical discourse.
We also have a resource centre for cultural diversity
in education and a fund to support the reception and
integration of immigrants, most of whom are young
people.

The time has come to move to a new phase in
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism. A
month ago, Spain requested that the Secretary-General
consider appointing, within the Secretariat and with
existing resources, a special representative mandated
to combat Violent extremism. Such a representative,
in addition to promoting the coordination of policies
against violent extremism, should make it a priority
to prevent the radicalization of young people and
work, together with the Secretary-General's Envoy on
Youth, to integrate young people in the development of
relevant policies. Such a special representative would
coordinate her actions with all bodies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations whose work touches
on this agenda. The Alliance of Civilizations should
undoubtedly be at the centre of this process. Likewise,
regional organizations should be involved, as should
the Union for the Mediterranean, which already works
in this area.

Your Royal Highness, I thank you for having
convened this debate. The commitment of the
international community and the Security Council
to the fight against Violent extremism, especially as
it affects young people, will be key to safeguarding
humankind's greatest treasure: our diversity.

