Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting ofthe Prime Minister ofSerbia, Mr. Aleksandar
Vueic', and we share his concerns. We take note of the
statement oer. Hashim Thaci. We thank Mr. Farid Zarif
for submitting the report (S/2014/773) of the Secretary-

General on the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), as well
as his a assessment of the situation in the region.

Much of what happened in Kosovo during
the reporting period demonstrates the failure of
State-building in Kosovo. The clear and protracted
political crisis has been provoked by the inability of
local elite and engendered by the infamous Kosovo
Liberation Army to find agreement without guidance
from the outside. We believe that, in the building of new
institutions of State, the ideas and approaches of Serbian
and other non-Albanian communities must be fully
taken on board. To uphold the interests of the Kosovo
Serbs, there is also a need for the swift establishment
of the community/association of Serb municipalities
in Kosovo, in line with the Brussels agreements. For
the time being, unfortunately, no progress has been
forthcoming. Delays in the constitution of Government
structures also slow down the resumption of negotiations
between Belgrade and Pristina.

We are concerned by the negative consequences
of the political crisis in establishing the specialist
court to investigate the allegations of crimes against
humanity committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army
during the armed conflict. The interim findings of the
investigations conducted by the Special Investigative
Task Force, led by Mr. Williamson, clearly point to
a sufficient body of evidence corroborate reports of
numerous murders, kidnappings, rapes, unlawful
detentions, inhumane treatment and the desecration of
churches, leading to the ethnic cleansing and expulsion
of Serbs from southern and central Kosovo, as well as
the trafficking in human organs. The perpetrators must
be brought to account, irrespective of their current
standing. It is also crucial that the protection of all
the witnesses be duly ensured during the trial. We call
on the Secretary-General to actively follow-up on the
situation regarding the constitution of the specialist
court.

Many years have passed, yet Kosovo has made
no manifest progress in the judiciary or in combating
corruption, organized crime, including drug trafficking
and human beings, restrictions on freedom of speech and
political influence on the judiciary. That is confirmed
by recent reports of the European Commission and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
There are also clear signs of backsliding in other
areas, including the social and economic fronts. The
unemployment rate remains very high, and people are
leaving Kosovo en masse to seek better lives.

We express our serious concern over reports that
high-ranking staff members of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) have been implicated in
corruption. These are the very individuals who should
be encouraging Kosovar Albanians to commit to the rule
of law. We call for an impartial investigation into these
cases since, according to available data, perpetrators
of serious crimes could remain at large as a result of
corrupt arrangements. We welcome the appointment of
Italian diplomat Gabriele Meucci as Head of EULEX.
We hope that he will be able to address these issues
related to the Mission, and spare no effort to fulfil, in
an impartial and consistent manner, the tasks entrusted
to him by the Security Council to ensure law and order
in Kosovo.

We are disturbed by a wave of ani-Serbian actions
in Kosovo following the football match between
Serbia and Albania on 14 October. We have heard the
usual formal condemnations of the anti-Serb attacks
from Pristina, but no more. Yet Serbian houses in the
region continue to burn, and there is no sign that the
perpetrators are being brought to justice. In addition
to the desecration of Orthodox monasteries in the
region, including the gem of cultural heritage - the
Visoki Decani Monastery - this is a clear indication
that interethnic intolerance endures among Kosovar
Albanians. It is no accident that there is an ongoing
exodus of ethnic minorities from the region. Mere laws
ensuring their rights will not suffice; laws have to be
enforced.

With regard to the participation of Kosovars in
the conflict in the Middle East, ongoing and decisive
measures are required to halt that dangerous trend.

The United Nations Mission remains the primary
international presence in Kosovo. The European
Union's mediation between Belgrade and Pristina and
the handover of part of UNMIK's functions to EULEX
does not mean that the United Nations role is in any way
diminished. Given the wide array of problems, we call
upon the United Nations Mission in Kosovo to carry out
its mandate fully and dynamically. That means that it
must have all the necessary resources and staff to do so.
We categorically object to attempts to devalue the role
of UNMIK, and we call on the Kosovar Albanian side
to fully cooperate with the United Nations presence.

To conclude, I would like to stress that the
Russian position regarding the matter of Kosovo and
the territorial integrity of Serbia has not changed.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully relevant and
obligatory as the internationally accepted legal basis
for a settlement to the situation in Kosovo.

