Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to reiterate Brazil's satisfaction at seeing
Guatemala presiding over the work of the Security
Council.

(spoke in English)

In the interest oftime, and heeding your appeal, Sir,
I am going to read out a short version of my statement.
The full text will be available in the Chamber.

Unfortunately, the situation in the region continues
to deteriorate since the Council last discussed the
Middle East in this open format, three months ago
(see S/PV.6816).

We are witnesses, on a daily basis, to the unfolding
crisis of the most serious consequences for the Syrian
people. The losses and injuries of Turkish nationals
added to the horrifying statistics of civilian casualties.

Brazil associates itself with the press statement by
the Security Council and condemns in the strongest
terms the shelling of the town of Akcakale. We also
express our heartfelt condolences to the families of
the victims and the Government of Turkey. As the
dangers of a regional spillover have become manifest,
Brazil calls for restraint. The escalation of the conflict
serves the interests of no one, in particular not those of
innocent civilians on both sides of the border.

Our sympathy and solidarity now also go to
those who have been victimized by heinous terrorist
attacks in Aleppo. As stated by the Council, such
acts are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, wherever, whenever and by whomever
committed.

Although the situation in Syria continues to defy
the best efforts of engaged actors, there is no alternative
but to deepen and strengthen diplomatic efforts towards
a political solution. We all know there is no military
solution to the conflict.

As stated by President Dilma Rousseff in the
general debate (see A/67/PV.6), diplomacy and dialogue
are not just our best option, they are the only option.
We reiterate our condemnation of all violence and our
firm call on the parties to lay down their weapons and
engage in the mediation efforts being undertaken by the
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States, who must be supported not
only in words but also 4 especially 4 in deeds.

We reaffirm our support for the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and reiterate that the
largest share of the responsibility for the violence we
have seen so far lies with the Syrian Government.

As we call for an immediate ceasefire and a
cessation of all violence, we recall the primary
responsibility of the Syrian authorities in committing
to the process. Armed opposition groups, especially
those that increasingly rely on foreign military and
logistical support, have only added to the scope of the
Syrian tragedy.

Our serious concerns regarding Syria do not allow
us to overlook the increasingly worrisome situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories. The peace process
remains at a dangerous stalemate.

Despite overwhelming international condemnation,
unabated Israeli settlement of the territories, including
East Jerusalem, is turning the prospect of a two-State
solution into an ever more elusive goal, in contravention
of consensus decisions by the Council.

The serious financial constraints now facing the
Palestinian Authority not only pose further threats
to stability but also reveal the clear limits of social,
economic and institutional development under Israeli
occupation.

Violence from elements in the Palestinian side must
also be rejected. Peace and a future of stability and
prosperity will not be served by shelling and other acts
of that kind. Negotiations are the way forward and the
only way to ensure that the conflict, which has lasted
for much too long, will be overcome.

This body must not abdicate its primary
responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations. We reiterate our call on the Quartet, which,
unfortunately, has become inoperative, to establish
regular reporting procedures to the Council on its
activities. Peace in the Middle East concerns the whole
of the United Nations and cannot be outsourced.

Brazil is convinced that only a free and sovereign
Palestine will be able to meet Israel's legitimate
security needs and fulfil our collective goals of peace
and political stability in the region. In that context, we
reiterate our support for the admission of Palestine as a
full Member of the United Nations. As an interim step,
we will be certain to extend our support to upgrading
the Palestinian status to that of an observer State.

As I address the Council, the Brazilian Minister
of Foreign Relations is paying a visit to the region. He
was in Israel on Saturday and Sunday and is currently
in Palestine. The message he conveys, as the leading
diplomat of a country where Jews and Arabs, Syrians
and Lebanese live together in harmony, is a message of
peace, based on respect for international law, through
dialogue and diplomacy.

Allow me some brief words on Lebanon. Brazil
commends the Lebanese Government and the political
leadership for their efforts to maintain stability in the
country despite regional turmoil.

Lebanon deserves our active support and
encouragement. In that regard, Brazil reaffirms its
intention to continue to participate in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon Maritime Task Force.

