I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Mark Lowcock, World Food Programme Executive Director David Beasley and Omer Badokhon for their briefings. It is high time we saw a political settlement for Yemen. There must be a cessation of hostilities, and a new Government must be formed. De-escalation is needed, and it must lead to a cessation of hostilities. In the north, the level of tensions around Ma'rib and the resurgence of tensions in Al-Hudaydah are concerning. The Yemeni parties must cease their clashes and renounce any military option in the north and throughout the country. In Al-Hudaydah, we call on the Yemeni parties to resume their talks within the framework of the Redeployment Coordination Committee of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement in order to implement the Stockholm Agreement and reduce tensions. We also condemn Houthi attacks on Saudi territory, which threaten the security of the Kingdom and the stability of the region. A new Yemeni Government must be formed without delay. The Yemeni political forces must implement the Riyadh agreement and validate the first efforts to distribute ministerial portfolios. Once again, we welcome Saudi Arabia's efforts to facilitate the signing of that agreement and its implementation. That new Government must find a comprehensive political solution. We call on the parties to engage in good faith in the dialogue on the draft joint statement proposed by the Special Envoy, to whom we reiterate our full support. As Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley stated, the humanitarian situation continues to worsen: the numbers speak for themselves. The spectre of famine is looming yet again. We must therefore act collectively to avoid such a catastrophe. In that regard, I would like to commend the outstanding work done by humanitarian actors, in particular by the World Food Programme. Their fight against hunger in the world is crucial, and they can count on France's support. We must not underestimate the risk of a second wave of coronavirus disease. The consequences would be tragic. We will not stop repeating it: all parties have the obligation to guarantee humanitarian access. This issue will be the subject of particular attention at the donors' meeting on 12 November, under the co-chairmanship of the European Union and Sweden. I would also like to recall that the protection of civilians must remain an absolute priority. Finally, it is essential to allow the inspection mission mandated by the United Nations to have immediate access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We must do everything possible to avoid a disaster, and this inspection has been delayed for too long. France will remain fully mobilized, along with the other stakeholders, to find a political solution to the war in Yemen. And the French authorities will continue to work towards a de-escalation throughout the region.
