Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express our deepest gratitude and
appreciation to you, Sir, and your team, for the excellent
manner in which you have managed the work of the
Security Council throughout this month.

We commend the initiative of Chad to organize
the open debate on the theme "Threats to international
peace and security: terrorism and cross-border crime"
(see S/PV.7351). Jordan is fully aware of the magnitude
of the challenges and danger posed to the world by
terrorism, and reaffirms the importance of promoting
international and regional cooperation in developing
effective mechanisms to counter terrorism, cross-
border crime, and the ramifications of the nexus
between those two phenomena. We also express our
appreciation for the leading role played by Chad in the
adoption of resolution 2195 (2014) on this subject.

The open debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
peace operations and the United Nations-African
Union partnership and its evolution (see S/PV.7343)
provided an opportunity to reaffirm the importance
of integrating the efforts of the Organization and the
African Union in promoting the partnership between
them and of cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council in matters affecting the
peace and stability of Africa.

Last week, on behalf of the Group of Arab States,
Jordan submitted a draft text calling for a peaceful, just,
permanent and comprehensive Middle East settlement
that would end the Israeli occupation of Arab lands and
ensure the establishment of two independent States,
Israel and a sovereign and contiguous Palestinian
State. In that regard. Jordan looks forward to working
with Member States towards achieving a consensus
agreement on the draft resolution.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to
congratulate the incoming Chilean presidency and to
wish it every success in managing the Council's work
next month. I also express my delegation's gratitude to
the delegations of Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg,
the Republic of Korea and Rwanda for their efforts and
cooperation on all matters addressed this year. We look
forward to working with the five new members next
month.

