Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia supported today's adoption of the new
resolution 2356 (2017), concerning sanctions on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The resolution
we have just adopted demands that Pyongyang stop its
inappropriate behaviour and submit to the legitimate
demands of the international community. Missile
launches, especially those carried out without warning,
are unacceptable. They are not only a threat to transport
security in the region, but also to the lives of people.

At the same time, we would like to draw attention
to some controversial points of the resolution that we
have just adopted. Of course, Pyongyang is violating
the sanctions imposed on it. However, it does not supply
components of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
to non-State actors. There is no direct connection
between the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and the actions of the authorities in Pyongyang. The
practice of mentioning it in the context of sanctions
must be stopped. It is counterproductive, especially for
resolution 1540 (2004) itself.

Russia has repeatedly stated that resolution 1540
(2004) primarily serves as a platform for cooperation
among States in order to prevent materials for weapons
of mass destruction from falling into the hands of
non-State actors. Without cooperation, it is impossible
to achieve that goal at the global level. Attempts to drag
the resolution into enforcement mechanisms will not
work, especially in national jurisdictions. Supporters
of maintaining the reference to resolution 1540 (2004)
should understand that by doing so they undermine
the inherent spirit of cooperation and interaction.
In addition, countries that are already wary of this
non-proliferation document are given an additional
argument in favour of non-compliance.

We also have serious doubts about the mention
in the text of some other WMD programmes. The
presence of that passage requires convincing evidence.
The Security Council has no right to make mistakes
and must operate with real facts, not with assumptions.
We remember how the United States initiated a war
against Iraq under the false pretext of the presence
of WMDs in Baghdad. At the moment, there is no
evidence that Pyongyang is developing chemical- or
biological-weapons programmes. If any colleagues
have relevant, convincing evidence about Pyongyang's
guilt on the matter, then we stand ready to look at it.
The facts that we have at our disposal say the following.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
is a member of the Biological and Toxin Weapons
Convention and no claims against it have been made
under the Convention. We also know that Pyongyang,
while not a party to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
nevertheless actively encouraged Malaysia to involve
the expertise of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons in the investigation of the murder of
Kim Jong-nam, the final results of which have not yet
been made public.

We would like to hear explanations from the
United States regarding the broadening of American
sanctions, announced on 1 June, against the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. It concerned three Russian
companies and one Russian citizen. The step is
perplexing and deeply disappointing.

We have repeatedly said that the mechanism of
unilateral restriction is illegal from the point of view
of international law. Practice shows the ineffectiveness
of such measures and the destructiveness of the
approach. The sledgeshammer of sanctions gets used
as a universal method for solving world problems,
instead of diplomatic tools. That fully applies to
the recent decision of Washington, which does not
contribute to the settlement of the situation around the
Korean peninsula.

It is necessary to note that, after the change of
Administration in the United States, sanctions by
inertia remain a constant in American policy. That
includes attempts to apply those sanctions to Russian
organizations and citizens. Instead of starting to sort
through the backlog that has accumulated in bilateral
relations, Washington is doing the direct opposite,
taking unfriendly steps that only complicate the
normalization of our dialogue and cooperation in
international affairs.

Pyongyang's reckless endeavours should not give
rise to an increase in military activity in the region and,
even more so, the implementation of plans to use force.
Confrontational logic is fraught with catastrophic
consequences for both the Korean peninsula and the
region as a whole. To us, it is absolutely clear that the
choice should be made in favour of maximizing the use
of diplomatic tools.

In that context, Chinese proposals on the two-
pronged freeze to North Korea's nuclear missile
programmes and the United States-South Korean
exercises, while advancing the solutions to the
problems that the peninsula is facing, deserve serious
attention. We are ready to promote international efforts
and in particular those of the United Nations aimed
at a diplomatic detente on the Korean peninsula. We
welcome the Secretary-General's intention to raise the
profile of the United Nations in resolving the tension
around the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. In
order to find a formula for normalizing the situation,
we ought not forget that sanctions against North Korea
should not lead to a strangulation of its 25 million
ordinary citizens, the vast majority of whom need urgent
assistance. In that regard, we are convinced that, when
it comes to humanitarian efforts, the United Nations
must fulfill its duty. Dehumanizing the decisions and
actions regarding the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and other situations of crisis is unacceptable,
regardless of how difficult those situations are.

The reason for the tension on the peninsula is not
just Pyongyang's nuclear missile programme. It also has
to do with increased military activity by some regional
and especially extra-regional States in North-East Asia.

Another destabilizing factor is the recent
deployment of components of the United States
THAAD missile defence system on the territory of
the Republic of Korea. We have repeatedly stated that
such a move undermines the existing military balance
in the region. It puts the security of neighbouring
countries in a precarious position. Once again, we call
on both the United States and the Republic of Korea
to reconsider the expediency of such a step and think
about its long-term consequences. We encourage others
in the region to not be tempted to get involved in such
destabilizing efforts.

It is now more important than ever to find a
political solution. Some of our partners say that they
are ready to renew contacts with Pyongyang, but under
certain conditions. If we speak to one another in the
language of ultimatums we will never move forward.
The situation on the Korean peninsula and other acute
contemporary crises require that we start working
together as quickly as possible. Russia stands ready to
start that kind of work.

