Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): I wish to begin by expressing
the support of our delegation for the statement made at the
beginning of this discussion by the representative of the
United Kingdom on behalf of the European Union and
associated countries.

The Security Council has, in resolution 827 (1993),
entrusted the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia with a
historic mandate to prosecute persons responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia since
1 January 1991.

In the nearly four and a half years of its existence,
the Tribunal has established admirable credibility as an
independent court. Furthermore, it has proved to be an
important international judicial institution whose proper
functioning is vital for the implementation of the Dayton
peace accords. Any kind of hindrance of the Tribunal's
statutory functions would have negative effects on the
endeavours of the Security Council and the international
community in building substantive grounds for a lasting
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and on security in the
region. The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia can therefore not afford to fail in its mission.

In addition to its immediate purpose, the Tribunal
also has a significant symbolic role of global importance.
The Tribunal symbolizes the end of the culture of
impunity and marks the advent of peace with justice
rather than mere appeasement. This is a valid contribution
of the Tribunal to the strengthening of real peace.

Moreover, the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
is playing a pioneering role and, jointly with the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, is setting
important precedents in international criminal
jurisprudence. Its existence has underscored the need for
the creation of a permanent international mechanism to
address human rights and humanitarian law violations. In
this context, let me emphasize Slovenia's strong
commitment to the establishment of an independent,
impartial and effective permanent international criminal
court at the Diplomatic Conference to be held in Rome in
June and July of this year.

It is our conviction that the Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia should be given all the necessary resources to
efficiently deliver justice. We further believe that the
accused persons in custody are entitled to be tried without
unnecessary delays, in accordance with the internationally
accepted standards of due process.

We are pleased to see that there has been significant
progress in improving the procedures of the Tribunal. We
have confidence in the ability of the Tribunal to continue
managing its work efficiently so as to ensure optimal use
of all its resources. The request by the Tribunal for
additional judges, which was presented to the Security
Council by its President, Judge Gabrielle Kirk McDonald,
in February this year, is valid, especially since the
workload of the Tribunal has recently intensified.

Despite the increased number of persons in custody,
my delegation is compelled to express its serious concern

 

at the fact that the most prominent military and political
leaders who have been indicted remain at large. It is
imperative that they be brought to justice. This is an
important condition for lasting peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The creation of a third trial chamber, which is the
object of the draft resolution before the Council today, is
timely. It will ensure full utilization of the three courtrooms
and will, as a final result, expedite the Tribunal's work.

We note with satisfaction that the members of the
Council are unanimous in their positive response to the
request of the President of the Tribunal. We would like to
take this opportunity to express our appreciation to the
delegation of Sweden for its leading role in the preparation
of the draft resolution. For our part, we will continue to do
our utmost for justice, reconciliation and peace in the
region. Full support for the Tribunal is one of the means to
achieve that goal. Slovenia will therefore vote in favour of
the draft resolution, of which we are a sponsor.

