Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I take the floor as
representative of the chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

The Chairman-in-Offlce has expressed grave
concern about the deterioration of the situation in the
South Ossetia region of Georgia. The OSCE fully
supports the territorial integrity of Georgia. We urge an
end to all violence and military action. Any further
escalation of the situation would have a devastating
impact on the region, as well as on international peace
and security. We urge the Georgians, South Ossetians
and Russians to cease fire, end military action and stop
further escalation.

We are extremely concerned about the reports of
movements of heavy weapons in the area. We are
seriously concerned at and deplore the loss of life. We
call on all parties to prevent further civilian casualties.

The OSCE chairmanship has reacted to the
situation in the following ways. The Chairman-in-
Office, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Finland, is
in constant contact with the parties to the conflict and
other international actors and has issued a statement
calling for an immediate halt of military action and the
re-establishment of contacts between the parties. The
chairmanship convened an extraordinary OSCE
Permanent Council meeting in Vienna earlier today.
The OSCE office in Tskhinvali has been evacuated.
The Special Envoy of the Chairman-in-Office is
travelling to Georgia. The Chairman-in-Office is also
planning to visit Georgia in the very near future.

The OSCE will continue to work intensively with
all parties to defuse tensions. The OSCE's work and
mandate must be respected by all parties to the
conflict.

At this point I would also like to mention the
importance of close coordination between the United
Nations, the OSCE and the European Union in
resolving the crisis.

I would like to conclude by regretting once more
the outbreak of the current hostilities. We urge an
immediate end to all military action and call for
restraint from all parties.

