Let me begin by thanking Mr. Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary- General, Mr. Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia, and Ms. Marcaillou, Director of the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS), for their comprehensive briefings. I welcome Ambassador Abukar, Permanent Representative of Somalia, and wish our brothers and sisters in Somalia a blessed Ramadan. This meeting is taking place amid a very challenging situation for Somalia. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has impacted its economy and development and will potentially exacerbate the humanitarian situation. However, I believe that this common challenge could also serve as an impetus for all parties to resolve their differences and refocus their efforts towards work together constructively. In that regard, I would like to highlight three points. First, we cannot overemphasize the need to ease tension between the Federal Government and some of the federal member states. As highlighted by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2020/398), the pandemic has highlighted the need for Somalia's federal and state leaders to come together in a spirit of unity and compromise. We welcome the efforts to facilitate the resumption of political dialogue between the Federal Government and the federal member states. With regard to the election, we welcome the enactment of the electoral law and the efforts to address key issues in the law. We also welcome more women holding parliamentary seats. The holding of a one-person-one-vote election as planned should remain a priority. It is necessary to mitigate the potential impacts of COVID-19 so that the elections can continue as planned. It is also important to make progress on critical State-building priorities, such as the Constitutional Court and the judicial service. An enabling environment is important for democracy to prevail. Secondly, we remain concerned by the security situation. We once again condemn all recent attacks by Al-Shabaab, which mainly targeted the African Union Mission and the Somali National Army, and would like to express our deepest condolences to the families of the victims. We heard the briefing by the Director of the United Nations Mine Action Service, which showed that the threat of Al-Shabaab has not lessened. I thank UNMAS for the information. We would like to reiterate that any attack on United Nations personnel is unacceptable and that perpetrators must be brought to justice. Al-Shabaab remains capable to conduct larger, more complex and high-profile attacks, including with improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and vehicle-borne IEDs. We regret that Al-Shabaab has not embraced the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. Therefore, it is important to provide the Somali National Army (SNA) with the necessary training in countering IEDs and with capacity-building. We commend the SNA and AMISOM on their continued operations and stabilization activities undertaken in areas previously controlled by Al-Shabaab and welcome the contribution of UNMAS. Furthermore, we pay tribute to the efforts of Blue Helmets and the African Union Mission in Somalia in the pursuit of peace. We also welcome the commitment by the Government to update the transition plan to ensure a comprehensive collective security plan for Somalia. Thirdly, the COVID-19 pandemic is happening amid an already dire humanitarian situation in Somalia coupled with severely negative economic impacts, as stated by Special Representative Swan. With at least 2.6 million people displaced, high levels of food insecurity, recent flooding and a locust outbreak, scaled up efforts are needed to alleviate the plight of the Somali people. We are glad that a United Nations country preparedness and response plan for COVID-19 is in place. We call on all international partners to provide the much-needed funding for the humanitarian response plan in order to ensure the long-term recovery and resilience of the people of Somalia. It is also crucial to facilitate and maintain unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance and relief, including in hard-to-reach areas. Lastly, it is our hope that, despite the COVID-19 pandemic, all actors in Somalia will remain committed to its peace and development efforts. Dialogue and reconciliation among all parties are crucial to ensuring a prosperous and peaceful Somalia. I reaffirm Indonesia's respect for Somalia's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and convey our utmost tribute to UNSOM, UNSOS, AMISOM, and all actors working to ensure lasting peace and stability in Somalia. As we approach the end of Ramadan, we wish all our brothers and sisters in Somalia a blessed Eid al-Fitr. Indonesia continues to support a prosperous and peaceful Somalia.
