Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I wish to thank
the Egyptian presidency for having convened today's
meeting and Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for
his very considered and illuminating briefing.

As the Council and the whole of the United Nations
are reviewing the tools at their disposal to maintain or
restore international peace and security, my delegation
believes that it is important to also assess and review
all measures that do not involve the use of force, such
as sanctions, and work on actions that can be taken to
further improve their elaboration and implementation.
It is also important that we do so with an open and
balanced view so as to actually improve the use of these
important tools by the Council.

Over the years the Security Council has shifted
from comprehensive and stand-alone measures to
combining smart and targeted measures aimed at
the decision-making elites and targeted individuals
while avoiding harm to the general population. These
represent an improvement of the measures decided by
the Council and key aspects to build upon.

The evolution of Security Council measures have
included the establishment of panels of experts and
monitoring teams to ensure improved implementation
of our decisions. In addition, peacekeeping or mission
mandates have been looked at so as to ensure that
they take into account the effective implementation of
Security Council sanctions.
But more needs to be done in this area. For instance, it
will be important to further advance with respect to due
process, guaranteeing listing and delisting procedures
for targeted measures. At the same time, it will be
important to also include in the reporting a gender and
women's rights analysis, including with respect to the
impact of sanctions and a counterterrorism strategy.

If we agree that further progress is needed, then
an ongoing assessment and review of Security Council
measures becomes essential. Such periodic assessment
needs to determine whether the implementation of
sanctions regimes continues to be coherent with the
objectives set by the Council. Sanctions are not an end
in themselves and should be integrated into a wider
political strategy. Furthermore, despite the name,
they must be intended not as punitive, but rather as a
useful tool to support the political process and lead the
targeted entities and persons to the path of dialogue
and negotiation. We have clear examples of sanction
regimes contributing to this end.

The need to ensure coherence between the end
and the means and verification on an ongoing basis are
important. Establishing or strengthening a mechanism
for periodic review could help the Council to adjust its
course of action. Such a review process should have a
twofold impact: first, on sanctions design, and secondly,
on their implementation.

Inputs from Member States, including targeted
entities and persons, should help the Council to adjust
both current and future restrictive measures for the
sake of improving their effectiveness and averting
unintended consequences, in particular for the
civilian population.

On the implementation side, sanctions committees
play an essential role. Also building on our experience
as Chair of a Committee, we are convinced that there
is a need for constant, sustained and effective dialogue
with Member States. The Committee must provide
clarity as to the overall framework for the measures
and offer guidance both through general guidelines
and on a case-by-case basis. In this regard, the role
of the Secretariat may prove crucial, as the process of
maintaining strict coordination with the Committee
Chair could be strengthened.

The Committees should consider greater
engagement in outreach activities to illustrate
Council measures, thus fostering proper and better
implementation, and to provide Member States with
a platform to exchange views and receive feedback on
these measures.
The same should apply to monitoring teams, expert
groups and panels ofexperts. They should be encouraged
to have more genuine and transparent interactions
with Member States, more informal opportunities for
dialogue and open doors vis-a-vis the Member States.

To sum up, from our point of view what is needed
is: first, clarity as to what Member States are asked
to do; secondly, guidance and assistance with respect
to any issues Member States may raise on sanction
implementation; and, thirdly, constant outreach to
and dialogue with the membership to improve both
the design and the implementation of sanctions. Any
review and potential reform of the sanctions system
should ensure an appropriate balance between greater
coherence and uniformity and the need to take into
account the specificities of each situation in which the
Council intervenes.

To conclude, I would like to touch on a more
general point: cross-cutting issues, including sanctions,
justice and accountability, the protection of civilians,
and women and children, call for coherence in
Security Council action. If the Council is perceived
as lacking coherence in its proceedings, there will be
issues in terms of legitimacy and acceptance of the
measures adopted, the spillover consequences of the
implementation of such measures.

As the Council is aware, we have been awaiting the
broadening of the work of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals so as to make it become an
informal working group on justice and accountability
in situations of conflict. Were we to follow a similar
approach with the issue of sanctions, Italy would focus
its attention on issues of implementation, on including all
relevant actors and on the overarching goal of providing
constructive contributions to sanctions design.

