Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): May I join others in welcoming you to the presidency, Mr. President, and also in welcoming Viet Nam and the other four elected members to the Security Council. We look forward to working with them. In the context of this briefing, we also welcome particularly the delegation of the Niger. We know from last month that the Niger has suffered first-hand the consequences of violence in the region. It has our condolences for the losses to its armed forces. It is also very good to see Special Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas back in the Chamber to brief us. We welcome the very productive role that the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) has played in the region. In particular, we welcome the role that the Special Representative of the Secretary-General plays through his good offices. People do not always see the result of that work because it is, by its very nature, diplomatic and quiet. But we know it goes on and we know it makes a difference, so I thank Mr. Chambas and his team for that. We are also very grateful to the Secretariat and the Secretary-General for their report on the trends in the region (S/2019/1005). As others have said, those trends continue to be of significant concern, particularly on the security side — but also on the humanitarian side — because the security situation is so bleak and is seriously affecting the broader development opportunities in the region. We wanted to cover three areas today. The first is security, which I will talk about in a little more detail. The second is elections, which we have heard a bit about already today. The third is the underlying causes of conflict and what we can do to address those once the security situation has been addressed. On the security and humanitarian sides, as I have said, we remain concerned about the damaging cycles of violence we are seeing — I think Mr. Chambas called them unprecedented — and the spike between the year before last and what we saw last year was exponential. They are a real cause for concern, particularly the deterioration in central Mali, an area of which the Council is separately seized, and in northern Burkina Faso since the latest report. The increased violence is exacerbating an already perilous humanitarian situation, particularly in central Mali and Burkina Faso. The United Kingdom has just released a further £20 million in additional humanitarian funding for the Sahel, on top of the £15 million we are already spending to help address the situation. We all need to think again about whether we are doing enough in the region to look at the humanitarian situation. As others have said, it is also worth noting that we and States in the region need to ensure humanitarian access for those who deliver the humanitarian response. We need to ensure that they are able to reach the regions they need to reach and are given the protection they need, in both legal and security terms. The main point is that security needs to be the Council’s principal focus. We cannot help those who urgently need assistance unless we can help the States that they are in to bring the security situation there under control. Like many others in this Chamber, we heard the African Union talk in mid-December, when we last touched on this issue, about the variety of regional initiatives that we now have on the security front (see S/PV.8685). One thing the Council might want to consider is whether we can help bring some coherence to those initiatives, to look at how we map them and at whether the current initiatives are addressing our concerns and whether they are duplicative or complementary. That is something we can consider in due course in line with African Union advice. Turning now to elections, again, it is useful to hear that there has been progress in the region and that there have been some upsides over the past year on the political and election fronts. We agree with the emphasis Mr. Chambas is placing on helping States deliver credible elections over this next period. From our perspective, the freedoms of assembly and expression are essential to that; therefore, we hope in particular that Mr. Chambas will send that message to States in the region. In the context of the deteriorating security situation we have already touched on, we have to help States avoid the elections becoming flashpoints for violence or enabling abuses of power, as that would only further exacerbate conflicts and violence. Citizens must be able to exercise their democratic right to vote without fear of intimidation or retribution. We stand ready to do what we can, with Mr. Chambas’s advice, to support the elections. In terms of the underlying causes, the immediate humanitarian and security efforts to support the elections and the wider region are obviously critical. But we must also do what we can to address the root causes of the conflicts and violence. One of the interesting things that we see in the report is that there is growing recognition in the countries themselves of the need to address those underlying issues. However, it is very difficult to do so in the absence of proper security. Nevertheless, States can do something. They can work to address long-term governance issues by reducing abuses by security forces. We can help Governments to build their legitimacy by providing inclusive and accountable basic services where they are able to do so. That is something I think we should focus on more, and it is good to see the report looking at giving UNOWAS the ability to help the United Nations in the region think about the development assistance that it can provide and when it can provide it. Those kinds of interventions will help build the foundations for the stability the region so desperately needs. We thank Mr. Chambas and his team. It is an incredibly important region, and they have a challenging year ahead, but they also have our full support.
