Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): My delegation is delighted,
Sir, to see you presiding over the work of the Security
Council today. I congratulate you on your delegation's
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of December. We have every confidence that under the able
and skilful hand of Ambassador Sir Jeremy Greenstock the
Council will deal successfully with the issues before it.
Allow me also to extend our congratulations to Ambassador
Danilo Tiirk, the Permanent Representative of Slovenia, on
his skilful stewardship of the Council's activities last month.

The Indonesian delegation takes this opportunity to
express its appreciation to you, Sir, and to the other
members of the Council for convening this interactive
discussion at a critical juncture for the African continent.
We also commend the choice of format for today's
discussion, which enhances the possibility for further
involvement by Member States not members of the Security
Council in the discussion of issues before the Council. We
look forward to the application of such a format to the
discussion of other crucial issues concerning the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Before proceeding further, I should like also to convey
our sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
opening remarks, which focused our attention on his
innovative suggestions and ideas for improving the
partnership between the United Nations and Africa.

As we all know, the African continent has for long
time been plagued by internal and cross-border conflicts
that show only marginal signs of ending. As democratic
Africa blooms, war-tom Africa bleeds. While African States
such as Nigeria have consigned their internal wars to the
past, others are still locked in a seemingly endless cycle of
revolution and violence. Regrettably, half of the violent
conflicts in the world are in Africa. The reality also is
that the worst-hit victims are not the combatants, but the
millions of innocent civilians caught in the middle.

In addressing these complex and interrelated issues,
the General Assembly and the Security Council have held
a myriad of discussions and have even taken decisions on
Africa in this past year, on both generic and focused
issues. Those discussions have provided the opportunity
to take stock of the problems faced by Africa, and
thereby enabled the submission of several thoughtful
suggestions.

However, the magnitude of problems facing Africa
is still enormous. Before commenting on the three basic
questions put forward by the presidency, allow me to
make the following remarks. It is not erroneous to assume
that wherever conflicts take place, the population in
question holds the key to their settlement. Nevertheless,
as the Secretary-General stated in his report, those nations
making good-faith efforts and adopting enlightened
policies deserve much greater support than they are now
receiving. It is clear that the predicament in Africa can be
attributed to a lack of sincere and thorough commitment
by the international community, particularly the Security
Council, both in providing adequate personnel in pursuit
of peacekeeping and conflict-prevention efforts and in
providing the necessary funds to sustain them. While we
welcome the generous contribution of the United
Kingdom to the United Nations Trust Fund for Improving
Preparedness for Conflict Prevention and Peacekeeping in
Africa, it is deplorable that the Fund, as an example of
several funds intended for Africa within the Organization,
has received only one contribution, of $250,745.

My delegation shares the view that if the
international community, especially Member States which
have been blessed with surplus resources, could
demonstrate a genuine commitment to Africa, that would,
without doubt, increase the prospects of success in
peacemaking and conflict prevention efforts on that
continent and also pave the way to sustainable
development efforts in a post-conflict peace-building era.

In this context, and in relation to the first and third
questions, on improving coordination and cooperation
between the Security Council and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and the key subregional
organizations, and also on creating additional instruments
of the Council for tackling the issue of Africa, we would
like to convey our deepest appreciation for the role played
by the OAU, key subregional organizations and several
 

African States which have contributed significantly in
pursuit of conflict settlement. In the endeavours to improve
coordination between the Council and these regional
organizations, it might be most beneficial if representatives
from each organization could meet simultaneously in order
to establish terms of reference to be used as a basis for
promoting concrete coordination and cooperation between
the organizations on an agreed footing and in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter.

In situations where the basis has been laid out and
agreed upon, one could envision the possibility of
establishing a Security Council team on Africa, consisting
of several members of the Council, with one representative
for each regional group and supported consensually by all
the members of the Council. It would have the dual
function of serving as a clearing house for information on
African issues in the Council and of submitting concrete
recommendations in close coordination with the Office of
the Secretary-General, the OAU, key subregional
organizations and relevant African countries on issues of
peacemaking and conflict prevention. The establishment of
such a mechanism could also serve as an early warning
system in order to prevent major humanitarian disasters in
the future.

In addressing the second question, on meeting the
needs for African peacekeeping more effectively, several
main issues need to be highlighted. In our view, while
welcoming the recommendation made by the
Secretary-General in his latest report on Africa that it
should support regional and subregional initiatives in the
areas of conflict prevention and the maintenance of peace,
based on agreements with the regional organization and the
host country, the Security Council should also explore the
possibility of establishing a preventive deployment force, as
in Europe, in order to prevent the spread of conflicts to
other areas.

It is my delegation's belief, too, that in the efforts to
bolster the capabilities of African peacekeeping, the
endeavour to increase the quantity and quality of national
and regional capability should be well supported, with the
involvement of the international community, including in
areas of training and information exchange within the
framework of the United Nations system, as discussed at
the special meeting convened by the Secretariat, in
coordination with the OAU on 21 January 1999, in which
51 states, including African States, participated.

In addressing the issue of African peacekeeping
capabilities, especially in terms of real time, it is worth
noting that the standby arrangements system under the
United Nations needs to be further pursued, not only by
African States, but also by other countries. Let me take
this opportunity to convey the information that Indonesia
is now considering the possibility of further increasing
our peacekeeping participation in Africa.

Finally, it is my delegation's fervent hope that our
discussion today will enrich our coordinated approach to
the issues of the maintenance of peace and security in
Africa, and in no way give room for the encroachment of
Afro-pessimism or even Africa fatigue in the international
community as a whole.

