Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I can be very brief.

First, I would like to thank Mr. Bildt for his briefing
this morning and for his extremely thoughtful and
perceptive analysis. I think the image of balancing
disintegration with integration, and ensuring that in the final
analysis those in favour of integration win out, is very
helpful to us all in this connection. It is also clear that, as
Mr. Bildt has said, the chances of success in the Balkans
will be substantially improved when all the key outside
players can work together.

It is similarly important that, as he has said too, we
should try and broaden the base of the dialogue with those
in the region to ensure that whatever long-term structure we
design will remain viable in the long term. Here, I think it
was useful that he highlighted the conundrum of how to
deal with the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

This is clearly something to which there will be no
easy solution as long as those indicted for war crimes
remain in power, but - and here I would disagree with
what Ambassador Lavrov said this morning - the solution
to it is not to somehow lessen the weight of the institutions
and factors involved, particularly the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. A crime against
humanity is, after all, a crime against humanity. None of us
should forget that and none of us should forget either that
the Tribunal is an impartial body, was set up with the
support of all members of the Security Council and must be
allowed to do its work.

Related to the issue of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is, as Mr. Bildt has rightly reminded us,
Montenegro. The situation in Montenegro and the linkage
and interaction between the Serbian and Montenegran
Governments have been of concern to us, too. I would be
very interested to hear Mr. Bildt's assessment of where
Montenegro is going and what more the international
community as a whole can do to ensure that it does not
go bad.
Finally, as Ambassador Dejammet has
emphasized - and I would like to say that I agree with
nearly every word he said this morning - this is going
to require continuing support from the international
community on a long-term and sustained basis. We all
know the particular problems of Kosovo and, as many
speakers have said, we will have an opportunity to discuss
those next week. But I would like to say that, over the
weekend, the United Kingdom announced a doubling of
its contribution to the United Nations civilian police in
Kosovo. We hope that, in some small way, that will be an
important index of the willingness of us all to fill the very
glaring gap that exists in that area.

