Mr. Sayed-Khaiyum (Fiji): I am delighted to be
here today to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Fijian Prime Minister, Mr. Josaia Voreqe Bainimarama,
who could not be here due to pressing engagements
at home.

We thank the Dominican Republic for convening
this open debate at the Security Council on the defining
challenge of our times - preparing the international
community to confront the growing security
consequences arising from climate-change-induced
natural disasters.

Climate change has transformed our natural world.
Extreme weather catastrophes - such as major floods,
prolonged droughts, record-shattering heat waves and
super-cyclones - and the frequency at which they
occur tell us that the natural world has fundamentally
changed. Once-in-a-lOO-years extreme-weather events
are being experienced once every 10 years. The gap
between extreme weather events is growing smaller.
And a single extreme weather event like Tropical
Cyclone Winston, which Fiji experienced in 2016 and
from which we are still recovering, as it wiped off one
third of the value of our gross domestic product in one
single event, can also take away the steady progress that
we have made in achieving the globally agreed goals.
The severe consequences of extreme weather patterns
in Fiji and across the world were highlighted repeatedly
by our Prime Minister during Fiji's presidency of
the twenty-third annual Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change.

Relentless sea-level rise is a threat multiplier to our
economies and societies. In 2014, the Fijian Government
relocated its first coastal community to safer ground,
and subsequently moved another two. Tragically, we
are only at the start of the relocation process. Another
43 coastal communities will follow. We will manage
those relocations the best we can, but I want to take
this opportunity to stress to the Security Council that
such relocations will not happen only domestically but
across borders.

I have highlighted this to the Security Council not
to make any moral point but to stress that we are too
uncomfortably close to a tipping point. We are still in
a phase where domestic and cross-border relocations
can be managed voluntarily, as Fiji has offered
support to host some of our neighbours. However,
very soon, they will become forced migrations on a
scale that will place severe stress on our societies and
international arrangements.

Climate change is leading to loss of arable land and
the relocation of people, which will increase and lead
to desertification, food and health insecurity and the
depletion of our fish stocks and marine resources. It
will lead to conflicts. Of course, the effects of climate
change, which at the moment is more pronounced in
some places than others, will nonetheless be a problem
that will ultimately affect us all. We are all vulnerable.

The effects of climate change are a threat to
everyone, everywhere - from the disappearing coast
lines ofBangladesh to the scorching heat drying out land
across sub-Saharan Africa to the worsening flooding in
low-lying cities in the United States. It is not just an
issue for the Pacific. All of these effects will place far
greater stress on individuals, communities and nation
States competing for increasingly scarce resources.

Extreme weather patterns make our economies and
societies more fragile. We have seen time and again
that, when economic and social fragility increase,
our institutions suffer - they become more open to
manipulation by extremists, corruption, international
criminal syndicates and geopolitical opportunists. It
makes our borders more porous.

We ask the Security Council and the wider United
Nations family to accept that climate-change-induced
disasters will continue to fundamentally challenge
institutions of national, regional and global governance.
And we call on the United Nations to lead and support
national and regional efforts to tackle growing security
challenges related to climate change.

Fiji has a long and proud tradition of United Nations
peacekeeping, which has given Fiji great exposure and
training. We thank all the permanent members of the
Security Council - the United States of America,
Russia, China, France and the United Kingdom - for
helping us to develop our peacekeeping skills. Our Prime
Minister has given his go-ahead to use that expertise to
develop what is perhaps the world's first response unit
that is fully capable of responding with speed, agility
and knowledge to climate-induced disasters, in addition
to peacekeeping. We acknowledge the assistance of the
Australian Government in that regard.

I am grateful for this opportunity to present Fiji's
perspective. We look forward to continuing to engage
with the Security Council to begin to tackle the growing
regional and international security consequences of
climate change.

