Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the Chairs of the three
Committees for their briefings, which illustrated the
very constructive role they play in the fight against the
threat that terrorism poses to international peace and
security.

Despite all the international community's efforts,
including those of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
that threat is growing, and in recent years we have
seen the emergence of groups affiliated with Al-Qaida,
as well as of dissident organizations such as Daesh.
They now control large expanses of territory and are
a threat to international peace and security, putting in
jeopardy all the efforts deployed by the international
community and the United Nations. We must therefore
be able to transparently assess the work being done in
order to understand the course we should take in the
future. Needless to say, that should in no way detract
from the achievements of previous years, but we must
be aware of the dangers coming from unconventional,
non-traditional sources. We must make effective
decisions that accord with the Charter of the United
Nations and with international law in order to deal with
this phenomenon.

Concerning the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, we
would like to emphasize its central role and that of the
sanctions system. The Committee plays an important
part in reducing the threat posed by Al-Qaida as well as
in implementing the various relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 1989 (2011), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004). In that regard, we stress the
importance of including on the list all those meeting
the criteria outlined in resolution 1989 (2011), ensuring
countries' full respect for the sanctions system and
keeping the sanctions list properly updated and
ensuring its fairness and transparency. That can be
done by continually reviewing listed countries and
the delisting requests submitted to the Ombudsperson.
Besides that, there is the updating of the work of
the Committee's Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, which depends on the cooperation
of the various countries concerned. In that context, I
would like to commend the role ofthe Monitoring Team
and the Office of the Ombudsperson.
Concerning the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the military
capacity of terrorist organizations, the increase in their
financing sources and their control of large areas of
territory all render their use of non-traditional weapons
very real and possible, so it is crucial that countries
fully comply with the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004). We welcome the fact that the resolution is
scheduled for a comprehensive review. We have great
expectations for the review and its examination of the
gaps in the resolution's implementation. It is vital that
we make use of that analysis to strengthen the role of
the Committee and to fill those gaps.

Jordan considers the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) extremely important, particularly in the
context of the current conditions in the Arab region. At
the beginning of this month we hosted a workshop for
17 Arab countries and 11 representatives ofregional and
international organizations, as well as representatives
of civil society, in a demonstration of my country's
willingness to ensure the review's success and to help
other Arab States to confront the challenge of terrorism
and terrorist organizations' ability to access weapons
of mass destruction.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism, and its
Executive Directorate (CTED) plays a very important
part in fighting terrorism. I would specifically like
to highlight the work of CTED with regard to foreign
terrorist fighters. In that context, the meeting to be held
in Madrid at the end of July is very important. The
Committee's role should be to help assess countries'
ability to implement the resolution and to assist them in
strengthening their counter-terrorism abilities. We call
on CTED to adopt such a strategy and to report to the
Committee on the assistance programme it administers.

I would now like to share some thoughts on the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The fight
against terrorism calls for ajoint effort. Many countries
that wish to implement resolution 1373 (2001) are
hampered by a lack of capacity. Providing assistance
and filling the gaps for those countries should become
a comprehensive part of the Committee's work. Such
work should be strengthened, and we should not forget
the Committee's role as a catalyst so that international
and technical organizations are encouraged to provide
assistance to the countries that require it.

We reaffirm the importance of cooperation and
coordination among the three Committees. We warmly
welcome the provisions to improve coordination among
them as described by the Chair of the 1540 Committee.
While they have the necessary political support for
their roles, they sometimes lack sufficient financial
resources to provide the necessary assistance. It will
be essential to bolster the capacity of the Committees
and their executive prerogatives with the provision of
financial resources.

Fourthly, the Committees should maintain ongoing
relationships and cooperate with the countries most
seriously affected by terrorism by strengthening links
with the permanent delegations, conducting visits and
meeting with the authorities of those countries.

Fifthly, we must respond in a comprehensive way
to the challenges that terrorism poses. Terrorist groups
may have different persuasions, but they share the same
obscurantist way of thinking. Therefore, whether they
intend to or not, they help each other. We must focus on
all terrorist organizations for that very reason.

Lastly, Jordan will continue playing its pioneering,
central role in the fight against terrorism. We have
responded to the phenomenon with all the means at our
disposal, and we have strengthened our cooperation
with the Security Council Committees and all the
relevant United Nations bodies.

