Mr. Vale de Almeida (European Union): I have the
honour of speaking on behalf ofthe 28 European Union
Member States and on behalf of the European Union
(EU) itself. The following countries align themselves
with my statement: the candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine.

I would like to thank the Senegalese presidency for
organizing the debate. I thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for his briefing, as well as all the other briefers
for their insightful contributions to today's discussion
on the challenges posed by asymmetrical threats to the
peace efforts deployed around the world.

Let me reiterate from the very start that the States
members of the European Union remain committed
to peacekeeping - a flagship activity of the United
Nations. We highly value the partnership between
the Secretariat, troop-contributing and host countries
and financial contributors that makes United Nations
peacekeeping unique. Welcoming also the increased
attention given to the role of regional organizations
in peacekeeping, the European Union will continue
to look for ways to enhance our support to United
Nations peacekeeping.

Recognizing the dangerous and complex context in
which peacekeepers and other United Nations personnel
carry out their work, we pay tribute to those who have
lost their lives in the service of the United Nations. The
EU is leading efforts to agree on a resolution concerning
the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
the protection of United Nations personnel, and will
continue working in support of that goal.
Searching for measures to increase the safety and
security of United Nations personnel on the ground
remains of critical importance, and is made even
more pressing by the significant number of targeted
attacks against peacekeepers. In consideration of the
contemporary and evolving peacekeeping landscape,
peacekeeping missions should deploy with at least the
same technological advantages that most Governments
and enterprises around the world find indispensable to
their operations.

In that context, a better integration of modern
technology and intelligence capabilities into peace
operations should continue to be pursued. We commend
the Secretariat's efforts towards the wider use of
modern technologies in peacekeeping operations. We
also encourage the development of information and
intelligence capacities in current and future missions.
The use of such resources and technology can help to
improve the situational awareness of troops in real time,
thereby contributing to the implementation of mission
mandates, the protection of civilians and the security of
United Nations personnel on the ground.

We need to maintain an open, transparent and
constructive dialogue on the deployment of particularly
sensitive technologies and use strategies that allow
field missions to enjoy the advantages provided by
modern technologies. The European Union believes
that discussions on those various topics in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping are encouraging and should
continue in a collective effort to find common ground.

At the same time, technology alone cannot bring
about solutions and increased effects. Instead, the
coherent merger of modern technology with relevant
methods at the disposal ofwell-prepared and trained staff
will be imperative in the pursuit of enhanced operational
output. Adequate training certificates, recommended by
the Secretary-General, are a step in the right direction.
Training, including linguistic training adapted to the
area of deployment and equipping personnel, before
and during deployment - whether military, police or
civilian - on the basis of consolidated standards is also
important to ensuring successful missions.

(spoke in French)

As the Senegalese presidency so rightly underscores
in its concept note for this debate (8/2016/927, annex),
Mali is an interesting case. The strategic objective of
the European Union in Mali remains the promotion
of stability by combining security, development and
governance in an integrated and coordinated approach
of its relevant instruments. The objective is to tackle
the deep-rooted causes of insecurity, underdevelopment
and local, regional and national conflicts.

Our two missions that fall within the framework of
the security and common defence policy deployed on
the ground - the European Union Training Mission
for Somalia in Mali and the European Union Capacity
Building Mission in Mali - are part and parcel of that
comprehensive approach. The European Union intends
to enable the Malian authorities to respond directly,
through their own means, to threats on the ground and,
more broadly speaking, to restore sovereignty, security
and stability throughout the country. To that end, the
European Union has undertaken to train the Malian
armed forces, by making available training experts and
strategic advisers within the police, the gendarmerie
and national guard forces, as well as relevant ministries
for security sector reform.

At the level of security, over half of the States
members of the European Union contribute troops
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). As a result,
they also directly work within MINUSMA to better
respond to asymmetrical threats. The outstanding
cooperation between MINUSMA and the European
Union missions clearly illustrates the joint work that is
being carried out to fight against asymmetrical threats.
That cooperation, which is based on the implementation
of their respective mandates, transcends the operational
level to cover the political process as a whole.

The comprehensive approach of the European
Union also includes a development cooperation
component in which we are a key partner for Mali.
The European Union and its member States jointly
contribute close to €1.7 billion for the period 2014 to
2017 in humanitarian aid, amounting to €40 million per
year. Regarding migration, Mali is one of the priority
States for EU action. In the framework of the trust fund
that we have established, €91.5 million have already
been approved and €40 million should be approved by
the end of the month.

The Central African Republic is yet another
example where the European Union works in close
cooperation with the United Nations and the host
country to back the efforts of the Government in
countering the activities of armed groups. On 19 April,
the European Council approved the establishment of
the European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic (EUTM. RCA), which is to
contribute to security sector reform in the country
and make its national forces capable of responding to
such threats themselves. In extension of the military
advisers mission ofthe EU, EUTM. RCA will modernize
the Central African armed forces to ensure that they
are effective, inclusive and subject to democratic
governance. In that regard, the States members of the
EU responded to the call of the United Nations and
mobilized to provide resources and troops to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic in order to
allow them to fulfil their mandates.

(spoke in English)

In conclusion, countries where peacekeepers
operate are particularly vulnerable to the spread of
Violent extremism that may be conducive to terrorism.
The EU has welcomed the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which, inter alia,
recommended that member States integrate preventing
violent extremism into relevant activities of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions, in accordance with their mandates.

We also believe that peacekeeping operations
are one way that the United Nations can assist local
authorities in developing and strengthening their
capacities to better face that scourge. It is part ofthe One
United Nations approach promoted by the Secretary-
General, aimed at achieving coherent, coordinated and
integrated tactical assistance to the Member States with
a view to developing and strengthening their capacities,
including in the area of preventing violent extremism.
The European Union encourages further coordination
and exchange between the peacekeeping operations
and other United Nations entities at Headquarters and
in the field.

