Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First of all,
I would like to congratulate the delegation of Lithuania
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I also wish to express our great appreciation for the
convening of today's debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. And I thank the Lithuanian delegation
for its concept note on today's item (S/2014/74, annex),
in particular because 15 years have elapsed since the
Secretary-General presented his first report on the
subject to the Security Council (S/1999/957), which led
to the adoption of the first relevant resolution (resolution 1265 (1999)). We hope that regular deliberations within
the Council on the subject will allow us come up with
an objective, holistic vision of how best to protect
civilians, all the while avoiding politicizing the issue
and staying away from double standards.

Confronting the root causes of conflicts and
pushing for comprehensive and lasting political
settlements are the best guarantee for the protection of
civilians. The concept note is quite right when it says
that the vast majority of victims in armed conflicts are

civilians. But it is necessary in that respect to draw
attention to an important truth, namely, that civilians in
very many conflict zones are victims primarily of rebel
movements that take up weapons in order to victimize
civilians, women and children, to the point where the
international community becomes indignant and seeks
to intervene in an armed conflict zone. The best example
in that regard - those who are responsible - are
the rebel movements that are undermining the peace
process in Darfur.

When we talk of the protection of civilians, it is
necessary to prioritize the success of peacekeeping
operations and political settlements whereby rebel
groups are pressured to join political processes
and enter into peaceful negotiations, as opposed to
resorting to the use of military force or attempts to
deceive international public opinion. Mr. Ladsous said
quite rightly this morning in English that peacekeeping
operations could not impose peace. Indeed, if there
is no peace to maintain, peacekeeping operations,
no matter what their capacities are, will not achieve
their goals in that respect. It is therefore necessary
to very swiftly implement development projects,
reconstruction projects, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration projects and quick-impact projects
so that internally displaced persons can return to their
homes and enjoy stability.

We call on the Security Council and the international
community to support the Sudanese Government to
achieve peace in Darfur. We also call on the Council to
send a strong message to those who refuse to sign the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and to the rebels in
the South Kordofan and Blue Nile regions to lay down
their weapons andjoin the peace process.

In her statement, Ms. Amos spoke ofthe situation in
those two regions and mentioned aerial bombardments
by the Sudanese Air Force - remarks that I would like
to correct. I hope Ms. Amos can hear us: that was not
the case. The truth is that rebel movements in those two
zones continued to violate all the unilateral ceasefire
announcements issued by the Sudanese Government.
The last ceasefire was intended to take place between
February and November of last year, but the rebel
movements did not respect it, and civilians and United
Nations facilities, in particular in Kadugli, were
targeted by the rebel movements in question.

The principle of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a very noble goal to which we all aspire.
What troubles us are attempts to instrumentalize that
objective with a view to very specific political ends.
For example, with respect to the principle of the
responsibility to protect, which we wish to endorse
from this podium, even if it appears in the Millennium
Declaration, it nevertheless remains open to very
different interpretations. It is in contradiction with a
principle enshrined in the Charter, namely, respect for
national sovereignty and States' primary responsibility
for the protection of their civilians. We need to reiterate
in that regard that the right to protection for civilians in
armed conflict is an integral part of a comprehensive
interdependent regime of rights and duties affirmed by
the Millennium Declaration, such as combating poverty
and preventing conflict by dealing with root causes.

In conclusion, we hope that the Council will
continue to discuss this matter in an objective manner
so that we can protect civilians in all conflict zones.

