Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Again, as you
requested, Mr. President, I shall abbreviate my text and
read out what I consider to be the most important
elements. The rest will be circulated among colleagues.

Since I last briefed the Council in May 2010 (see S/PV.6310), there have been a number of significant
developments in the work of the Committee and the
sanctions regime it is tasked to oversee. I therefore
welcome this opportunity to update the Council.

The review process, which was the first of its
kind conducted by a United Nations sanctions
committee, has been the main focus of the Committee's
work over the past two years. It has served as an
important function both in improving the quality of the
consolidated list and in advancing the overall
credibility and transparency of the Committee. The
Committee concluded its review on 29 July, after the
Security Council extended the review period by one
month. On 29 July, I also gave an open briefing to all
Member States on the results of the review. I will
therefore only briefly recapitulate the main results,
which I consider quite impressive.

Of the 488 names reviewed, the Committee found
that the listings remained appropriate for 443, and
removed 45 names from the list. In addition, de-listing
requests submitted for 58 names in the course of the
review remain under the consideration of the
Committee.

The review demonstrated that the Committee
relies heavily on the cooperation of Member States, for
which we were grateful. I am confident that the high
level of engagement has contributed to a better
understanding of the Committee's work.

In a similar vein, the Committee reiterates its
standing invitation to Member States to attend
Committee meetings to discuss relevant issues. We
recently discussed a new approach to invite Member
States to take a more active part in forthcoming
reviews.

The Monitoring Team produced a report on the
conduct and the results of the comprehensive review,
including a set of valuable recommendations. The
Committee is currently concluding its consideration of
the report and the recommendations contained therein
and will shortly submit its position to the Security
Council. The comprehensive review set the standards
for future additional reviews introduced by resolution
1904 (2009), namely for listed persons who are
reportedly deceased, for entries that lack identifiers for
effective implementation and for names on the
Consolidated List which have not been reviewed in
three or more years.

Such reviews represent an important step in
making the Consolidated List a more dynamic
document that responds better to the evolving and
continued threat, and that is more up to date and
contains the most complete and accurate information
possible on the identity and whereabouts of listed
parties in order to enable Member States to effectively
implement the three sanctions measures that apply to
them.

During the course of the comprehensive review,
the Committee also addressed the issue of deceased
persons on the List. Prior to the review, there was only
one single case of the removal of a deceased person
from the Consolidated List. At the conclusion of the
review, eight additional deceased persons had been
removed from the List: two names associated with the
Taliban and six names associated with Al-Qaida.
However, there remains a considerable number of
deceased persons on the List, which is why the
Committee will conduct a specific review of deceased
persons in accordance with paragraph 26 of resolution
1904 (2009).

The Committee will soon be preparing the
modalities of that review, which will be conducted in
the upcoming months. In that connection, I would like
to mention that the Committee recently discussed a
recommendation by the Monitoring Team to clarify the
process by which Member States need to submit the
necessary information to the Committee certifying the
death of the individual. The Committee will soon be in
a position to inform Member States about those
requirements and procedures.
10-6374]
As a further attempt to improve the quality of the
List, the Committee is currently also discussing the
issue of entities that have ceased to exist and is
considering a review of that matter.

Finally, the Security Council also directed the
Committee to review all matters that were pending or
on hold as of 17 December 2009. The Committee has
commenced that review for the 23 items that fall within
its scope.

I would like also to highlight the new procedures
for matters that are pending and were placed on hold
after 17 December 2009. As called for in resolution
1904 (2009), the Committee adopted revised guidelines
on the conduct of its work, which bring those new
improvements into the Committee's practice and also
introduce a new procedure for such pending issues. The
procedure foresees regular updates by Committee
members on the status of resolving such matters and
introduced detailed rules for the time limit.

The most significant step in resolution 1904
(2009) was the establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson to assist the Committee when
considering de-listing requests. On 3 June 2010, the
Secretary-General appointed Judge Kimberly Prost as
Ombudsperson. Since her appointment, the
Ombudsperson has swiftly commenced her important
work. The Ombudsperson has kept the Committee
informed of developments in all cases before her, in
accordance with resolution 1904 (2009). I would like
to underline the importance of permitting the
Ombudsperson to fulfil her mandate without
interference and in an impartial and independent
manner.

Regarding updates on the status of the
Consolidated List, the narrative summaries of reasons
for listing and outreach activities by the Monitoring
Team and the Committee, I refer to the more
comprehensive version of my statement.

In concluding my remarks as Chairman of the
Committee in the name of the Committee, I would like
to remind the Council that in a previous meeting I
already mentioned the challenges the 1267 sanctions
regime has been facing (see S/PV.6310). Over the past
two years, the Committee has experienced growing
criticism by States, individuals and courts because of
procedural and human rights concerns. National
parliaments, national and regional courts and civil
society as well as international bodies, including
United Nations bodies, have pointed out shortcomings
of the 1267 sanctions regime. The Committee and the
Security Council have listened to those voices and
have taken important steps to address many of those
concerns in resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009).
The Committee has also strengthened fair and clear
procedures by revising its guidelines and internal
methods accordingly, and that has not gone unnoticed.

However, the recent judgment of the European
General Court in the case of Kadi II and other court
cases show that challenges remain. The high level of
engagement of Member States, for example during the
review, suggests that they continue to share the
Security Council's concern that there should be a
coordinated international response to the threat posed
by Al-Qaida and the Taliban. It is therefore important
that the Committee continue to engage in dialogue to
find appropriate ways and means to respond to those
challenges.

As I have highlighted several times, improving
the procedures will make the regime stronger and
therefore a more effective tool in the fight against
terrorism. The Committee should remain on this track.
Significant improvements to ensure fair and clear
procedures have already been achieved, and that
process will hopefully be continued in future.

Before closing this formal part of my statement, I
would like to take the opportunity to thank the
members of the Monitoring Team, the Secretariat and
the Committee members for their invaluable
contribution in coping with the enormous work
challenges during the last two years.

I have now come to the end of the text that I was
asked to present in the name of the Committee. I would
like to make just a few comments, as you suggested,
Mr. President, in my personal capacity after having
nearly terminated two years of work at the head of the
Committee. I wish to underline that these comments
oblige only me and do not represent agreed positions
by the Committee.

The Committee's comprehensive review was -
and this is my personal conviction - a groundbreaking
and unprecedented step. It was the first time ever that a
sanctions committee conducted such a thorough
review. I have already given the numbers: 488 names
were carefully scrutinized and 45 entries were deleted,
and some 60 de-listing requests are still pending. About
270 list entries - and I think this is also important -
that were added in 2001 have been reviewed for the
very first time since they were listed.

However, despite those efforts a number of
problematic entries, such as deceased people, defunct
entities and entries lacking identifying information,
remain on the list. I have already referred to the
additional reviews that were introduced by resolution
1904 (2009) - a review of deceased persons, a review
of entries that lack identifiers and the triennial
comprehensive review of each name on the list. This
basically means that in the future, in more complex
cases, the Committee will in fact review some names
up to three times, in three separate reviews, and that in
itself is a positive development. In addition, the
Committee recently agreed to conduct a specific
review of entities that have ceased to exist, which is in
fact a further step beyond what is provided for in
resolution 1904 (2009).

I have already referred to the appointment of
Judge Kimberly Prost as Ombudsperson, which was an
important and significant step.

I feel very strongly that we should give Judge
Prost, who is a remarkable person, the time to show her
merit. I would like to note that she has just started
working on her first cases, and I reiterate the
importance of Member States fully cooperating with
her and providing her with all relevant information.

The Council will remember that there was a
discussion at the time about whether the
Ombudsperson would be given the possibility to
present recommendations. Having seen Judge Prost, I
feel that the Committee will attach full weight to her
written reports, and in practice, the artificial distinction
drawn between recommendations and observations
might very well become irrelevant.

Finally, given the fact that the Ombudsperson was
appointed six months after the adoption of resolution
1904 (2009), I would be very pleased to see Judge
Prost's mandate continue next year. I therefore believe
that the Council should consider extending her
mandate and also extend the mandate of the
Ombudsperson to other sanctions regimes, because the
creation of the function was an important first step that
will also be beneficial for all sanctions regimes.

Important progress has been achieved over the
past two years to strengthen due process in the internal
procedures and working methods of the Committee.

As regards the Committee's decision-making, I
have clearly gained some experience with the principle
of consensus that exists within the Committee. I would
thus like to share some thoughts on that principle with
the Council, as the principle of consensus has been
criticized as giving designating States a right to veto
any de-listing request. It is obvious that that is perhaps
a rather far-reaching statement, since only a
designating State that is a member of the Security
Council can participate in decision-making.

While it is true that the consensus rule applies to
decisions of all sanctions committees of the Security
Council, it is often overlooked that paragraph 4(a) of
the Committee Guidelines expressly provides that if,
after consultations undertaken by the Chairman,
"consensus still cannot by reached, the matter may be
submitted to the Security Council". Thus, even under
the current procedures, any de-listing request may be
submitted to the Security Council for review and
subsequent decision by majority rule pursuant to
Article 27 of the Charter.

I personally believe - and this is my strong
personal view - that it would not be a revolutionary
step to adopt the same decision-making procedure -
majority voting - for de-listing decisions of the
Committee as well. It is also interesting to note that in
some instances, such as the granting of humanitarian
exemptions pursuant to resolution 1452 (2002), the
Committee already takes decisions by so-called
negative consensus. That means that the consensus
principle has been reversed by requiring the Committee
to take a negative decision by consensus.

Finally, the 1267 sanctions regime regarding
Al-Qaida and the Taliban has also been criticized
recently in the sense that it was no longer a temporary
emergency measure to address a specific threat, but an
open-ended measure that was not limited in time or
space.

It is interesting to note that the Security Council
has not adopted a consistent approach in this regard.
While some country regimes, such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, are renewed annually, many
targeted sanctions measures - including Sudan,
Somalia, Eritrea, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and others - are open-ended. However, in the
1267 regime the concerns regarding the open-ended
nature of the measures are considerably mitigated by
the reviews pursuant to resolutions 1822 (2008) and
1904 (2009), which I outlined earlier. At least every
three years each name is thoroughly reviewed by the
Committee and, as I pointed out, in some cases more
that once, twice or even three times.

If the procedure - and this is again a personal
suggestion I would like to make - of those triennial
reviews were changed to require a positive
reconfirmation of each list entry under review, many of
the concerns I mentioned would be satisfied. The
adaptation of the periodic review procedure would in
fact then have the same effect as the introduction of a
time limit or sunset clause for the listings and would
put an end to the recurring question of whether the
sanctions regime is of a punitive or preventive nature.

I am confident that the Security Council and the
Committee will continue to actively follow the
developments and will continue to look for answers to
the concerns raised. The upcoming resolution to extend
the mandates of the Monitoring Team and the
Ombudsperson in June 2011 will provide the next
opportunity for the Security Council to take further
steps in that important matter. This is a living process,
a living regime that has been adapted continuously. We
have succeeded in improving it substantially during the
past two years, but I think efforts to further improve it
will continue.

