The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

For six years, the world has watched as the Syrian
Government and its leader, Bashar Al-Assad, have
terrorized their own people. They have murdered
hundreds of thousands and displaced millions. They have
broken international law and violated numerous United
Nations resolutions. They have committed criminal
acts that shock the conscience of all humankind.

The international community has repeatedly
expressed its outrage. The Joint Investigative
Mechanism has found, beyond any doubt, that the
Syrian regime has used chemical weapons against its
own people multiple times. On Tuesday, the Al-Assad
regime launched yet another chemical attack on
civilians, murdering innocent men, women and children
in the most gruesome way. Al-Assad did that because
he thought he could get away with it. He thought he
could get away with it because he knew that Russia
would have his back. That changed last night.

As I warned on Wednesday (see S/PV.7915, when the international community consistently fails in its
duty to act collectively, there are times when States are
compelled to take their own action. The indiscriminate
use of chemical weapons against innocent civilians is
one of those times. The United States will not stand
by when chemical weapons are used. It is in our Vital
national security interests to prevent the spread and use
ofchemical weapons. Our military destroyed the airfield
from which this week's chemical strike took place. We
were fully justified in doing so. The moral stain of the
Al-Assad regime could no longer go unanswered. His
crimes against humanity could no longer be met with
empty words. It was time to say "enough", but not only
say it; it was time to act. Bashar Al-Assad must never
use chemical weapons again, ever.

While the Syrian regime is responsible for the
chemical-weapon attack, it is not the only guilty party.
The Iranian Government bears a heavy responsibility. It
has propped up and shielded Syria's brutal dictator for
years. Iran continues to play a role in the bloodshed in
Syria. The Russian Government also bears considerable
responsibility. Every time Al-Assad has crossed the
line of human decency Russia has stood beside him. We
had hoped the Security Council would move forward
but Russia made it known, as it has done seven times
before, that it would use its veto once again to cover up
for the Al-Assad regime.

Further delay by compromising with Russia for
a watered-down draft resolution would have only
strengthened Al-Assad. Strengthening Al-Assad will
lead only to more murders. We were not going to allow
that. But it is even more than that: Russia is supposed
to be a guarantor of the removal of chemical weapons
from Syria. Think about that. Russia is supposed to
have removed all the chemical weapons from Syria. But
obviously that has not happened, as innocent Syrians
continue to be murdered in chemical attacks. Let us
think about the possible reasons for Russia's failure.

It could be that Russia is knowingly allowing
chemical weapons to remain in Syria. It could be that
Russia has been incompetent in its efforts to remove
the chemical weapons. Or it could be that the Al-Assad
regime is playing the Russians for fools, telling them
that there are no chemical weapons all the while
stockpiling them on their bases. The world is waiting
for the Russian Government to act responsibly in
Syria. The world is waiting for Russia to reconsider its
misplaced alliance with Bashar Al-Assad.

The United States will no longer wait for Al-Assad
to use chemical weapons without any consequences.
Those days are over. But now we must move to a new
phase - a drive towards a political solution to this
horrific conflict. We expect the Syrian regime and
its allies to take the United Nations political process
seriously, something they have not done up until this
point. We expect Russia and Iran to hold their ally
accountable and abide by the terms of the ceasefire.
We expect the Security Council to speak loudly and
forcefully when the regime or its allies undermine the
political process and countless of our own resolutions.

The United States took a very measured step last
night. We are prepared to do more, but we hope that
will not be necessary. It is time for all civilized nations
to stop the horrors that are taking place in Syria and for
them to demand a political solution.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

