Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I thank High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina Inzko for his important
briefing and assure him of Ukraine's full support
for his activities. In the current circumstances of
political instability and internal tensions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, his role and leadership have become even
more important.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
deliver on behalf of the European Union (EU).

Despite the Council's efforts and calls on the
competent authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
work actively to consolidate the results of the political
process, engage in dialogue to settle their differences
and comprehensively implement the Dayton Peace
Agreement, the internal situation in that country
remains tense, with a risk of further escalation. The
need to overcome selfish interests and ethnic divisions
and reach the necessary progress in the implementation
of the 5+2 agenda is as pressing as never before. In that
regard, Ukraine condemns the decision of the Republika
Srpska authorities to cease all communications and
contact with the Office of the High Representatives, as
well as their denial of access to official information and
documents. I would like to underline that such actions
violate the General Framework Agreement for Peace
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and are
therefore unacceptable.

Unfortunately, existing differences in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are not unique in the Balkans. Political
tensions are becoming the new normal in the whole
region. Two days ago, the Council discussed Kosovo (see S/PV.7940). In the past few months we have witnessed
tensions and even an attempted coup d'etat in the
Balkans. Those developments all demonstrate that the
shift from a post-conflict to a pre-conflict environment
in the region is, unfortunately, still possible.

Of course, the problems and challenges of each
country are very different and sometimes incomparable
but their roots are rather similar. Quite often, internal
tensions are stoked by certain external players, who stir
up instability in the Balkans to reverse European and
Euro-Atlantic integration of the region and to keep the
Balkan States in the imagined sphere ofinfluence. It is
an irresponsible policy to conduct in a region that is as
complex as the Balkans.

I recall the Council's discussion before and after the
adoption of resolution 2315 (2016) in November 2016.
Ukraine and many other Council members then strongly
condemned the holding of a so-called referendum by
the authorities of Republika Srpska, which was in clear
contravention of the final and binding decisions of the
Constitutional Court. Despite that condemnation and
calls for restraint, as well as an annulment of the results
of the so-called referendum by Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court, the Republika Srpska authorities
continued their provocative actions, violating the
General Framework Agreement for Peace. Such actions
include the "Republika Srpska Day" celebrations,
with the participation of the army's Third Infantry
Regiment, the adoption of the law on "Republika
Srpska Day", divisive rhetoric and threats of cessation,
rejection of the authority of the High Representative
and many others.
During the negotiations on resolution 2315 (2016),
many Council members, including Ukraine, insisted
on the inclusion of condemnation of the so-called
referendum, as that would have sent a strong and clear
signal to the authorities of the Republika Srpska.
That did not happen due to opposition by the Russian
Federation. Why was that? In the light of the recent
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the answer
is obvious. The failure to take resolute consolidated
steps against separatist actions by the leaders of
the Republika Srpska challenges the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and may lead to the destabilization of the Balkans.
It would thus would punch another big hole in the
infamous instability belt. Ukraine joins the High
Representative's call and underscores that the entities
have no right to secede from Bosnia and Herzegovina
and that the General Framework Agreement for Peace
guarantees the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the constitutional position
of the entities.

We are encouraged that, despite the negative
developments, during the reporting period we
also witnessed substantial progress by Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its path to European and Euro-Atlantic
integration. In particular, I commend the adoption of
the long overdue defence review and the signing of
the protocol on the adoption of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union. We
also look forward to the EU Commission opinion on
Bosnia and Herzegovina's EU membership application
and hope that it will attain the status of a candidate
country in the near future.

Ukraine commends the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Althea for its efforts to enable the
security forces ofBosnia and Herzegovina to operate in
an independent manner and to participate in building a
peaceful society. We look forward to a strategic review
of the issue by the European Union.

It is important to continue efforts to implement the
reform agenda, which includes socioeconomic issues,
the rule of law and public administration reforms. Of
equal significance is to demonstrate progress in the
functioning of the judiciary, including through the
implementation of the relevant Constitutional Court
decisions and the fight against corruption, organized
crime, radicalization and terrorism. Such progress is
essential for the further stability and development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the whole region.
