Ms. Mapisa-Nqakula (South Africa): At the
outset, let me join previous speakers in congratulating
Secretary of State John Kerry on his country's
assumption of this important role. I wish the United
States delegation continued success in steering the
work of the Council during its presidency. We also
congratulate Mr. Martin Kobler on his appointment
as the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. And
we commend Mr. Russ Feingold on his appointment
as United States Special Representative for the Great
Lakes Region of Africa. We also wish to thank all those
who have spoken before us.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Mozambique on behalf of the Southern
African Development Community.

South Africa attaches great importance on the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
We commend the Secretary-General for giving special
attention to the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as well as the progress already made
in implementing what has become known as the
"framework of hope".

The prospects for peace in the region depend
upon compliance with, and the implementation of, the
Framework by all signatories. The recent visit in May
by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the President
of the World Bank, Mr. Jim Yong Kim, is encouraging
for peace efforts. We are also encouraged by visits
undertaken by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region, Ms. Mary
Robinson, whose efforts are critical to the success of
the Framework. We encourage the Special Envoy to
accelerate her efforts as she takes concrete steps in her
engagement with the relevant parties. In that context,
we welcome the innovative approach of proposed
benchmarks in pursuit of indicators that are specific,
measurable, achievable, relevant and time-based.
We also welcome the pledge by the World Bank of
$1 billion for development projects aimed at economic
rejuvenation andjob creation in the Great Lakes region.

We commend the steps taken by the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to establish
a national oversight mechanism in accordance with
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
and resolution 2098 (2013). We look forward to the
early commencement of its work. We encourage the
Government to make further strides to implement its
commitment in terms of the Framework, including
security sector reform and the establishment of the rapid
reaction force to be able to take over, when appropriate,
the responsibilities of the Force Intervention Brigade of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic People's Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and restore State authority.

South Africa remains deeply concerned about the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
strongly condemn the continuing attacks perpetrated
by armed groups against the people of the country in
particular, and against MONUSCO. We also take note
of the fact that thousands of refugees have poured into
Uganda, and many others have been internally displaced
following new eruptions of violence in the Kamango
and Mataho areas. Clearly, the humanitarian impact of
those attacks, particularly on vulnerable groups, is of
major concern.

South Africa reaffirms its commitment to
supporting peace initiatives in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In that regard, we commend President
Museveni's mediation efforts aimed at facilitating the
peace talks.

While supporting the Force Intervention Brigade's
deployment to the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we remain convinced that a long-
term solution to peace and stability in the Congo can
only be guaranteed by a political solution. Moreover,
improved relations between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its neighbours is an important
ingredient for peace, stability and security. With regard
to our contribution to the Force Intervention Brigade,
we are finalizing our deployment in line with the
commitments we have made and will assume our duties
and responsibilities in the Mission.

Finally, we all have a responsibility to ensure that
the renewed energy for establishing long-lasting peace
is well coordinated and well sustained.

