Mr. Holliday (United States of America):
Ambassador Mufioz has provided us with a very
helpful, informative and specific overview of the
recent work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the
important contribution that the Monitoring Team has
made in support of those efforts. Recent events,
particularly in the Russian Federation and affecting
Australian citizens in Indonesia, serve as a sad and
sobering reminder that the global threat of terrorism
persists. The Monitoring Team's 31 July report
correctly notes that the international community has
made important progress in combating the threat posed
by terrorists associated with Al Qaeda and the Taliban.
We and our allies have weakened Al Qaeda's ability to
launch new operations by freezing more than $140
million in assets linked to many individuals and
entities affiliated with the Al Qaeda network and other
terrorist groups. The freezing of terrorist assets
remains a top United States Government priority. We
strongly encourage those nations that have not already
done so to enact domestic legislation to permit the
freezing of terrorist-linked assets.

The Monitoring Team's report also noted that
individual Member States cooperate more closely than
ever in sharing information and mounting joint efforts
to defeat our terrorist enemies. That cooperation
remains essential to ensure full sanctions
implementation by all States.

We must continue to set the bar high in our
shared fight against Al Qaeda. We need fresh and
imaginative ideas to defeat our terrorist foes,
particularly as they formulate new strategies to
undermine international peace and security. The
Monitoring Team's report appropriately notes that the
nature of the Al Qaeda and Taliban threat has evolved
since the Security Council first imposed measures
against the Taliban and Osama Bin Laden under
Security Council resolution 1267 (1999). Al Qaeda has
become a global network of groups, no longer bound to
one nation's borders, that pose a threat to all freedom-
loving peoples around the globe. We need to ensure
that we continue to refine and tailor existing measures
and consider additional steps that may be needed to
address the constant evaluation of the Al Qaeda and
Taliban threat.

In closing, Sir, I would like to commend
Ambassador Munoz and his delegation for their
vigorous and expert leadership of a Security Council
Committee that has become a critical focal point for
our shared efforts to combat terrorism. The United
States delegation also welcomes the efforts of the new
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004),
led by coordinator Richard Barrett, in support of the
work of the Committee. We will draw heavily on its
expertise to provide ideas on how States might further
enhance their counter-terrorism efforts. In that regard, I
am pleased to note that two members of the team
recently visited Washington, DC, to meet with senior
counter-terrorism officials from my Government. The
United States Government stands ready to assist the
Council's efforts against the threat posed by Al Qaeda
and we will provide leadership where necessary. It is a
fight none of us can afford to lose. Our efforts must be
tireless.

