Mr. Gentiloni (Italy): I wish to thank the Malaysian
presidency for convening today's open debate and for
introducing resolution 2225 (2015), which recognizes
abductions in armed conflict as a listing criterion in
the annexes of the Secretary-General's annual report on
children and armed conflict (S/2015/409).

I also thank the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF for their work
in identifying ways that will help us better prevent and
respond to the scourges that continue to afflict children
in armed conflict. I am here to reaffirm Italy's strong
support for the Council's endeavours.

Abductions are often a precursor to other grave
violations, from recruitment to mental and physical
abuse and other harmful practices, such as forced
marriage. They can be used in retaliation by non-State
actors such as Daesh, Boko Haram and other terrorist
groups that neglect children's right to education and
deny their empowerment, especially that of adolescent
girls, and target ethnic and religious communities. We
believe that our common efforts to counter violent
extremism should also be aimed at eradicating that
plague.

Resolution 2225 (2015), which we adopted today,
is a very relevant tool for addressing the increasing
use of abduction. But even more relevant will be its
concrete implementation through the work of the
Security Council and its bodies, supported by the entire
international community.

As a non-permanent member of the Security
Council in 2007, Italy strongly supported the inclusion
of specific provisions on the protection of children
in the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The targeted training of United Nations
personnel on children's rights remains paramount to
ensuring effective peacekeeping on the ground.

Italy is continuously engaged in such efforts through
our training centres. The review of peacekeeping
operations will no doubt be an opportunity to provide
concrete recommendations on how this important
topic may be considered in planning and conducting
peacekeeping operations.

Accountability at the national and international
levels is also key to ensuring that perpetrators are
brought to justice. National authorities have the duty
to enforce the rules and investigate and prosecute
violations and abuses. At the same time, we must
spare no effort in supporting the international criminal
justice system.

Prompt action is vital so as to reduce the exposure
of children to serious risk factors, while promoting and
implementing long-term initiatives for the recovery and
social integration of former child soldiers and victims
of conflicts.

According to UNICEF, approximately 14 million
children have been impacted by conflicts in Syria and
Iraq. Italy pays particular attention to their condition.
Last year, we allocated a total of €2 million for projects
carried out by UNICEF in support of children in
Iraq, Lebanon and Jordan. They included social and
educational activities that involved the creation and
management of child and family protective facilities.
We funded programmes, such as UNICEF's "No
Lost Generation" initiative, aimed at tackling child
malnutrition and providing psychological assistance
and support for minors and their families. In the
Kurdish Autonomous Region of Iraq, since January
2015 we have financed assistance to young Christian
and Yazidi girls who are victims of violence.

Our own lessons learned from those and other
programmes have been that, in the short term, success
lies in the ability to rapidly re-establish family, social
and institutional protection networks and set up direct
relief initiatives. Short-term success, however, is not
enough. Medium- and long-term actions are crucial to
safeguarding the security and development of children
in situations of crisis and conflict. This requires the
adoption of a multidimensional approach that is able
to address the root causes of poverty, lack of education
and basic services, and the militarization of societies.

Mr. Aman took the Chair.

Lastly, at this juncture, as we approach the
adoption of the post-2015 agenda, allow me to reaffirm
that the needs and rights of children and adolescents,
particularly adolescent girls and those living in poverty
or otherwise excluded, must be a cross-cutting priority
in our development efforts.

