The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration ofthe item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf ofthe Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
report of the Secretary-General dated 11 January
2001 (S/2001/35), submitted in accordance with
the statement by the President of the Council of
10 February 2000 (S/PRST/2000/5).

"The Security Council commends the
United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
the Central African Republic (BONUCA) and the
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
efforts they have constantly made to contribute to
peace and stability in the Central African
Republic. In this connection, the Council
welcomes the additional progress made in certain
areas since the previous report of the Secretary-
General of 29 June 2000 (8/2000/639),
particularly in the area of disarmament and the
restructuring of the security and defence forces,
and as regards respect for human rights by the
police.

"The Security Council welcomes the
mission to the region of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to assess the impact of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
on the Central African Republic and the Republic
of the Congo, in particular its humanitarian,
economic, social and security implications. The

Council is looking forward to discussing the
findings ofthat mission in the very near future.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the political and social tensions which have
recently resurfaced in the Central African
Republic, which threaten the national
reconciliation process undertaken four years ago
with the active support of the international
community. The Council notes with concern the
absence of dialogue between the Government and
the opposition. The Council is also disturbed by
the deterioration of the economic situation, partly
because of the repercussions of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
resulting fuel crisis.

"The Security Council welcomes the
contributions already received and calls upon
bilateral and multilateral donors to provide full
support to the efforts of the Government of the
Central African Republic. The Council
appreciates the release by the World Bank of the
second tranche of credit for the consolidation of
public finances and welcomes the recent decision
by the International Monetary Fund to release
additional funds. The Council calls upon Member
States which made pledges at the special meeting
in New York co-chaired by the Secretariat,
Germany and the United Nations Development
Programme in May 2000, to fulfil their
commitments. The Council also stresses the
importance of international assistance to refugees
and displaced persons in the Central African
Republic and in the other countries of the region
in order to contribute to regional stability.

"The Council reaffirms that it is first up to
the Central Africans to summon the necessary
political will for national reconciliation. The
Council strongly encourages the Government of
the Central African Republic to do everything in
its power to strengthen democratic institutions
and broaden the scope of national reconciliation.
The Council urges all political actors in the
Central African Republic to contribute each in
their own way to the reduction of the existing
tension between the Government and the
Opposition. In this respect, while it welcomes the
release, on 8 January 2001, of 62 persons who
had been arrested during the prohibited
demonstration of 19 December 2000, the Council

nevertheless notes with concern certain
constraints on peaceful public assembly of
opposition and labour groups.
"The Security Council calls upon the
Government of the Central African Republic to
take concrete measures to implement economic
reforms and to ease social tensions. The Council
stresses the priority need for the payment of
salary arrears in the civil service and welcomes
the recent announcement by the Government of
the Central African Republic that it will take
steps in this direction. The Council also
encourages the Government of the Central
African Republic to take all the financial
measures that are necessary to relaunch the
demobilization and reintegration programme.

"The Council requests the Secretary-
General to continue to keep it regularly informed
about the activities of BONUCA, the situation in
the Central African Republic, and in particular
the progress made in the political, economic and
social reforms, and to submit a report by 30 June
2001, in accordance with the statement of the
President of the Council dated 10 February
2000."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2001/2.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15pm.
