Mr. Vukasinovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November, and to wish you and your
delegation every success. We welcome Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
have taken note of his forty-eighth report (S/2015/84l, annex), covering the period from 21 April to 21 October
2015.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the Council's
adoption today of resolution 2247 (2015), which
extends the mandate of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) Operation Althea
for 12 months. The mandate of the EUFOR Althea
mission, with a current strength of 600 personnel on
the ground, is implementation of the military aspects
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace,
contained in its annexes 1A and 2. The situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has now been calm and
peaceful for a long period, which has had a positive
impact on regional stability. During the past few years
the EUFOR Althea mission has been reconfigured, and
its focus has shifted from deterrence and ensuring a
safe and secure environment to capacity-building and
training, reflected in the conclusions on 12 October
of the Foreign Affairs Council of the European Union
(EU). I should also mention that we have had good,
productive cooperation with EUFOR Althea in building
the capacity and training Bosnia and Herzegovina's
armed forces.

We have demonstrated that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has come a long way. It has gone from being a security
consumer to becoming a troop contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping missions and thus a provider
of security for international peace and security.
Today, military and police personnel from Bosnia and
Herzegovina participate in many international peace
operations, including the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mali, Afghanistan, Liberia, South Sudan and
Cyprus.

The adoption of today's resolution coincides with
the twentieth anniversary of the signing of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, which laid the
foundations of Bosnia and Herzegovina's constitutional
and political system. The Agreement acknowledged
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a complex, multinational
State and reflected its unique historical and multicultural
background. It has played an important role in post-
conflict reconciliation in the region as a whole as well
as in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Iwould like to highlight some positive developments
that have taken place in Bosnia and Herzegovina during
the reporting period. First, since the last elections we
have seen the creation of a positive atmosphere that
has made a major contribution to advancing economic
and social reforms in the country and fostered progress
towards its admittance to the European Union. In
that connection, our Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the EU entered into force on 1 June,
while the EU reform Agenda was adopted in July. The
agenda stipulates the enactment of socioeconomic
reforms including in the areas of fiscal policy, the rule
of law and good governance, and constitutes one of the
country's most significant steps forward of the past few
years. Shortly after that, the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina adopted a master plan for our integration
into the European Union. The Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities are fully committed to maintaining positive
momentum in this. The next step will be submitting
our application for EU membership at the beginning of
2016 in order to acquire candidate status by the end of
2017.

Secondly, it is worth mentioning that since 19 May,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has chaired the Committee of
Ministers ofthe Council of Europe, an organization that
promotes and strengthens democracy, human rights and
the rule of law throughout the continent. During our
chairmanship, we focused particularly on the promotion
and protection of human rights, with a special emphasis
on protecting the rights of vulnerable groups. On
22 October, we signed the Additional Protocol to the
Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of
Terrorism. The Protocol is a significant step forward
in the fight against terrorism, and it accords with the
provisions of resolution 2178 (2014).

Thirdly, Bosnia and Herzegovina has continued
to cooperate fully with the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). The ICTY's closure
does not imply the end of my country's fight against
impunity. Fighting impunity at the domestic level is a
prerequisite for achieving national reconciliation and
long-term stability in the country and the region. In
that regard, the implementation of a national strategy
for processing war crimes, regardless of the national
or religious origin of the perpetrators and victims, is of
crucial importance to a complex, multinational State.

Fourthly, Bosnia and Herzegovina remains fully
committed to further bolstering cooperation among
countries of the region. A special focus on regional
cooperation has been included in infrastructure projects
as a precondition of substantial economic development.
In that regard, the positive trend continues and a number
of important meetings have taken place at all levels
with representatives of the Western Balkan countries.
The most recent was an official visit by the delegation
of Serbia, led by the Prime Minister, to Sarajevo, where
a joint meeting between the Government of Serbia and
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
took place on 4 November.

Fifthly, the country's economic and fiscal
situation, as a result of global economic crises, remains
difficult. However, economic indicators have shown
some improvement. In the first eight months, export
increased by 4.9 per cent; by July, industrial production
had increased by 2.3 per cent, in comparison to the same
month in 2014. July's unemployment rate decreased by
1 per cent, compared to the same period in 2014.

Finally, I would like to express the readiness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities to continue their
work in securing a better and prosperous future for their
citizens. At the same time, we would like to express
gratitude to our international partners for supporting
Bosnia and Herzegovina on that path.

