The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Chile, Denmark, Fiji,
India, Indonesia, Japan, New Zealand, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Thailand, Timor-Leste and Ukraine
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Guterres
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Dauth (Australia), Mr. Valdes (Chile),
Ms. Laj (Denmark), Mr. Naidu (Fiji),
Mr. Nambiar (India), Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia),
Mr. Haneda (Japan), Mr. MacKay (New Zealand),
Mr. Macieira (Portugal), Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea), Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand) and
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine) took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber

The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation, under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure, to Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Sharma to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/1223, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission
of Support in Timor-Leste.

I now call on Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, to introduce the report.


