Mr. Skau (Sweden): In accordance with paragraph
24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February 2011,
I have the honour to report to the Security Council on
the work of the Committee established by that same
resolution. The current reporting period is from 8 June
to 28 August 2017, during which time the Committee
met once in informal consultations and conducted
additional work via the silence procedure.

At the outset, I would like to recall that on 29 June,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2362 (2017).
By that resolution, the Council inter alia expanded the
applicability of the measures aimed at preventing illicit
exports of crude oil from Libya to cover petroleum,
including refined petroleum products. The Council also
extended the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Libya
to 15 November 2018. Both of those elements have had
an impact on the activities of the Committee during the
current reporting period.

With respect to the first element, following
notifications received from the Libyan Government,
the Committee included on its sanctions list two
vessels - the Capricorn and the Lynn S - for
attempting to illicitly export gasoil from Libya. The
flag States of the two vessels, Tanzania and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, respectively, now have
certain obligations vis-a-vis those vessels, and all
Member States are required to prohibit the vessels from
entering their ports unless such entry is necessary for
the purpose of an inspection, in the case of emergency
or in the case of return to Libya. The listings, which
were accomplished in a matter of days from the time
of notification, on 21 July and 2 August, are valid for
a period of three months, unless terminated earlier
by the Committee. In addition to the flag States, the
Committee has written to several other Member States,
such as the reported States of origin and destination,
seeking any further relevant information.

Concerning the second element, the Committee
met on 21 August to hear a presentation by the newly
reconstituted Panel of Experts on its work programme
under the extended mandate. In the discussion,
Committee members addressed questions or comments
to the experts, who provided additional information and
clarifications. As some may recall, at its last briefing
(see S/PV.7961), the Chair informed the Council that
the Committee was considering the recommendations
from the final report of the Panel under its previous
mandate. Of the 16 recommendations, five were
addressed to the Council, six to the Committee, and five
to Member States, including Libya. The Committee has
since agreed to take action on five recommendations,
one of which was also discussed during the informal
consultations of 21 August.

With respect to the arms embargo, during the
period under review, the Committee approved a request
for exemption under paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970
(2011) from the Netherlands. The Committee also
responded to a request for guidance received from the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya concerning
the scope and application of paragraph 10 of resolution
2095 (2013), which relates to supplies of non-lethal
military equipment, and the provision of any technical
assistance, training or financial assistance, intended
solely for security or disarmament assistance to the
Libyan Government.

The Committee further received an initial report
and a final report, submitted pursuant to paragraph
10 of resolution 2292 (2016), by EUNAVFOR MED
Operation SOPHIA, of a vessel inspection undertaken
on 19 June on the high seas off the coast of Libya.
Arms and related materiel were found on board this
vessel - the same vessel, on the same route, which
had been inspected by EUNAVFOR once before, on
1 May. The Committee again notified Libya of the
inspection. During the reporting period, the Committee
also received the final report of the 1 May inspection
from EUNAVFOR. I should recall here that the
authorizations as set out in resolution 2292 (2016) were
extended by the Council in its resolution 2357 (2017) of
12 June 2017, for a further period of 12 months.

Also in the context of the arms embargo, the
Committee received the names of the authorized
signatories from Libya for requests for exemptions
from the arms embargo and for end-user certificates,
as per the requirements contained in the Committee's
implementation assistance notice No. 2 concerning the
arms embargo. A response is now under consideration.

Concerning the assets freeze, the Committee
received a notification from Greece under paragraph
16 (a) (i) of resolution 2009 (2011). In its response, the
Committee encouraged further bilateral contact between
Greece and Libya on the matter, and provided guidance
on the requirements of the notification procedure. The
Committee's consideration of an exemption request
submitted by Canada, pertaining to an asset owned by a
listed individual, is still ongoing. Two of the five Panel
recommendations on which the Committee agreed to
take action also related to the assets freeze, albeit one
is pending further information from the Panel. The
recommendations pertain to the Stolen Assets Recovery
Unit of the Central Bank of Libya, and the Committee
considers that a well-functioning Unit could be an
important partner in monitoring the assets freeze and
preventing the misappropriation of funds.

On the travel ban, the Committee approved an
advancement of the return travel of Ms. Safia Farkash
Al-Barassi, who had been authorized to travel between
Egypt and Oman The Committee also approved an
extension to the exemption request for Mr. Sayyid
Mohammed Qadhaf Al-Dam, who had been authorized
to travel between Libya and Egypt. Both listed
individuals were authorized to travel on the grounds of
humanitarian needs.

Lastly, on 27 June, in my capacity as Chair, I
participated in a joint open briefing of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism; the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
on challenges in countering terrorism in Libya. A
summary of the discussions is available on the 1373
Committee's website. The Committee also received one
implementation report from a Member State.

