Mr. Tladi (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
participate in this debate and for your concept paper
(S/2010/322). We move from the premise, as does your
concept note, that the old debate about whether the
Security Council functions above international law is
truly passe' and that, notwithstanding the primary role
of the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
operates within the framework of international law in
all its functions.

An important element of preventing conflict must
be to deal with post-conflict situations in a
comprehensive manner to facilitate nation-building and
the avoidance of the recurrence of violence. For this
reason, my delegation agrees with the assertion that
peacebuilding and post-conflict capacity-building are
key components of the maintenance of international
peace and security. It is this belief that led us to
lament, in our statement of 22 April in the debate on
the implementation of the presidential note contained
in document S/2006/507, the perception that the
Security Council's function is only to mandate
peacekeeping operations. In that statement, we
reminded the Council that

"Peacemaking is not always merely equal to the
deployment of troops to conflict situations. It is a
continuum from mediation to conflict prevention
to peacekeeping, where required, and to
peacebuilding and peace consolidation and
sustainable development" (S/PV.6300, p. 34).

In this context, we welcome the initiatives taken
by the Rule of Law of Unit in the Executive Office of
the Secretary-General to promote a more coherent
approach to rule of law activities in societies emerging
from conflict. We await with anticipation the outcome
of these endeavours and hope that those outcomes will
contribute meaningfully to the work of the Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission.

The concept note before us observes correctly
that targeted sanctions still raise fundamental questions
in connection with the rule of law and basic principles
of due process. The note also acknowledges that major
improvements have been recorded through, for
example, the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1822 (2008). We also welcome the adoption
of resolution 1904 (2009), which created the office of
the Ombudsperson, and annex II of that resolution,
which lays out the Ombudsperson's functions. While
we agree that these are important steps in the
promotion of due process principles, we hope that the
Office of the Ombudsperson shall be further
strengthened to ensure a greater protective mandate.
We further encourage the Council to take account the
recommendation of the document entitled
"Introduction and implementation of sanctions imposed
by the United Nations", annexed to General Assembly
resolution 64/ 115, when imposing and implementing
sanctions.

Inherent in the building blocks of the United
Nations is the inextricable link between the promotion
of justice and the attainment of a peaceful world. This
link is reflected in, among other provisions, Articles 1,
2 and 33 of the United Nations Charter. The
establishment of the International Court of Justice as a
principal organ of the United Nations also reflects
recognition of that link. The role of the Security
Council in promoting the rule of law by resorting to
peaceful judicial settlement is manifold. The Security
Council could, for example, recommend to parties that
disputes be referred to the International Court of
Justice in the spirit of Article 36 of the Charter.
Ultimately, however, whether a particular dispute is
referred to the Court will depend on the consent of the
particular States in accordance with article 36 of its
Statute.

A second possible role that the Security Council
can play in the promotion of the rule of law through the
use of the International Court of Justice is through
regular recourse to advisory opinions from the Court.
As we have noted on previous occasions, we are
pleased that the General Assembly has not been shy
about requesting advisory opinions, and we encourage
the Security Council to follow suit when faced with
questions of legal complexity. In this regard, we
remind the Council of the important consequences of
its decision to request an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice, which resulted in the
now famous 1971 Namibia opinion.

The role of the Security Council in the area of
peaceful settlement of dispute mechanisms is not
limited to requests for advisory opinions or to
encouraging parties to a dispute to refer it for
adjudication. The Council also has an important role in
the enforcement of decisions of the Court, in
accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 94 of the
United Nations Charter.

We believe that this responsibility applies
equally, though differently, in respect to the
implementation of advisory opinions. While advisory
opinions of the Court are not binding in and of
themselves, in the sense of Article 94 of the Charter,
they are not without legal consequence, and failure to
comply with them indicates a violation of whatever

10-4285]
rule the Court may have been deemed to be at issue in
that opinion. In the interests of promoting the rule of
law, we therefore call upon the Security Council to
take appropriate action to ensure the implementation of
the advisory opinion on the legal consequences of the
construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory and the Western Sahara opinion.

The concept note correctly observes that an
essential element in the Security Council's role in rule
of law issues relates to the efforts to end impunity and
the Council's complex relationship with international
tribunals and the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Time constraints unfortunately will not permit a
comprehensive discussion, and so I limit our
observations here to the ICC, and in particular to
events surrounding the Review Conference held in
Kampala. The first important point to note was the
adoption of the Kampala Declaration, under the
facilitation of your delegation, Mr. President, which
reaffirms the nexus between peace and justice.

On the main issue under consideration in
Kampala - the adoption of the definition and trigger
mechanisms for the crime of aggression - the role of
the Council became the single greatest sticking point.
It is unnecessary to rehash the debate on whether the
Council's mandate in the maintenance of international
peace and security is primary or exclusive, because
surely we all know that it is the former. Most of us in
Kampala expressed serious concern about leaving the
determination of the crime of aggression exclusively in
the hands of the Security Council. While very
convincing legal arguments were advanced for this
reluctance, it was also clear that the underlying
political reasons emanated from the perception, real or
imagined, that the Security Council as it is currently
constituted could not faithfully fulfil this mandate and
would, for political reasons unrelated to the
maintenance of peace and security, prevent the ICC
from exercising jurisdiction over this crime.

It seems to us that it is those same suspicions that
are behind many of the debates on the role of the
Security Council in the referral and deferral of
situations before the ICC. Whether or not these
underlying perceptions are founded on reality, they do
serve to illustrate the very urgent need to reform to the
Security Council. It is our view that, to rid itself of this
suspicion, the Council first and foremost needs to
become more representative and requires expansion in
both categories of its membership.

