Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): My delegation too
wishes to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of
the United Kingdom on your assumption of the
presidency for this month. We also wish to thank South
Africa and to congratulate it on its able stewardship of
the Council last month.
My delegation appreciates the important briefing
by the Chairmen of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), the 1267 Committee and the 1540 Committee.
We would like to express our appreciation to the
Chairmen for their able leadership of the work of those
Committees.

Today's briefings clearly reflect the significance
of the close cooperation among the three Committees
dealing with counter-terrorism issues. We are of the
view that this cooperation will not only be crucial for
the work of the Committees, but also will be essential
for synergy and coherence in the Council's
contribution to countering the threat posed by
terrorism. To this end, my delegation recalls the
intention of the Council to provide guidance to the
three Committees on areas of common interest in order
to better coordinate counter-terrorism efforts stipulated
in resolution 1805 (2008).

With regard to the briefing on the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, we duly note the Committee's
accomplishments on several key initiatives, which will
serve as a sound basis for its future work. My
delegation is of the view that the revised organizational
plan could strengthen the role of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to enhance
the CTC's ability to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). We share the view that the
recommendations contained in the organizational plan
could consolidate the achievements of CTED, and
could eventually intensify the work of the CTC.

My delegation recognizes the significance of the
adoption of Preliminary Implementation Assessments
(PIAs) as a tool to intensify dialogue between the CTC
and Member States on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). PIAs are dynamic documents, and we
hope that the CTC will continue to further improve the
consistency and accuracy of their content. On the issue
of a revised version of the "Survey of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States", we would like to underline
the need for the CTC to present a more accurate picture
in finalizing the survey.

On the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005),
my delegation reiterates the importance of CTED's
support for the work of the CTC in ensuring
comprehensive implementation of the resolution. For
its part, Indonesia actively continues its efforts to
promote cultural dialogue, tolerance and mutual
understanding with religious communities and among
civilizations.

With regard to the briefing on the 1267
Committee, I would like to use this opportunity to

reiterate our strong commitment to the promotion of
the effective implementation of the sanctions regime
adopted under resolution 1267 (1999) by improving the
quality of the consolidated list. We are of the view that
our joint efforts to improve the quality of the
consolidated list, particularly through enhancing its
completeness and accuracy, should contribute generally
to the effectiveness of the implementation of resolution
1267 (1999). In this context, my delegation fully
supports the intention of the Committee to evaluate the
review mechanism of the consolidated list, as provided
for in paragraph 6 (i) of the Committee's guidelines.

While fully supporting the effort to identify
possible cases of non-compliance, my delegation
maintains its view that the Council, in considering the
compliance of Member States, should also take into
account their achievements in combating Al-Qaida and
its affiliates through robust national criminal law
enforcement. The problem of non-compliance may be
caused not only by lack of political will or insufficient
understanding of the sanctions regime, but also by
legal deficiencies of procedure applicable to the listing
and de-listing processes. My delegation therefore is of
the View that the Security Council should give its
utmost and urgent attention to the issue of further
improving fair and clear procedure. We are convinced
that addressing this issue will also improve and
promote effective implementation of the regime at the
national level.

Turning to the briefing on the 1540 Committee, I
would like to reassert Indonesia's support for the main
tasks of the Committee, namely promoting global
capacity and raising international standards for
implementing the resolution. We are also pleased to
note that the Council, through resolution 1810 (2008),
has extended the mandate of the Committee for a
period of three years.

Since the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is a long-term objective and an ongoing
process, we hope that in its future work the Committee
will continue to place priority on dialogue and
cooperation with Member States on their need to fulfil
their obligations under the resolution. In this regard,
my delegation stresses that the responsibility for
implementation of the resolution rests fully with
national Governments, whereas international and
regional organizations can continue to assist them upon
their request and needs.

Finally, my delegation reiterates the importance

of continued and strengthened cooperation among the

1267, Counter-Terrorism and 1540 Committees. My

delegation would also like to underline that full

implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373

(2001) and 1540 (2004) can be effectively carried out

through continuous efforts, patience, dialogue,
cooperation and assistance.

