Mr. Gomaa (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Egypt, has followed the deteriorating situation in the
Great Lakes region with great concern and regret. This is
an important region for Egypt, as the time-honoured ties
we enjoy with its people are as old as the Nile. Thus,
during recent months and weeks, we have agonized over
this humanitarian tragedy, which has such far-reaching
dimensions.

Egypt has taken part in intensified endeavours within
the African framework to find a way to break this
stalemate, within the context of African brotherhood and
African values and based on our full belief in the
importance of the role of Africa, through the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) and its Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution. The latter issued
a communique at the Fourth Extraordinary Session of its
Central Organ, held in Addis Ababa on 11 November, in
which it referred to elements involved in the current
international consensus on settling this difficult problem.

 

I refer here to the need to play a more effective role at the
international level - which means sending a multinational
force and ensuring the flow of necessary humanitarian aid
to facilitate the voluntary repatriation of refugees on the
basis of full respect for the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Zaire - and to the need for a broad
African participation in any multinational force. It is no
secret that widening African participation will depend on
the mobilization of resources, on a reliable and sustainable
basis, through the voluntary trust fund that was established
for this purpose, as well as through other channels.

My delegation pays tribute to the initiatives that were
undertaken in response to the gravity of the situation,
beginning with the French initiative - which has formed
the basis of the action taken by the Security Council and its
adoption of resolution 1078 (1996) - as well as the
Canadian initiative, which a number of countries took part
in putting into effect in the Council. The Canadian initiative
provides a well-defined framework for the creation of a
temporary force to achieve an urgent, clear, humanitarian
objective, and at the same time reaffirms the importance of
African participation in this force.

We therefore think that, as far as the Security
Council's debate in recent days is concerned, the action is
compatible with the African viewpoint within the
Organization of African Unity. Accordingly, we
wholeheartedly support the draft resolution (S/1996/943).
Egypt will vote in favour of this draft resolution, of which
it is a sponsor.

Guinea-Bissau and Botswana have also given their
support, as well as other brotherly African countries, most
importantly Zaire - which may shoulder the biggest share
of suffering - and Cameroon, which is the current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity.

At the same time, the Egyptian delegation has
followed what has been said by the representative of
brotherly Rwanda on the latest positive developments in the
return in great numbers of refugees to their homes. We feel
happy for and pay tribute to this development. At the same
time, we think that adopting the current draft resolution
does not at all contradict these efforts or the developments
that we hope will be enhanced in a way that will alleviate
and end the current tragedy and suffering.

In this connection, it is worth noting that the proposed
multinational force is a temporary force and is limited in
scope. Its nature and mandate presuppose the full and
sincere cooperation of all the countries of the region. It will

 

ultimately reflect a responsible awareness of the
dimensions of the tragedy and the need to find a solution
to it.

We hope that this force will eventually realize its
objective smoothly and in the shortest possible time, in a
way that will consolidate the efforts at reconciliation
among the countries of the region at a conference on the
Great Lakes region to be held under the auspices of the
United Nations, and will ensure the growth of their
economies and the achievement of prosperity for their
peoples.

