Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): My delegation, like
others, also extends a warm welcome to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma, and thanks him for his informative
briefing in introducing the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET). We commend the Special
Representative for the excellent manner in which he
has steered the work of UNMISET since its inception,
and we wish him and his team much success in the
fulfilment of the Mission's mandate and in addressing
the principal challenges that confront the young island
State and to which he has just referred.

We are pleased to note that the Government of
Timor-Leste and its national institutions have assumed
responsibility for the management and conduct of its
affairs. The report clearly highlights the developments
in Timor-Leste after independence. We take note of the
progress towards the promotion of a broad-based
democracy in Timor-Leste through the establishment of
legislative, executive and judicial structures. An
effective and functioning democracy must have
necessary safeguards for the protection of human rights
and the promotion of the rule of law. We are
particularly pleased to see that the protection of human
rights in Timor-Leste is being institutionalized. We are
confident that the office of the "Provedor" will carry
out its activities in the most professional manner.

It is heartening to learn that the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, established to
facilitate reconciliation with justice, has commenced its
operational phase. A country that has suffered from so
much trauma and been subjected to untold hardships
cannot embark on nation-building without justice being
seen to be done. Nation-building is never complete
without a consolidated, united and peace-loving
society. In this regard, Mauritius believes that more is
required in order to encourage longer-term
reconciliation among the Timorese. Importance must,
therefore, be given to nation-building, capacity-
building and institution-building.

The strong commitment of the Security Council
and the international community has been instrumental
in the success achieved so far in Timor-Leste. As the
report observes, it is important that the Security
Council and the donor community remain engaged, so
as to build upon the outstanding contribution that has
been made to date. The Security Council should
therefore continue to support the country in order to
preserve and promote its political and economic
independence.

It is undeniable that without a strong and well-
equipped public administration it would be difficult to
implement the programmes of the Government. The
challenges mentioned in paragraphs 11, 12 and 13 must
therefore be addressed as soon as possible in order to
maintain the stability and move forward with the
developmental process. We hope that the donor
community will make additional efforts by providing
the funding required to enable the commitments to
materialize. We fully agree that the support of
multilateral and bilateral donors in ensuring the
economic and social well-being of Timor-Leste is Vital
for the long-term stability of the country.

We welcome the progress made so far in the
Timorization process in all sectors, particularly in the
police and defence forces. It is encouraging to learn
that a total of 2,285 Timor-Leste Police Service
officers are now serving their country. We fully support
this process and hope that the joint assessment mission,
planned to take place this month with the involvement
of the Government of Timor-Leste, the United Nations
and donor countries, will come up will proposals that
will address the needs of the Timor-Leste Police
Service. We are happy to note that the first phase of the
four-phase downsizing programme will be completed
as planned by the end of November, and we hope that
the national defence force will become fully
operational by June 2004.

The resolution of the refugee problem is, indeed,
a matter of high priority. No effort should be spared to
accelerate the voluntary return of refugees who remain
in West Timor. The extremely low return rate registered
in October is a matter of concern. We commend the
initiative of President Gusmao to make a personal
appeal to the refugees to return. The process of
reconciliation and nation-building will be more
effectively consolidated by the voluntary return of the
refugees and by providing them with the necessary
facilities for their full integration into society.

My delegation is gratified at the pace at which
Timor-Leste is forging its relationships abroad. We are
pleased to note that it has established diplomatic
relations with almost all States members of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations, and has
become a member of the World Bank, the Asian
Development Bank and the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries. As a small island State,
Timor-Leste needs the support of the international and
regional communities in its economic reconstruction
efforts and in building a solid, united and peaceful
country.

My delegation takes particular note of the
constructive approach demonstrated by President
Megawati Soekarnoputri of Indonesia. The creation of
a Joint Ministerial Commission for Bilateral
Cooperation to address issues of mutual concern in the
maintenance of the Joint Border Committee is a real
and significant step forward. This shows the genuine
commitment of both countries to the success and
prosperity of Timor-Leste.

Finally, let me commend the people of
Timor-Leste and its leaders for their undying spirit in
rebuilding their country. Although their road to
independence was long and difficult, the resilience and
true dedication of the people of Timor-Leste for the
well-being of their country will certainly make that
small island State a prosperous and peaceful place to
live.

