Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation is grateful
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his presence and
his briefing at this important meeting.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the representatives of Iran and Kuwait on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

My delegation also welcomes the Secretary-
General's recent visit to the Middle East region, including
to Gaza, which highlighted the unsustainable situation
on the ground. Malaysia also welcomed the convening
of an international interministerial conference on 3 June
in Paris. We fully support the French initiative, which
complements the efforts of the Middle East Quartet
and seeks to galvanize international support to recreate
the political horizon for a two-State solution. We look
forward to follow-up actions that advance the prospects
for peace, including the identification of meaningful
incentives to the parties and the holding of another
international conference later this year involving the
parties in conflict.

My delegations acknowledges the efforts of the
members of the Middle East Quartet in coming up with
its first-ever report earlier this month. The report was
timely, given the deteriorating situation on the ground,
which, if left unchecked, might soon render a two-State
solution unattainable. Like everyone else, Malaysia had
high expectations for the report. The least we expected
of the report was for it to be based on the principles
and values of the United Nations, the rule of law and
relevant Security Council resolutions. In that regard,
we regret the fact that the report completely sidesteps
the question of the illegality of the Israeli settlements,
despite comprehensive discussion of the issue of the
settlements in the report. The Quartet report describes
only the outposts as illegal, and not the settlements,
which reflects the erroneous positions of the occupier
on the matter. Subscribing to that position would
undoubtedly tarnish the integrity and impartiality
of the Quartet. It is indisputable that the settlements
are illegal under international law and therefore not a
matter of negotiations. That has been clearly laid out in
the Fourth Geneva Convention, the Hague Convention
respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land, the
Council's own resolutions and the 2004 decisions of the
International Court of Justice.

We must not stay silent on the crucial issue of the
settlements, as the settlements constitute the main
threat to the viability of the two-State solution and
the main source of frustration, anger and despair that
feeds the continuous cycle of violence. It is foolhardy
not to express that truth. Just days after the publication
of the report, the Israeli authorities announced new
settlement expansions in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem and the additional financing of nearly
$13 million for Israeli settlements in the occupied West
Bank. Indeed, by being silent on the illegality of the
settlements in such an important document, we end up
shielding and perpetuating illegal actions that erode the
two-State solution.

In trying to identify threats to the two-State solution,
the Quartet report focused on the symptoms rather
than the root causes of the conflict. Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon said earlier this year that "it is human
nature [for oppressed people] to react to occupation"
(S/PV. 7610, p. 2). And, as the representative of Egypt,
echoing the Secretary-General, also said, that "often
serves as a potent incubator of hate and extremism".
However, conspicuously missing and glaringly absent
from the report's recommendations was the need to end
half a century of brutal, repressive, discriminatory and
racist military occupation by Israel.

While we categorically do not condone any acts of
violence and terrorism, regardless of the perpetrators
and victims, we need to address the factors that trigger
the widespread anger, frustration and despair in the first
place. Burying our heads in the sand and pretending that
the Violence exists in a vacuum defies sound logic and
common sense. Until the root causes are addressed, we
will be stretching our imagination rather too far if we
expect the Palestinians to stop resisting the occupier.

There are those who expect the Palestinians to
engage in solely peaceful resistance to the repressive
occupation, but in order to successfully engage
in peaceful resistance, there need to be legal and
legitimate avenues and platforms to channel their
resistance away from violence. Such a platform would
take the form of an impartial judicial system, to which
the Palestinians could turn to when their homes are
illegally demolished, their lands seized or their family
members killed extrajudicially. It may also consist of
a political platform for meaningful negotiations to
resolve the final status issues or for the exercise of
their democratic rights, or a multilateral platform to
provide protection from gross violations of human
rights. Sadly, they have no recourse to justice. The
stark reality is that, when the Palestinians go to the
Israeli courts to seek legal regress, such as for violence
perpetuated by Israeli forces or settlers against them
and their property, 94 per cent of the cases are simply
closed without prosecution. When civil society and the
media have tried to highlight gross violations of human
rights perpetuated against the Palestinians, they have
been arrested, intimidated, defamed or shot down.

When Palestinians engage in peaceful
demonstrations against the illegal policies of the
occupier, they, even children, have been shot at and
killed by the Israeli forces. At the international level,
when the Palestinians try to seek accountability and
justice in regard to war crimes and crimes against
humanity by turning to the International Criminal Court,
many try to block them and criticize their attempts as
unilateral measures. A similar rebuff occurred when
the Palestinians have turned to the United Nations to
seek protection, even if the effort is completely in line
with international law. Needless to say, any attempts to
bring their legitimate grievances to the Security Council
would be vetoed. Furthermore, when the Palestinians
seek peace through the comprehensive Arab Peace
Initiative, they found no genuine partner on the other
side seeking to bring about a two-State solution and no
honest broker with a moral standing to take an objective
position and pressure both sides to reach an agreement.
Even the French diplomatic initiative has been rejected
outright by the occupier.

Such are the contextual realities for the occupied
Palestinians that have been fomenting anger and
despair. Unfortunately, they have found no one who
could make a difference to bear witness to their
suffering and relieve them from the dehumanizing acts
that they are being forced to endure. Yet, ironically, we
demand of the Palestinians that they cease violence,
while at the same time we keep closing all doors to
legal and legitimate avenues to enable them to achieve
their legitimate aspirations through peaceful means.

The tragic circumstances of the Palestinian people
are nothing new. This Chamber has laboriously debated
it for decades. It is time for a change. The conflicting
parties need to take affirmative steps to reverse the
threats to the two-State solution identified in the report.
The role of the Security Council is crucial in overseeing
the implementation of the affirmative measures
and in creating the conditions for the resumption of
meaningful negotiations.

Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council is entrusted with the maintenance
of international peace and security. Therefore, while
the Council has endorsed the Middle East Quartet's
mediation of the peace process, that does not mean that
the Council has abrogated its responsibility with regard
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Instead, the Council
should use the various tools at its disposal to strongly
support the Quartet's efforts to vigorously influence the
parties' behaviour and to salvage the two-State solution.
Malaysia stands ready to engage constructively with
other Council members in responding to the Secretary-
General's message that surely they deserve a horizon
of hope.

