Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate. I should also like to
thank Ms. Amos, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs; Mr. Le Roy, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Affairs; and Mr. Simonovie,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights and
Head of the New York Office of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Today wars and conflicts have encroached upon
safe, densely populated cities and villages. Every
citizen is now in the line of fire and can lose his or her
life, arbitrarily, at any time. Thus living far from the
threat of armed conflict has become an indispensable
humanitarian requirement for a safe and decent life.
That is the basic challenge that all individual States
and the international community as a whole must strive
to meet.

States are primarily responsible for protecting
their civilians and accountable for grave violations of
international humanitarian law. Thus, it is a top priority
for the international community to strive to support
national efforts in that regard. We recall here the
obligation of occupying Powers to protect civilians
under occupation and to safeguard the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the needy, pursuant to the
provisions of international law and international
humanitarian law, particularly The Hague and Geneva
Conventions. We reiterate our condemnation of the
ongoing Israeli blockade of Gaza and restrictions on
the delivery of humanitarian assistance thereto. We call
on the Security Council to assume its responsibility to
end that anachronistic practice.

It is also important to provide reliable and up-to-
date information to the Security Council on imminent
threats to civilians at any time or place. Such
information allowed the Council to respond swiftly to
the need to protect civilians in Libya by adopting
resolution 1973 (2011). There is no doubt that the
adoption and timely implementation of that resolution
prevented a looming humanitarian disaster in Benghazi
and other areas in Libya. In that regard, we emphasize
the need for all parties in Libya to respect international
humanitarian law. We condemn the use of heavy
weapons and cluster munitions against civilians,
particularly in the light of the suffering experienced in
southern Lebanon due to Israel's use of those brutal
weapons in its 2006 aggression.

Lebanon also stresses the need to hold
responsible the perpetrators of crimes against the
Libyan people. Indeed, accountability promotes
compliance with international law. The trial of those
responsible and the payment of compensation represent
the administration of justice and deter potential
violators. We wish in that regard to reiterate our
demand that Israel pay compensation for the material
and human losses incurred in the war it launched
against Lebanon in 2006.

While the Security Council's actions against
Libya were exceptional and represented the last resort
in addressing an imminent threat, the Security Council
and the international community have means of
protection at their disposal. The sustainable protection
of civilians cannot be achieved unless we address the
root causes of conflict. The United Nations must
therefore spare no effort in promoting the political
settlement of disputes, particularly through
comprehensive dialogue, national reconciliation and
reintegration.

The rule of law is at the heart of protection. We
must strive to help States emerging from conflict to
build their judicial and security institutions and to
foster a culture of protection. Finally, the protection of
civilians should remain the focus of the international
community's efforts. We have a collective
responsibility to protect the voiceless millions on
whom conflicts are imposed, to horrifying effect. We
hope that everyone will step up to the plate.

