Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to
congratulate Peru on a successful presidency of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to thank
Mr. Mladenov for his important briefing.

We meet at a perilous time in the Middle East.
The Secretary-General, Mr. Guterres, described the
situation as chaos and a threat to peace and security.
The gaps are huge, and the shattered hopes should
intensify our determination to sustain peace.

The Palestinian question and support for the
Palestinian people and their legitimate rights remain
a central tenet of the Arab consensus. That was
reaffirmed at the summit held in Dhahran, Saudi
Arabia, in mid-April when Arab leaders, once again,
emphasized their support for the right of the State
of Palestine to its sovereignty over all the occupied
Palestinian territories since 1967, including East
Jerusalem. Jerusalem took centre stage in the summit,
and the Arab leaders unanimously condemned and
rejected the decision to recognize Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel, as they rejected moving the United
States Embassy to Jerusalem.

In the meantime, the peaceful demonstrations
by civilian Palestinians in Gaza were met by Israeli
bullets, and led to the death of dozens of Palestinians
and injured thousands. Lebanon added its voice to
the voice of the Arab leaders and the rest of the world
in condemning the killing of innocent civilians and
called for an international investigation commission to
prosecute those responsible for those crimes.

Despite the situation, the Arab world is still
committed to solving the conflict peacefully. The Arab
leaders, at their summit, including Lebanon, reaffirmed
their commitment to peace as a strategic option. They
called for resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict on the
basis of the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002, ending the
occupation and returning to the 1967 borders. The
message remains that there is no alternative to the
two-State solution based on all the relevant United
Nations resolutions. How many innocent people should
be killed, how many summits should be held and how
many calls and condemnations should be enough for
the Council to act and resume its role as the primary
organ responsible for peace and security in the world?
There is consensus in Lebanon about a policy
of disassociation towards the conflict in Syria.
Nevertheless, because of the presence of over
1.2 million displaced persons in my country, Lebanon
joins the international community in its call for a
political solution to the Syrian conflict. It was only this
week that the President of the Council of Ministers of
Lebanon, His Excellency Mr. Saad Hariri, urged the
international community to be more determined to find
a solution in Syria and considered any delay harmful to
the displaced Syrians, as well as to Lebanon.

In the midst of that regional turmoil, Lebanon
remains steadfast in its efforts to preserve its stability
through a series ofsteps. The Government was successful
in holding three important conferences in partnership
with Lebanon's friends. The Rome conference, hosted
with the Italian Government's support in March, helped
generate assistance for the Lebanese Armed Forces and
security services. The conference in Paris under the
auspices of the French presidency earlier this month
brought about much-needed support for the Lebanese
economy. Lastly, the Brussels conference, held this
week, promised to bring invaluable help to Lebanon to
withstand the burden of the displaced Syrians in the
country, although the pledges fell below 15 per cent of
the appeal.

Lebanon is very thankful for the generous support
of its friends in the international community that
understand the central role that Lebanon plays in the
stability of the region. Domestically, the Lebanese will
go to the polls on 6 May to vote for a new Parliament.
Those elections are very important because they
strengthen the well-established democratic traditions
in Lebanon and send a message about the importance
of the ballot box in politics. But Lebanon is still facing
serious challenges and threats to its security and
stability, especially from the daily Israeli violations
of its sovereignty by air, land and sea. Israel is still
insisting on building a wall on occupied Lebanese
territory and in disputed areas.

The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,
through the tripartite mechanism, is trying to reduce
tensions and resolve disputes on the ground. But that
is not an alternative to the full implementation of
United Nations resolutions that call for the full Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied Lebanese territory
and respect for its territorial and maritime borders.
Lebanon is committed to the complete implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety, and expects the
Council to shoulder its responsibility to bring Israel to
do the same, and stop its threats to Lebanon.

The last two days witnessed hundreds of world
leaders and representatives in this building talking about
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Ifthere is anything
they agreed on it was the importance of addressing the
root causes of conflicts. There is no place that needs
that more than my region. Ending the occupation in
Palestine and withdrawing from the occupied Lebanese
and Arab territories can go a long way towards bringing
peace and stability to the Middle East. There is a need
for peacemakers and honest brokers to start a peace
process, and have the commitment and will to see it
through. Only then can we have an open debate on the
Middle East that does not dwell on conflict, bloodshed
and despair, and delivers a hopeful message.

