Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I should like to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting on the situation in Kosovo. My delegation
wishes to express its support and appreciation for the
Secretary-General's very substantive report
(S/2003/42l) and especially to thank Mr. Annabi for
the update that he presented to us this morning.

My delegation welcomes the important progress
registered in several areas, as provided in Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999): the transfer of powers
and responsibilities to local institutions, the
establishment of municipal administration and of
multi-ethnic civil services, and progress in stabilizing
the rule of law. The Kosovo Police Service continues to
increase in numbers and to improve its working
methods.

However, despite that progress, some
shortcomings remain, as detailed in the Secretary-
General's report and as pointed out this morning by Mr.
Annabi. There is the fragility of the political situation
and the inadequate dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina; there are acts of intimidation, threats and
violence directed against minorities, displaced persons
and refugees; and there are still some human rights
abuses for ethnic reasons. Those are important areas in
which insufficient progress has thus far been achieved.
Also, constructive dialogue on practical matters of
mutual interest between Belgrade and Pristina must be
intensified in order to achieve concrete results in this
process. In addition, Belgrade and Pristina should exert
influence in combating violence, in strengthening the
rule of law and in maximizing the effectiveness of the
international community's efforts.

Resolution 1244 (1999) continues to be the basis
of the international community's policy for Kosovo.
We wish to express our appreciation for the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Steiner, with a view to attaining the objectives of
resolution 1244 (1999) and of the Constitutional
Framework. The fulfilment of those targets is essential
to determine Kosovo's future and requires full
commitment by all parties. Kosovo's leaders must
therefore demonstrate commitment within the existing
framework.

My delegation remains concerned about the
situation of internally displaced persons and refugees
and about the prevailing violence. We wish to express
our appreciation to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
for their valuable work on the return of refugees; it is
important to create conditions favourable for their
return. There is also a need to continue monitoring the
human rights situation closely.

Let me conclude by reiterating that the policy of
"standards before status" remains an achievable
objective, and by encouraging all parties involved in
this process to work for peace and stability with a View
to creating a multi-ethnic and democratic society
capable of reintegrating all of the population of
Kosovo.

