Mr. Fulci (Italy): Allow me at the outset, Sir, to offer
my sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. Having been privileged
to serve with you for many years in another forum, I knew
from the first moment that you began to exercise this
function that you would be very successful.

Your predecessor, Ambassador J ean-Bernard Merimee,
the Permanent Representative of France, with his brilliant
presidency of the Council last month, once more confirmed
the high professionalism that has won him universal
admiration and respect.

Italy welcomes the adoption of the resolution on the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) until 8 December 1995.
The resolution marks the beginning of a new phase of
cooperation between the United Nations and Rwanda - a
phase which, we are convinced, will be characterized by
unity of intent and of objectives.

I wish to take this opportunity to express our sincere
satisfaction at the spirit of compromise and flexibility that
has prevailed during the course of the consultations held
over the last few days. This spirit has made possible the
launching of a new, significant phase in the operation in
Rwanda, one that shifts the focus from peace-keeping to
confidence-building. All the conditions seem to be set now
for the Rwandese operation to become another United
Nations success story like those in Cambodia,
El Salvador, Haiti and Mozambique.

In this respect, let me pay homage to the diplomatic
skill and balance shown by our colleague Ambassador
Manzi Bakuramutsa, the Permanent Representative of
Rwanda. In our opinion, that skill and balance were
instrumental in reaching an agreement that satisfied all
concerned.

The resolution realistically adjusts the mandate of
UNAMIR to the conditions prevailing in the country
today, which are characterized by renewed stability. There
are numerous signs that testify to the gradual return to
normality in Rwanda. To complete this positive overall
picture, it will now be necessary for the national judicial
system to be reactivated and for the International Tribunal
to begin operating without delay. This would also help
reinforce the climate of confidence, and thus help towards
a definitive solution to the refugee problem, a solution
which we hope will come soon. In this respect, I should
like to express our deep appreciation to Zaire and to other
neighbouring countries for carrying a substantial part of
the burden of the refugee flow and for managing it
effectively.

We consider it significant that the subject of the
rearming militias and the supply of arms at refugee camps
are also dealt with in the resolution. We consider of equal
significance the clarification of certain aspects of the arms
embargo in order to give the international community
more effective means against those who would act to
destabilize Rwanda. We support, without reservation, the
measures adopted today in this regard.

Italy also wishes to emphasize particularly the
resolution's call for the convening of a regional
conference on security and stability in the Great Lakes
area. We are convinced that the recent developments in
the region should now lead to the adoption of broader
confidence-building measures. These would greatly help
to restore stability in the entire region and set in motion
the necessary work for rehabilitation and reconstruction.

In conclusion, Italy believes that the Security
Council has today adopted an effective instrument in
support of the efforts of the Rwandese authorities and of
the international community towards long-term solutions
to the problems of the area.

