Mr. Jokonya (Zimbabwe): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. My
delegation also welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Leonard She
Okitundu. We appreciate his very comprehensive
contribution to this debate. We also welcome the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Namanga Ngongi. His appointment to replace Mr.
Kamel Morjane is a demonstration of the confidence
and trust the international community has in him to
steer the Congo process, a challenge of our time.

The timing of this meeting, coming immediately
after the inter-Congolese dialogue in Addis Ababa,
could not be more than perfect. Zimbabwe regards it as
a privilege to pronounce itself before the Security
Council on an issue of such importance.

The peace talks that have just ended in Addis
Ababa have underscored the need for the international
community to prodigiously endow the peace process
with the requisite resources that would make it possible
for the inter-Congolese dialogue to become an all-
inclusive process. It is most unfortunate that only 70 of
the 320 expected delegates attended the Addis Ababa
plenary session. It must be recalled that the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement conceived the inter-Congolese
dialogue as an all-inclusive process. For 70 delegates
to pretend that they genuinely represented the diverse
political opinions and aspirations of the Congolese
nation is a violation of the spirit of Lusaka.

My delegation welcomes, therefore, South
Africa's offer to host the next session of the inter-
Congolese dialogue. But I must quickly add that South
Africa's decision to step into the breach does not
excuse the international community from its duty to
drive the peace process in the Great Lakes region.
Against the backdrop that the Security Council has
placed a great premium on the inter-Congolese
dialogue in previous Council meetings, I do not need to
remind its members that the absence of logistical
support could unravel the peace process.

Even as we sit here to consider the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it has been
reported that renegade officers of the Ugandan People's
Defence Force have formed a rebel group called the
People's Redemption Army - one wonders whom they
are redeeming. This group is training and camped in
the Rwanda-controlled part of the eastern Congo.

Apportioning blame to Kinshasa for the slow
progress in Addis Ababa by the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie (RCD)-Goma and the
Mouvement pour la liberation du Congo (MLC) rings
hollow, when we know from reliable information that
just last weekend the Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA)
and its Congolese allies in RCD-Goma laid siege to
Ugandan-backed Congolese rebels and captured the
north-eastern town of Kanyabayongo. This information
can be verified by the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Foreign Minister She Okitundu's submission is a
challenge to the Security Council, a challenge to ensure
that its resolutions are not violated with impunity.
Despite resolutions calling for the demilitarization of
Kisangani, Rwanda and its allies in RCD-Goma have
not only disregarded these calls, but have set up
governmental structures - a de facto balkanization of
the Congo. Yet the Security Council has always called
for respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

When President Joseph Kabila addressed the
Security Council on 2 February 2001, he recognized
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement as the road map for
the United Nations engagement in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo peace process. In accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement acknowledges the indivisibility of
the Congo.

The demilitarization of Kisangani merits special
attention by the Council. In this regard, my delegation
urges those Lusaka signatories responsible for the
destruction of Kisangani to fulfil their ceasefire
obligations. The joke by RCD-Goma that it is
protecting human rights through the illegal occupation
of parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is not
only farcical, but a blatant disregard for the rights of
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
makes a mockery of the United Nations and should be
dismissed with the contempt that it deserves.

Not to be outdone, the Ugandan-backed MLC has
also been violating the ceasefire, as pointed out in the
submission by Foreign Minister She Okitundu. The so-
called withdrawal of uninvited foreign forces, which
has been accompanied by pomp and ceremony, must be
seen for what it is: a facade. Both Uganda and Rwanda
are reinforcing and consolidating their deployment in
eastern Congo, as has been vividly put before the
Council by the Foreign Minister. How long shall these
belligerent forces continue to hoodwink the
international community?

Foreign occupation is always accompanied by
gross violations of human rights, and this is the case in
eastern Congo. The Council has been informed by both
State and non-State actors of the suffering visited upon
the Congolese people by the occupation forces. It must
be emphasized that under the United Nations Charter
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has the right to
demand the withdrawal from its territory of uninvited
foreign troops. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
has gone further, and has disarmed the Rwandan rebels
and handed them over to the United Nations, thus
removing the pretext for Rwanda's invasion of the
Congo. But, to the chagrin of all and sundry, instead of
Rwanda's withdrawing its forces and being grateful for
the assistance by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, it is actually deploying fresh battalions. It is
time for the international community to stand up to all
these blatant violations of international agreements.
The continued presence of uninvited foreign troops
does not further the peace dividend, but, rather, helps
to unravel the process.

In conclusion, my delegation acknowledges the
indomitable will of the Congolese people in their quest
to shape a new political destiny for posterity. Despite
the cataclysmic conflict that has resulted in the death of
more than 2 million people - mostly in the occupied
territories of the Congo - the inter-Congolese
dialogue remains on schedule, and must be supported
by the international community.

I have often avoided apportioning blame, but
today I urge the Security Council to impress upon those
Lusaka signatories that support the rebels in the Congo
to encourage their allies to toe the line. We all know
that the rebels are pawns that can be ordered to comply.

