Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, for allowing me to speak on behalf of the
European Union and to report on a recent European
Union mission to Sierra Leone and other West African
countries.

Arriving in Freetown, it is not far to go from the
Hastings airport to the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) headquarters on the
peninsula, but it is still far enough to see that things are
changing in Sierra Leone. Freetown is a rapidly
growing city, full of activities everywhere. One can see
people returning who had to flee in the past, and
refugees coming in from camps and elsewhere as well.

But this involves also driving past another kind of
camp - the camp of the mutilated. That is where some
of the international non-governmental organizations are
helping many of those who suffered from the worst
atrocities of the rebels, those who lost their ears and
their arms in the most cruel acts of terror, committed
also on women and children. This is a reminder of what
has occurred during the tragic civil war in Sierra
Leone.

To meet some of the children in this camp,
deprived not only of their parents and their childhood
but also of parts of their own bodies, is to feel not only
sympathy but also outrage over these awful crimes.

From this camp, it is just a few miles down the
road to UNAMSIL headquarters. They also bustle with
life. United Nations officials of many nationalities are
hard at work there, and there is a feeling of confidence
in the air. When I visited this very same place two and
half years ago on behalf of one of the Security Council
sanctions committees, I remember that building being
frighteningly empty. Some Nigerian soldiers were
standing out in the hallways, but the rebels had been
sighted just a few miles outside Freetown, and, a few
weeks later, they had taken over the city.

Coming back now, on behalf of the troika of the
European Union, we found the ceasefire holding. We
saw the beginning of the dialogue between the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and the Government
of Sierra Leone. The RUF, I understand, has even been
offered one of the Government buildings for rent and
has been issued a temporary registration as a political
party. This is real progress. It speaks well for those
who are participating in the dialogue, but it also calls
for a special tribute to the men and women of
UNAMSIL. Their efforts to stabilize the situation and
to help with disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration are indeed leading to results.

We heard firsthand from the United Nations
observers who are actively engaged in collecting and
destroying weapons and ammunition about the steady
progress of these efforts, with the possibility of
concluding the disarmament phase perhaps as soon as
this coming August.

Of course, it is still too early to be sure, but it
seems as if President Kabbah and his Government are
on the right track. The plans for national elections can
soon start to be implemented. We hope that the former
rebels will be fully reintegrated, taking into account the
need for justice to be served with respect to the
atrocities committed.

Civilian institutions and basic social services also
need to be re-established in the former rebel territories.
The European Union stands ready to support this
peaceful and positive development in Sierra Leone,
including the holding of free and fair elections, as we
have supported the work of UNAMSIL. The European
Union and its member States are now looking actively
at the possibility of increasing our contribution to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme.

Let me also commend the Council and the
Secretary-General for having responded to the
challenging situation in Sierra Leone in the past not by
withdrawing but by reinforcing in time of crisis. That,
as we see now, was indeed the right thing to do.

The European Union troika came to Sierra Leone
as part of a mission to the entire Mano River region.
The political and humanitarian crisis there has long
been of particular concern to the Union. We started our
mission by going to Mali, to the presidency of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), to express our support for what it and
President Konare are doing to find a political solution
to the crisis in the region.

We found the President of Mali to be particularly
concerned about the deterioration of relations between
Guinea and Liberia. He has made several attempts to
organize a meeting between the leaders of those two
countries, but those have so far failed, despite the help
given also by the President of Senegal and the
President of Nigeria.

President Konare said that he hoped that the
international community would support the efforts of
ECOWAS and assist in pressing for a dialogue between
Liberia and Guinea. The European Union is ready to
give such support. One of the main messages of the
troika mission was to encourage the parties here to
solve the conflict by political means.

There are indeed serious differences that have to
be overcome. President Conte of Guinea, for example,
reiterated his position that he would not enter into a
direct dialogue with President Taylor of Liberia as long
as his own country was being violently provoked. It
will not come as a surprise to the Council that
President Taylor gave a different description of the
conflict in the border area. He claims that Liberia was
being attacked by Guinea, but that he nonetheless is
open to talks with President Conte.
ECOWAS is seriously considering putting up a
border force between Guinea and Liberia, which could
help prevent a direct military confrontation between
those two countries. The European Union could
support such a plan, provided that the mandate is
reasonable and the countries concerned give their
consent and cooperation. President Conte' said that he
was not against a border force as a matter of principle,
but he insisted that it should be deployed in Liberia and
Sierra Leone, and not on his own territory.

President Taylor in Liberia said that he accepted
the force, while there was substantial scepticism in
Sierra Leone towards the idea, based perhaps primarily
on the limited size that is currently envisaged.

President Konare also expressed a strong wish for
increased cooperation in general between the European
Union and ECOWAS, and we have responded in the
same spirit. ECOWAS is becoming more and more
involved in conflict prevention, but in many cases it
lacks resources and capacity to implement all its own
decisions. The European Union has started to support
the building-up of such capacity here, and we
encourage contributions from others as well.

When the Security Council earlier this year
adopted a new sanctions regime for Liberia, this was
strongly endorsed by the European Union. We believe
all efforts must be made to end Liberia's military and
financial support for and contacts with the rebel groups
in Sierra Leone and elsewhere in the region. We also
approve of the way these new sanctions have been
structured, not only directly targeting arms transfers
but also regulating the diamond trade and imposing
travel bans.

Meeting with President Taylor in Monrovia, we
repeated to him our endorsement of these sanctions. We
said that it was up to him and his Government to prove
to the international community that they fully comply
with the demands of Security Council resolution 1343
(2001). It is our understanding that the political and
psychological impact of the sanctions is being felt
quite strongly in Liberia. In that sense, these sanctions
already work. President Taylor obviously thinks that
they are unfair, but he said to us that he accepts the
sanctions as a political reality and that he would
comply with the demands imposed on him.

That, of course, remains to be seen. President
Taylor particularly emphasized the need for an
independent United Nations mechanism that could
control sanctions. We, on our side, suggested that the
best course for the Government of Liberia would be to
cooperate fully with the sanctions Committee chaired
ably by Ambassador Mahbubani. That Committee has
an important responsibility in ensuring the effective
implementation of the sanctions as long as they are in
force.

The humanitarian situation in the Mano River
region continues to be extremely serious. Hundreds of
thousands of refugees are still suffering from previous
hostilities in Sierra Leone as well as from new clashes
along the border between Guinea and Liberia. The
European Union recognizes the substantial efforts
made by the Government of Guinea in hosting most of
these refugees. We welcomed the assurances on
refugee security that were given to the new United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees when he
visited Guinea in February.

As regards the situation in northern Liberia, in
and around Lofa County, the actual situation is still
unclear to us. We hear estimates of very large numbers
of internally displaced persons, but it is difficult to
establish reliable statistics, since very few external
actors are permitted access to the area. Just in the last
few days, we have heard from refugees fleeing by sea
of a deteriorating situation. Also the human rights
situation in Liberia is getting worse and should be
given increased attention. The European Union intends
to conduct an open and frank dialogue with the
Liberian Government on this and on the need for a
global solution to the crisis.

We found in the Mano River countries a strong
fear that the conflict there would spread to
neighbouring countries. If instability persists in
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, there is a clear risk
that we will see an economy in the future dominated by
illicit trafficking in arms and goods, by mercenaries
and other elements with potentially destabilizing
effects for the whole region.

It is the View of the European Union that the
humanitarian and political crisis in this area cannot be
solved without a direct dialogue between the
Governments concerned. President Kabbah's initiative
to engage the countries of Mano River in a dialogue
could be a first step, one that we would like to support.
It is also vital that the international community - all
of us - act in a coordinated manner in basic
confidence-building measures. However welcome,
stabilization in only one country is not sufficient for
overall stability in the subregion.

The European Union and its member States make
up an important part of the donor community in this
region. We would like to increase our coordination
with others, in particular with the United Nations. We
see scope also for more general cooperation between
the European Union and the United Nations in West
Africa and in the Mano River region in particular.

This statement has dealt with a region far away
from Europe, from our own continent. That does not
lessen our concern over a political and humanitarian
crisis that has led to so much unnecessary suffering.
These are countries rich in natural resources, with the
most beautiful scenery. The people around the Mano
River should be able to develop their land, look
forward to a prosperous future and leave civil strife
behind. Their children should be able to go to school,
not have to go to war. For the United Nations, as for
the European Union and the world community at large,
there could be no finer mission than to assist these
people in making that come true.

