Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Like others, I
pay tribute to our good friend and colleague Staffan.
It was a sad day when we learned that he would step
down. He has given the most enormous service to the
United Nations. I personally have worked with him on
Afghanistan and other issues, and his track record in
that country, in Iraq and in Lebanon speaks for itself.
He has tried harder than anyone to bring a resolution to
this truly terrible conflict in Syria.

As he himself said, he has worked on it longer than
the First World War lasted, exceeding the tenure of his
predecessors, Mr. Brahimi and Kofi Annan. I think
as the tribute to him showed, there is not a person in
the United Nations who does not feel very deeply the
amount of commitment, energy, resolve and passion
that he has brought to this most difficult of all United
Nations Envoy tasks.

We would like, through him, to also salute his
wonderful team, who have supported him - both the
members sitting behind him and some of those whom
we have seen via videoconference, and whom I also
personally know from previous incarnations. I would
like to welcome Geir Pedersen, but I will save that for
another time, when Geir has taken over. But I hope he
knows that we are very indebted to him and that we
recognize how much we owe him.

I think that, as other speakers have said, it is deeply
regrettable that there has not been more progress on the
constitutional committee. It is unfathomable that - for
an idea that was set up to advance the political process
at Sochi - there has not been more progress, because
it ought to have been possible to have made progress in
that area. There are just a handful of days left within
which to meet President Putin's self-imposed deadline.

But even withjust a few days to go, if progress can
be made, then we absolutely urge the Syrian authorities
and their supporters to take that opportunity. But when
all is said and done, the United Nations can only join
a process that is balanced. That is the fundamental
tenet on the basis of which the United Nations assists
Governments and the international community. We will
support the Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-
General to the hilt in upholding that very central tenet.
I think it was the French representative who made the
point that the Astana guarantors had submitted at the
moment an unbalanced and unworkable list, and we
would absolutely agree with him. Again, even in those
last few days, if there can be a genuine consultation
process, then there should be one in order to achieve a
meaningful reconciliation.

Buthould also like to say that we are meeting almost
on the third anniversary of the adoption of resolution
2254 (2015), and it remains the best agreement we have
made and the closest we have come to managing to work
towards an end to this crisis. It is a huge failure of the
international community - not of the United Nations,
but of the international community - that collectively
we have not been able to advance this more. But above
all, and very obviously, it is a huge failure of the Syrian
Government to protect its people that has led us to this
point, and the Syrian Government's refusal to work
towards the implementation ofresolution 2254 (2015) is
at the absolute heart of all the horrors and all the awful
things that have been inflicted on Syria and its people.

The central problem in the whole Syria conflict has
always been the Syrian authorities' refusal to address
the legitimate grievances of the Syrian people. That
is how the conflict came about in the first place. It
remains a central tenet, an essential element of what
has to be done if anything is ever to move forward. The
Special Envoy has often come to the Council unable to
record any positive movement by the regime.

I just want to stress again that, without movement
in that direction and whatever happens militarily,
Syria will not see reconstruction or rehabilitation
into the international community. Its people will not
see representative government, and whatever interim
arrangement comes into force in Syria, it will not help
the Syrian authorities hold their territory or govern
it, and it will certainly not do anything to address
the legitimate aspirations of all of Syria's people,
regardless of the religious or ethnic community from
which they come. As such a central point, rehabilitation
means being able to stop a reversion to the tensions and
the situation that existed before the conflict. Without
addressing the aspirations of all of Syria's people and a
genuinely representative Government, there will never
be an end to the suffering of the Syrian people. I really
think that the Council should look ahead, focus and
keep that question of what will most help the Syrian
people in the future right at the forefront of its plans
and thinking.

Finally, if I may, I would like to say a word about
Da'esh. The United Kingdom has been a leading
member of the Global Coalition. We are proud of our
role, alongside other partners, in the fight against
Da'esh. Since military operations began, the coalition
and its partners in Syria and Iraq have captured the vast
majority of Da'esh territory and even in recent days
important advances have been made in the last area
of eastern Syria that Da'esh still occupies. The Royal
Air Force of the United Kingdom was active in just the
past 24 hours. Much remains to be done in the global
campaign, but we must not lose sight of the threat
that Da'esh continues to pose, even when it no longer
holds territory.

