Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of April and to
express our appreciation for the impressive stewardship
of the Council by your predecessor.

Israel and I personally would like to pay tribute to
the outgoing Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), Sir Jeremy Greenstock of Great
Britain, for his skilful and inspiring leadership. In the
difficult months after the horrific attacks of 11
September 2001, the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
under the leadership of Ambassador Greenstock,
embarked on an important initiative to assist and
monitor State implementation of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001). His country's leadership should
be duly applauded for the vanguard role it has assumed
in the global campaign against terrorism.

We wish Ambassador Greenstock's successor, the
Ambassador of Spain, Inocencio Arias, every success
in this crucial global effort and assure him of Israel's
full cooperation.

To many countries around this table, terrorism is
fortunately still a virtual or theoretical matter, but
Israel speaks from bitter personal experience. We are
the victims of a very real and bloody daily ritual; the
victims of the most brutal, evil, cynical terror directed
at our children and at our very future. At my last talk
before the Security Council on 20 February, I spoke of
this future. I expressed the hope that my grandson's
nursery school would no longer require the protection
of armed guards against vicious and deliberate attacks.
I expressed the hope that terrorism would cease.
Unfortunately, the terrorism in Israel has
continued. It is with a heavy and mournful heart that I
recount these recent immoralities. Just last Sunday, a
depraved suicide attack was perpetrated in the peaceful
coastal city of Netanya against innocent civilians.
Ramadan Shallah, Secretary-General of the terrorist
organization Islamic Jihad, which operates freely from
Damascus, Syria, aided by a member of this Council,
proudly claimed responsibility for the attack. In a
statement issued from his Damascus office, Shallah
vowed to carry out more attacks.

On 5 March, in an attack described by United
Nations Special Coordinator Terje Roed-Larsen just
recently as an act of mass murder and an outrageous
waste of life, a suicide bomb ripped apart a public bus
in the northern Israeli city of Haifa. The bus was filled
with young children and students en route to Haifa
University. Seventeen were killed and 53 wounded,
many of them civilians, by the powerful bomb, laden
with metal shrapnel in order to maximize the extent of
human injuries. In addition to these and other atrocious
attacks, innumerable incidents of terror are thwarted on
a daily basis by Israeli counter-terrorism efforts.

Terrorism kills indiscriminately. Terrorism knows
no border, nationality, race, age or religion. Terrorism
poses a threat to all free peoples, and therefore there
must be no distinction between good and bad terrorism,
between the military and social wings of terrorist
organizations. It is immoral to abuse the noble lexicon
of freedom to justify the mass murder of innocents and
to excuse these abhorrent acts for the advancement of a
political agenda. Repeated resolutions and declarations
of the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General uphold the principle that any
deliberate targeting of civilians for political ends is
wrong, unjustifiable and immoral, regardless of cause
or circumstance.

As the world was horrifically reminded on 11
September, if the fires of terrorism rage anywhere, they
pose a threat to peace and security everywhere.
Terrorism is epidemic, and any attempt to douse one
flame, one flare-up of this pervasive threat, while
expressing sympathy or understanding for another will
only undermine our efforts. Rather, we must strike at
its core: at regimes that nourish the germ of terror
through their support, inaction and complicity; at
regimes with the ability to transfer biological, chemical
and nuclear weapons to terrorists who have no
compunctions regarding their use; and at regimes like
those in Iran and Syria, a member of this body, that
actively support terrorism to further their agenda,
poking a finger into the eye of the CTC while raising
another in support of its efforts.

I encourage the CTC to exhibit the courage to
name and shame those States that continue to support
terrorism and compel every State to undertake a sincere
and irrevocable commitment to eradicating terrorism
from its own soil. I am encouraged that the call to
name and shame has today been reinforced. I hope it
will become the mantra of the CTC.

In accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), the
members of the international community must take
active and aggressive measures to destroy the financial
and organizational infrastructure of terrorism and to
address the venomous incitement that is pervasive in
the media and in the educational, religious and political
institutions of certain States.

The germ of terror is nourished by the inculcation
of fundamentalist, intolerant and rejectionist
ideologies. The glorification of murder as martyrdom is
a gravely flawed moral sanction for acts of mass
murder. No child, no baby, is born into this world
wanting to be a suicide bomber. In our region, we are
faced with countless crude and unmistakable examples
of how incitement kills. Children's textbooks should
not serve as manuals for hate.

Government-sanctioned incitement that nourishes
and sustains the terrorist agenda violates the most basic
human rights obligations of States. Our efforts to
combat terrorism and to implement resolution 1373
(2001) must focus not only on the practical support
provided to its perpetrators, but on the intolerant
ideology that nurtures the phenomenon itself.

Another emerging threat is posed by shoulder-
launched surface-to-air missiles capable of destroying
civilian aircraft at low altitudes. This threat was made
clear just a few months ago in Mombasa, Kenya, when
terrorists narrowly missed bringing down an Israeli
civilian airplane. This potentially catastrophic attack,
along with recent warnings of similar planned attacks
in other cities, underscores the necessity for States to
take urgent action to curb the proliferation of these
weapons and the access of terrorist groups to them. We
welcome the adoption of resolution 1450 (2002)
condemning the attacks in Kenya and we urge the CTC
to work towards the adoption of a universal standard to
defend against these weapons.

Man-portable air defence systems (MANPADS)
present the international counter-terrorism community
with one of its deepest crises ever, requiring worldwide
cooperation and coordination. The danger posed by
MANPADS is particularly great because of their
unique qualities: not only are they small, cheap and
easy to operate, but they enjoy freedom of location,
time, target and scale of operation. Terrorists know no
limits, and none of us are immune to their threat.

Professionals in the aviation security field are
already working to combat the MANPADS threat and
deserve the full backing of States. We believe that this
support should include investing in defensive onboard
technological systems, as well as tightening security
control over airport perimeters. Israel believes it is
critical that efforts to strengthen aviation security be
complemented by stronger controls over MANPADS
themselves. To ensure the success of efforts to prevent
terrorist access to MANPADS, selling States should
bear the responsibility of verifying end-user identity. In
addition, purchasing States must shoulder primary
responsibility for those systems' security, storage,
transfer, maintenance and monitoring. Furthermore, we
would encourage the establishment of an international
assistance programme to help countries combat the
danger of MANPADS falling into terrorist hands.

As a nation that has endured a terrible human loss
to the perils of terrorism since its establishment, we
support the noble efforts of the CTC and believe that
intensive international cooperation is a critical weapon
in the counter-terrorist arsenal. Israel stands ready and
willing to continue to share its knowledge and
expertise, learned from bitter experience, and to
collaborate in joint efforts aimed at coordinating and
strengthening our collective response.

In doing so, we hope that the CTC will continue
to take an increasingly proactive role in implementing
a policy of zero tolerance for terrorism. In the wake of
this global threat, we cannot confuse paperwork with
progress. Clearly, enhancing the legislative and
administrative tools available to States for fighting
terrorism, and capacity-building in general, are crucial
to our efforts. But the real test will always be the
implementation of commitments on the ground. The
filing of lengthy State reports cannot be allowed to
serve as a cover for those States determined to persist
in supporting and glorifying terrorism. Part of the
CTC's mandate under resolution 1373 (2001) should be
to test Member States' compliance not just on paper
but in practice.

Despite the daily threat of terrorism that plagues
our region and the existence of regimes that adopt
terrorism as a means to advance their political agenda,
we remain resolved to overcome the devastating impact
of suicide bomb attacks, which endanger both the
Israeli and Palestinian peoples.

Even in these dark times, we continue to believe
that the day will come when we and our children will
enjoy the fruits of peace. That dream leaves me

hopeful. I hope that the upcoming changes in the
Palestinian leadership will finally provide us with a
real partner for a secure peace. Israel hopes that those
changes will lead to concerted action to dismantle
terrorist infrastructure, delegitimize terrorist groups
and eliminate incitement.

By fighting terrorism wherever it breeds, by a
determined commitment to peace and to the end of
violence and hateful incitement, we can look forward
to peace and a better future for us all.

