Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Ms. Bintou Keita, the Permanent
Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), Mr. Maman Sidikou, whom I welcome and
thank particularly for his exemplary commitment, as
well as the Permanent Observer of the African Union,
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, and the Permanent
Observer of the European Union, Mr. Joao Vale de
Almeida, for their very informative briefings. They
demonstrate once again the full mobilization of the
international community in support of the G-5 Sahel
and the fight against terrorism in the Sahel.

Almost six months after the adoption of resolution
2391 (2017), significant progress has been made in the
operationalization of the Joint Force. Following the
Brussels conference and the signing of the technical
arrangement, the G-5 Sahel now has the necessary
support to move forward with the deployment of the
Joint Force. Progress on the ground is real, in particular
through the operationalization of command structures,
the deployment of the majority of troops expected in
the Central Sector, the adoption of the operational and
administrative framework of the force and the conduct
of new operations. The endorsement of the human
rights compliance framework is also a very positive
development, since it is an essential dimension for the
success of the Joint Force and its work in the service
of the people. Finally, the ongoing strengthening of
the Permanent Secretariat and the instruments at its
disposal ~ particularly financial - is a step in the
right direction and must be supported. All of that serves
to make the Joint force a potential model for an African
intervention force.

Despite our lofty ambitions and the sustained
momentum, we must be realistic and reasonable in our
short-term expectations. The Joint Force still faces many

challenges, including with regard to the availability
of critical equipment such as communications links
between its command structures and its contingents on
the ground. It cannot be operationalized overnight. It
is important that the G-5 Sahel States continue in the
coming months to make the best use of the support
provided to finalize the operationalization of the force
as a matter of priority. That includes the effective
deployment of all troops, as well as the transfer of
authority to the Force Commander. The establishment of
a police component is also crucial in order to guarantee
the judicial nature of the activities of the Joint Force
and the indispensable link with the criminal justice
system of each of the G-5 States. Finally, all allegations
of human rights violations must be investigated and, if
proved, prosecuted in accordance with the principles
set out in the compliance framework.

The fulfilment of pledged contributions is an
important condition for the G-5 Sahel States to make
progress in the operationalization of the Joint Force.
Our responsibility, as partners of the G-5 Sahel, is
therefore to do everything possible to ensure that such
support is provided as quickly as possible, which is
unfortunately not always the case today. When it comes
to the Joint Force, we cannot promote expectations that
are disconnected from the pace of implementation of our
own support. Indeed, we must advance on both fronts.

The coordination of bilateral aid is also crucial at
a time when the G-5 Sahel is facing a large influx of
goodwill, with limited means of absorption. That is
the point of the outstanding work carried out by the
European Union through the coordination hub at the
request of, and in close cooperation with, the G-5 Sahel
States. That work must be continued and supported,
in full association with the G-5 Sahel Permanent
Secretariat. France, for its part, continues to provide
material and operational support to the G-5 Sahel States.

The activation of the support provided for under the
technical arrangement, thanks to an initial contribution
from the European Union, is also very important.
It allows for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to provide the Joint Force with logistical and operational
support directly on the ground, which cannot be
provided through other funding channels, including
bilateral funding. However, MINUSMA could do even
more if additional funding were secured. We therefore
call on donors that have not yet made their contributions
to participate in the financing of this useful mechanism.

It is clear that the military response is only part of
the solution and that there can be no lasting stabilization
of the Sahel without making political and development
progress. That is a crucial point. On the political
front, we must more than ever use all the levers at our
disposal to encourage the Malian parties to implement
their commitments, including before the next elections.
In recent weeks there have been several encouraging
signals in that direction, including the inauguration
of the Kidal Operational Coordination Mechanism,
which must now be confirmed and enhanced. In terms
of development, our objective must be to coordinate
the actions of the various donors around limited and
targeted priorities - defined in conjunction with the
partners of the G-5 Sahel and aimed at ensuring a direct
impact for the most vulnerable populations. That is the
thrust of the Alliance for the Sahel's approach, which
fits perfectly into the broader framework set by the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

France intends to persistently bring the issue
of the fight against terrorism in the Sahel to the
Security Council. The situation on the ground
justifies that more than ever. The latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/432) presents relevant and
appropriate recommendations to provide the Joint
Force with support that is predictable, sustainable and
commensurate with the challenges. We will continue to
work in that arena, taking into account the pace of the
operationalization of the Joint Force on the ground and
seeking to maintain consensus within the Council on
that issue. But expectations remain high, and we must
meet them.

In the short term, it is important to call on the
international community to provide all the pledged
support as soon as possible, as well as to encourage the
G-5 Sahel States to continue their mobilization towards
the effective deployment of the Joint force. At the end
of this meeting, France will submit a proposed press
statement of the Security Council along those lines.

