Mr. Rowe (Sierra Leone): It is an honour for
Sierra Leone to have been selected as one of the first
two countries to be placed on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission. It is also an honour for my
delegation to speak as a country-specific participant at
this meeting of the Security Council.

We are grateful to the United Nations and the
international community for their continued
engagement with the situation in Sierra Leone
following the devastating rebel war. That engagement
has been demonstrated in many practical ways. For
instance, following the successful peacekeeping
operation - the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone - the Organization established its first
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone. The Office - now

in its second year - is, indeed, an experiment, and
hopefully it will become a model of United Nations
post-peacekeeping. It has set the pace for a similar
mechanism in Burundi.

It will also be recalled that a few years ago Sierra
Leone became the subject of another experiment: an
experiment in transitional justice, in the form of a
hybrid Special Court, based on national and
international criminal law, to try individuals accused of
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Incidentally,
as we all know, that experiment has been working well
but is facing funding problems. The Special Court
cannot become a model without the financial resources
necessary to conclude its work within the established
time frame.

Now Sierra Leone finds itself the subject of yet
another experiment in post-conflict cooperation,
namely, as a specific country under consideration by
the new Peacebuilding Commission. We are occupying
an enviable position. My delegation would like to
assure the Security Council that Sierra Leone will
make good use of its position in this worthy
experiment. We are committed to the integrated
approach to peacebuilding that the United Nations has
adopted in post-conflict peacebuilding leading to
sustainable development.

Sierra Leone had great expectations regarding the
Commission. We saw it - and still see it - as a
supplementary but effective instrument for facilitating
the process of early post-conflict recovery. We have
faith in its commitment to help us to address some of
the problems and challenges that require urgent
attention, and our expectations remain high.

As others have pointed out, the Peacebuilding
Commission is new. It is still going through the
proverbial teething stage. Perhaps one could say that it
is even too early to make a definitive and objective
evaluation of its substantive work. However, in the
view of my delegation, the results of the recent
country-specific meetings augur well for the future
success of the Commission. For Sierra Leone, a
highlight of those meetings was the conclusion that an
envelope of approximately $25 million was expected to
be made available as an initial - I stress: initial -
contribution towards the implementation of our priority
programmes.

It is in this regard that my delegation would like
to emphasize that any assessment of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission must be based on its
objectives and mandate as outlined in the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

First of all, we should always bear in mind that
the Commission is a special mechanism created to
address the special needs of a special group or category
of countries. Accordingly, the process of meeting those
special needs may require some elements of creativity,
flexibility and adaptability.

Secondly, the mandate of the Peacebuilding
Commission reflects a sense of urgency - we are in a
hurry. If, indeed, the Commission is to help ensure that
countries emerging from conflict do not relapse into
conflict, and if provision has been made for the
Commission to deal with any situation where a country
is at risk of or already relapsing into armed conflict, it
follows that the Commission and the international
community must act speedily to avert imminent crisis.

As far as achieving the objectives of the
Peacebuilding Commission is concerned, the bottom
line is "resources, resources, resources". Indeed,
throughout the mandate of the Commission, the key
words are "assistance" and "resources" - and we can
look at the mandate and objectives again. Of course,
the Commission was created to provide advice and
propose integrated strategies for post-conflict recovery.
Of course, its job i or part of its job - is to mobilize
sustained international attention on the needs of our
countries, even beyond the period of post-conflict
recovery. However, we should bear in mind - and I
would like to emphasize this - that the Commission is
expected to assist our countries in laying the
foundation for sustainable development, to mobilize
assistance and, I stress, to bring together all relevant
actors to marshal resources and help ensure predictable
financing for early recovery activities.

This brings me to the issue of delivery, which is
very close to our heart. My delegation believes that the
most effective way that the international community
can continue to demonstrate its continued engagement
with Sierra Leone and other least developed countries
emerging from conflict is through the timely delivery
of the necessary assistance to meet the special needs of
the countries concerned. My delegation notes with
satisfaction that the most recent country-specific
meeting of the Commission stressed that every effort
should be made to deliver the Peacebuilding Fund

country assistance envelope for Sierra Leone in
January 2007 so that implementation of the agreed
short-term priorities can commence immediately.

The Sierra Leone delegation is aware that the
processes of mobilizing and marshalling resources are
complex. They obviously require extensive
coordination and consultations at various levels - at
the national level and at the international level.
However, timely delivery of assistance is crucial to the
success of the whole recovery process. We are
encouraged by the commitment of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the international community,
especially those countries that have made generous
contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund. We applaud
them. We want just to take this opportunity today to
make an appeal, in the form of a reminder that before
the ruthless rebel war, Sierra Leone was one of the
least developed countries of the world. The conflict
made an already precarious situation even worse.
While we share many or most of the problems that
other post-conflict countries face, we should realize
that Sierra Leone is, in a sense, unique. It should be
treated according to its own particular circumstances.

My delegation is confident that within the next
few days the Secretary-General will announce the
allocation of an appreciable amount from the
Peacebuilding Fund that is commensurate with the
special needs and critical priorities that we outlined in
the Peacebuilding Commission last year.

