Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
issue of post-conflict national reconciliation is of
special importance as we consider the future role of the
United Nations in peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peace-building. No one can overestimate the
importance of national reconciliation in rehabilitating
societies that have suffered as a result of bitter armed
conflict, given the impact of such conflict on the social
fabric and economic infrastructure of the States and
regions concerned. National reconciliation can help
them to start a new chapter and look forward to a
future of peaceful coexistence, cooperation and
common objectives and interests.

In our View, consideration of the role of the
United Nations in national reconciliation should take
into account a number of issues and elements. First,
national reconciliation processes are, by nature, long-
term, since in large part they fall within the concept of
peace-building, although preparations for setting up an
administrative infrastructure for such processes begin
at an early stage in peacekeeping operations. While the
main features of the direct role of the United Nations in
peacekeeping have become clear - in keeping with the
Brahimi report - that role still requires additional
definition and clarification with a view to further
developing practical ways in which the United Nations
can contribute.

Secondly, the requirements and components of
national reconciliation operations differ in accordance
with the nature of the conflict in question and its
historic, cultural, social, political and economic
dimensions. The principal means by which the
international community can ensure that its efforts
support national reconciliation is for it to recognize
that no single model can be imposed on all conflicts.
Each one should be dealt with in accordance with its
specific characteristics and those of the society in
question.

Thirdly, ownership of national reconciliation by
the parties to a conflict is one of the most important
elements on which the international community's
action should be based. The driving force is the will of
individuals, groups and factions to accept
reconciliation, let go of their grievances and bitterness
and work to repair the damage that the conflict has
done to the social fabric of the State. In this context,
many important elements come into play, such as the
administration of justice, the establishment of
accountability, compensation for victims' families and
balanced participation in the distribution of wealth and
decision-making, apologies by the perpetrators to the
families of victims, and an appropriate framework to
ensure respect for and protection of human rights.
The international community has an important
role to play in providing financial and technical support
to transitional Governments and, at a later stage, to
elected Governments, with a view to establishing the
necessary frameworks to provide for all of these
elements, including special tribunals, truth
commissions, information strategies to enable
individuals and groups to recover from the conflict and
move to a phase of peaceful coexistence, and effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.

Fourthly and lastly, economic incentives are one
element that can contribute to national reconciliation
processes. It is evident that the economic benefits of
peace and stability generate a feeling of hope and
optimism for the future, which in turn helps people to
get over their feelings of hatred and makes vengeance
and violence seem less attractive. In this context,
international support should be provided in the form of
rehabilitation projects and programmes to establish
employment opportunities and to rehabilitate and
reintegrate refugees and displaced persons.

In view of those general elements, there is no
doubt that the United Nations role in post-conflict
national reconciliation is one of support for national,
regional and international efforts. In that context, we
believe that the United Nations is equipped to
coordinate all such efforts, with a clear strategy agreed
among Member States that would govern the role of
the Organization in peace-building after its
peacekeeping mission has ended. That will require a
true partnership among the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and all other parts of the international system.

