Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): My delegation
is pleased to see the Security Council convened under your
authority, Sir, at this meeting devoted to the theme
"Maintaining peace and security: humanitarian aspects of
issues before the Security Council". I thank the delegation
of Bangladesh, especially Ambassador Chowdhury, for
having taken the initiative of convening such a meeting,
which gives us a useful opportunity to take a closer look
at the role to be played by the Security Council in
supporting the work of humanitarian organizations and
improving the framework in which humanitarian activity
is conducted.

I also thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement.

These days, most conflicts which the Security
Council must address are internal ones during the course
of which systematic and massive violations of human
rights are committed. In many cases, it becomes
impossible to distinguish between combatants, civilians,
peacekeeping forces, humanitarian forces and
humanitarian and associated personnel. In some instances,
protected persons are directly targeted by the belligerents.
Mali resolutely condemns such acts and considers it
urgent that they be stopped.

Because the security of peacekeeping and
humanitarian assistance missions is of the highest
importance in situations of crisis and conflict, the Security
Council must, in accordance with its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, ensure the normal conduct of humanitarian
action in a favourable and peaceful environment. In this
respect, the Council must see to it that United Nations,
humanitarian and associated personnel carry out their
missions to the best of their ability.

In this regard, the parties to a conflict are obligated
to allow the unconditional access of humanitarian
personnel to all those affected by hostilities. Moreover,
the Security Council must once again emphasize that
obstacles to such access are unacceptable violations of
international humanitarian law and that those responsible
must answer for their actions.
Similarly, when the Council decides to deploy a
peacekeeping operation or preventive mission, its mandate
must be defined clearly and precisely. The personnel of
operations to keep or restore the peace must also enjoy
the necessary resources to accomplish their missions. The
international community must bear the financial costs of
such operations because the maintenance of international
peace and security - which, I reiterate, is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council - can be neither
delegated nor subcontracted to others, including regional

 

organizations wishing to undertake important commitments
in human or financial terms.

My delegation also wishes to draw attention to the
issue of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
as well as to the devastating effects of anti-personnel
landmines. Most violations of international humanitarian
law we see today have been committed with weapons of
this category. While the primary responsibility for
controlling the import, export and manufacture of light
weapons and anti-personnel landmines falls to States, the
fact remains that the Security Council has a role to play in
this regard, especially through the imposition of arms
embargoes. In this respect, my delegation welcomes the
recommendation, made by the Secretary-General in his
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, that
arms embargoes be imposed in situations where civilians
and protected persons are targeted by the parties to a
conflict or when it is known that the parties are behind
systematic and widespread violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, particularly the
recruiting of child soldiers.

The nature and scope of humanitarian action require
a comprehensive and integrated approach to the
management of humanitarian crisis situations. My
delegation therefore believes that we should unite
participants from various spheres in a single framework for
action, so that they can work together on humanitarian
activities and assistance.

In this regard, Mali firmly supports efforts to
coordinate and strengthen the relevant United Nations
bodies. My delegation is also of the view that the
Organization would benefit further from the establishment
of close cooperation outside the United Nations system that
would encompass non-state organizations, civil society and
regional and non-governmental organizations.

In conclusion, I wish to state that my delegation fully
supports the presidential statement we are to adopt at the
end of this debate.
