Ms. Sabelo (South Africa): We join other
delegations in expressing our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for holding this meeting, as well as to
our briefers for their comprehensive briefings. We also
would like to congratulate Mr. Onanga-Anyanga on his
new role as Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa.

I would like to limit my intervention to the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA),
the status of Abyei and the humanitarian situation.

With regard to UNISFA, South Africa welcomes the
rolethatUNISFAhasplayedinimprovingintercommunal
relations through its proactive engagement with the
communities, particularly along the flashpoints, as well
as its efforts in supporting local-level dialogue between
the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities. We note
with concern, however, that intercommunal violence
still occurs and that, although the current military
threat to the Abyei Area remains limited, the presence
of armed groups has the potential to inflame tensions
between the communities.

South Africa wishes to remind the parties that
resolution 1990 (2011) stipulated that the Abyei Area
should be demilitarized from any forces other than
UNISFA and the Abyei police service. In the absence
of an Abyei police service, the United Nations should
continue to advise and mentor the community protection
committees on maintaining law and order.

In view of the forthcoming discussions on the
mandate renewal of UNISFA, South Africa stresses
that the extension of the mandate should take into
consideration the evolution of the current political
situation in the Sudan and the transitions taking
place in South Sudan. Consequently, we should also
guard against taking decisions that could possibly
aggravate the current prevailing political environment.
Furthermore, we should ensure that the mission is fit
for purpose.

South Africa supports the recommendations
of the Secretary-General to maintain the presence
of UNISFA in the Abyei Area and within the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, which
remains crucial to sustaining the stability achieved thus
far. Equally, it is imperative that the mission continue to
support the two Governments and the African Union in
working to achieve a political resolution to the impasse.

Abyei has been a thorny issue for both countries for
many years. We welcome and recognize the progress that
has been achieved against the benchmarks. However,
we also recognize that Abyei remains the one area that
could unravel a lot of the good progress that has been
achieved by both countries. In that regard, we should
utilize the current political environment to recalibrate
and redouble efforts to address all outstanding issues in
order to create lasting peace.

We welcome the meetings of the Joint Border
Commission between the two countries, which are a
step in the right direction and another milestone on the
path towards resolving the final status of Abyei.

Furthermore, the stabilization of Abyei remains
critical, not only for South Sudan and the Sudan but
also for the region and neighbouring States. We should
therefore continue to encourage the implementation of
all relevant agreements, which will ultimately lead to
the final resolution of the status of Abyei and all its
outstanding issues.

Lastly, on the humanitarian front, we welcome
the work of UNISFA in facilitating the delivery
of humanitarian assistance by providing logistical
support. We also commend the United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations that continue to
provide much-needed assistance programmes to more
than 180,000 communities in the Abyei region and
neighbouring States.

