Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council's guest today,
Mr. Samura M.W. Kamara, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of the Republic of Sierra
Leone, has convincingly shown that today marks a
genuine milestone for his country. With the work of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) drawing to a close in less than
a week, the long-time presence of the United Nations
in the country will also come to an end. The country is
closing a chapter and moving beyond its past.

We note the success achieved in Sierra Leone in the
areas of peacebuilding and post-conflict stabilization.
Of course, the international community played an
important role in that regard, mainly the United
Nations and the Security Council. Comprehensive and
coordinated and agreed upon efforts were undertaken.
The experience gained in Sierra Leone will be useful
in finding long-term, lasting solutions to other conflict

situations.

However, regardless ofits scope, no outside support
or assistance can alone achieve significant results
without the active efforts of the people of a country and
their Government, including their aspirations for peace
and prosperity. The principle of national ownership has
become a guarantee of progress at all peacebuilding
stages - the people of Sierra Leone themselves
choosing priorities in that regard.

Today there is a multifaceted political progress
taking place in the country in the context ofvarious laws.
The economy is growing steadily. There are political
parties and civic organizations. And there exists a civil
society and media. Tangible efforts are being made
to ensure and uphold human rights. It is of the utmost
importance that the country maintain stability and
security. In addition, new tasks have emerged today, in
particular in the social and economic areas. All ofthose
positive strides should be strengthened and scaled up.

Of course, as with any other country, Sierra Leone
has its problems. Some of those have been described in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/192) before
us today. We support the active intention of the country
to resolve those issues in a timely manner.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
gratitude to all UNIPSIL staff, as well as to Mr. Jens
Toyberg-Frandzen personally for all his efforts.

