Ms. Schonmann (Israel): At the outset, allow
me to express my delegation's appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening today's important debate
and to the Deputy Secretary-General for his presentation
this morning.

Maritime piracy and armed robbery at sea have
been issues of global concern for centuries. In this
age of globalization, maritime trade offers countries
unprecedented opportunities for growth. Indeed, 90 per
cent of the world's commerce is conducted through
the oceans, and piracy poses a profound threat to that
trade. Moreover, maritime commerce is conducted
by seafarers, and we must be mindful of the human
dimension of piracy and the constant threat to their
lives and well-being.

Israel is not immune to those threats; 99 per cent of
our trade is conducted through maritime passageways.
The sea is our lifeline. Our shipping companies have
faced attempts by pirates to hijack our ships in the past,
and freedom of navigation is therefore of vital interest
to Israel.

Piracy is born on shore and perpetrated at sea.
That connection is especially clear in areas where safe
havens are in close proximity to the shipping lanes
where pirates prey and in places where the rule of
law is weak or dormant. As long as organized crime
syndicates, financiers and supporters can sustain
piracy as a lucrative business enterprise, they will find
seas in which to sail. As long as underdevelopment
and political instability on land persist, transnational
criminal enterprises will enjoy an endless supply of
labour. In order to effectively combat piracy, those
core issues must be addressed in a comprehensive and
holistic manner, as also suggested in the concept paper
circulated for today's debate (S/2012/814, annex).

Piracy raises many acute challenges for the
international community, which range from securing
maritime safety and addressing the plight of the victims
of piracy to ensuring that proper law enforcement and
judicial mechanisms are in place. The rise in pirate
attacks in recent years has also prompted questions
relating to the hiring of private security personnel and
their rules of engagement.

Of vital interest to all is ensuring free use of the
high seas in accordance with customary international
principles such as freedom of navigation, innocent
passage and transit passage. What originated as
individual responses by States has now become a
concerted global effort undertaken to the growing
threat of piracy. Israel commends the multilayered,
multi-stakeholder approach inspired by resolution 1816
(2008), and recognizes that it has resulted in a significant
drop in pirate activity off the coast of Somalia. We
note, however, that while the attention of the Security
Council has been primarily focused on Somali pirates,
and more recently on the Gulf of Guinea, there has been
an increase in the incidence of piracy in other areas,
including the South China Sea, the Indian Ocean, West
Africa, South America and the Caribbean.

Israel's domestic legislation explicitly criminalizes
acts of piracy as offences punishable by 20 years of
imprisonment. Our legislation also fully implements
the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Maritime Navigation and its
Protocol relating to fixed maritime platforms on the
continental shelf, which provide effective tools for
combating piracy. Our legislation also prohibits the
laundering of funds obtained through or derived from
piracy. The importance ofwell-functioning judicial and
law enforcement mechanisms must not be understated.
Without proper investigations, indictments, trials and
penalties for the convicted, interception will surely
be in vain. The recent report of the Secretary-General
on specialized anti-piracy courts (S/2012/50) has
shown that strengthening national jurisdictions and
enhancing their capacities are important steps towards
a sustainable long-term solution, and we welcome that
approach.

In line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, Israel works in collaboration with local
shipping industries and continues to develop and
implement best practices for prevention, precautionary
measures and defence against attacks. The relevant
Israeli authorities stay in close contact with local
crews whenever violent incidents occur on the high
seas, advise them on measures to take in emergency
situations, and ensure that ships flying the Israeli flag
request assistance in the event of an emergency.

In addition to piracy, numerous transnational
criminal acts are carried out on the high seas, such as
smuggling and trafficking in weapons, narcotics and
people, as well as terrorism. Today those threats are
converging, as we see piracy increasingly being used
as a platform for carrying out other criminal activities.
In particular, we cannot help noticing the striking
resemblance between the threat of piracy and the threat
of terrorism. Both represent overarching threats that
affect the international community as a whole; both
draw on similar weaknesses in the socioeconomic
fabric of societies; and both take advantage ofa lack of
orderly governance and gaps in legal frameworks.

A coordinated international response should be
based on identifying positive elements at the regional
level and adapting them to the global effort. It requires
the creation of broad multilateral coalitions and
adequate legal standards, mechanisms and capacities.
Those who seek to address the global threat of piracy
successfully should study those parallels. In that
exercise, drawing on the lessons learned in countering
terrorism may prove to be a valuable tool in the fight
against piracy.

International and regional cooperation is key
to addressing piracy, including through State
capacity-building. Continued cooperation among all
stakeholders, including through information-sharing,
prompt reporting, responding to real-time maritime
incidents, and providing assistance to developing
countries, is critical to ensuring an effective response.
In that regard, we note the important roles played by the
Contact Group on Piracy offthe Coast ofSomalia and the
International Maritime Organization, which regularly
publishes guidelines to assist in the investigation of
piracy crimes and armed robbery. Israel will continue
to play an active role in the global fight against piracy
and maritime terrorism, and welcomes this opportunity
to exchange ideas in order to address the problem more
effectively.

As I come to the end of my statement, I must add
that it is most unfortunate, yet not surprising, that
certain delegations, which clearly have nothing to
contribute to this professional-level debate on piracy,
have chosen to hijack it by linking Israel to an unrelated
discussion. I do not intend to be dragged into pointless
trading of accusations or to waste the Council's limited
time. Let me just briefly say that we did not seek the
conflict in Gaza; in fact, we did everything we could
to avoid it. We have one objective, namely, to target
and destroy the terrorist infrastructure of Hamas,
which fires rockets from civilian population centres
into Israeli communities, day after day. That is Israel's
right and duty. No nation would allow such attacks
against its civilians, and no nation should defend an
internationally recognized terrorist organization that is
targeting Israeli civilians as we speak.

