Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the briefers for their remarks
this afternoon and for their commendable work in
effectively implementing the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015).

We welcome the eighth report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/934) and the latest report issued by
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). In
that regard, we wish to highlight the verification and
monitoring undertaken by the IAEA to ensure the
implementation of the JCPOA and the use of nuclear
energy for exclusively peaceful purposes.

The Dominican Republic strongly supports
the JCPOA and its full implementation, as it is a
successful product of diplomacy, multilateralism
and the non-proliferation architecture. It is therefore
imperative to continue to undertake comprehensive
efforts to preserve it and not to toss aside the years
of hard work that led to its adoption. In that regard,
we welcome the good offices of the stakeholders, as
well as the cooperation of other States in upholding
the agreement, as is the case of the European Union,
which has implemented various measures such as the
establishment of the financial institution Instrument
in Support of Trade Exchanges to promote legitimate
commercial activities to ease the economic restrictions of
the unilateral sanctions imposed on Iran. In that regard,
we regret the withdrawal of the United States from the
agreement, the reimposition of sanctions and the recent
cancellation of exemptions on nuclear non-proliferation
projects under the plan and commercial oil activities.

At the same time, we note with concern that as
a result of the reimposition of sanctions in July, Iran
has begun to reduce its commitments agreed to in
the agreement, including by exceeding the limit of
3.67 per cent of enriched uranium. We therefore urge
Iran to avoid taking further steps that would violate
the agreement, the nuclear architecture and the trust
placed in it by the parties. We call on Iran to return to
full compliance with the provisions of the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015), as the most viable way to ensure
that its nuclear programme is peaceful and solely for
the well-being of the Iranian people.

Together, we encourage Iran to address the concerns
raised by various States, including several parties to
the plan, regarding activities that do not keep with the
restrictive measures set forth in paragraph 3 of annex
B of resolution 2231 (2015), which calls on Iran not
to undertake any activity related to ballistic missiles
designed to deliver nuclear weapons. Moreover, we
call on Iran to avoid destabilizing activities, such as
alleged transfers of weapons and related technologies
to armed groups and States in conflict, which are also
inconsistent with the aforementioned resolution.

In conclusion, we wish to underscore that
the Secretary-General's report indicates that Iran
continues to comply with the Additional Protocol to its
IAEA Safeguards Agreement, as well as transparency
measures, which we commend. For that reason and
taking into account that the Iranian authorities have
stated that the recent reduction of the country's
commitments is a reversible step, we understand
that the JCPOA can be preserved. To achieve that,
however, the parties must narrow their differences
through dialogue that facilitates the easing of tensions
and the achievement of a solution that guarantees that
Iran will not increase its nuclear capacity or pose a
threat to international peace and security, especially
in the Middle East, while it is safely reintegrated into
the commercial and banking world and receives the
previously agreed on economic benefits.

