Mr. Nl'ifiez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Given the reports that we have submitted to it, the
Security Council is very familiar with the case of the
well known, self-confessed terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles, who is responsible for the mid-air explosion
of a Cubana de Aviacion plane with 73 people on
board. He is also responsible for many acts of terrorism
against my country in which citizens of other countries
have also died. Despite the fact that it has all the
evidence against Posada Carriles that we have
provided, the Government of the United States, as its
representative has just acknowledged, refuses to try
Posada Carriles for terrorism and prosecutes him
instead on minor charges.

Cuba reiterates that the handling of the case of
Posada Carriles by the Government of the United
States, if he is not extradited to Venezuela or tried as
what he is, a well known terrorist, is a flagrant
violation of resolution 1373 (2001).

The revealing statements made by the confessed
terrorist Francisco Chavez Abarca, who was detained
by the Venezuelan authorities as he was attempting to
carry out an attack against stability in that country and
other brotherly countries, confirm details of the new
pathways being exploited by international terrorism
and provide irrefutable proof of the guilt of Posada
Carriles and his sponsor, the United States. The plans
of this terrorist included sinking ships loaded with oil
en route to Cuba.

The case of the five young anti-terrorist Cubans
in the United States is also well known, despite the
wall of silence that the Government of the United
States has sought to set up around them. These five
young Cubans infiltrated terrorist organizations in the
United States and uncovered plans for terrorist acts
against Cuba that would have claimed the lives of
Cuban and United States citizens. The Cuban
Government delivered all of that information to the
United States Government. Instead of imprisoning the
terrorists, the United States Government imprisoned
the five young Cuban counter-terrorists. They were
sentenced unjustly to long periods of incarceration in a
rigged and politically manipulated trial, without
evidence, in the city of Miami, surrounded by intense
media propaganda. Even the prosecutor admitted that
there was not enough evidence to support any of the
charges made against them. Nonetheless, they find
themselves unjustly imprisoned in this country. The
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention of the defunct
Commission on Human Rights spoke out on this case.
Many organizations of international lawyers
throughout the world have spoken out about this case.
The case is well known despite the wall of silence that
attempts have been made to erect around it.
Over the past 50 years, my country has been the
victim of many terrorist acts organized within the
territory of the United Stares. Those acts have claimed
3,478 lives in my country, and a further 2,099 people
have been injured.

Double standards cannot prevail when it comes to
terrorism. It will never be possible to eradicate
terrorism if only some acts are condemned while others
are covered up.

Cuba urges the United States Government once
again to try Posada Carriles as what he is - a terrorist.
Cuba urges once again - backed by the clamour of the
international community and the growing clamour of
the people of the United States, despite the wall of
silence that the authorities wish to establish around this
case - for the five Cuban anti-terrorist fighters to be
set free.
44

