Mr. Scheffers (Netherlands): I thank you, Sir, for
your presence here in order to preside over our
important meeting today. I wish to join previous
speakers in thanking Dr. Piot for his very to-the-point
and concise presentation, and in general for the
excellent work of the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).

As the French representative will also speak on
behalf of the European Union, my delegation can be
brief and wishes to highlight a few points only that are
characteristic of the Netherlands' approach to the
international dimension of the HIV/AIDS crisis.

The Netherlands notes with great appreciation
that, increasingly, HIV/AIDS is not seen as just a
health problem. Its social consequences are severe and
the disease adversely affects a country's potential for
economic development. As a matter of fact, AIDS may
ultimately destroy the very fabric of entire societies
and aggravate the risk of instability. AIDS might
therefore become one of the root causes of conflict.

I am not going to repeat the statistics provided by
UNAIDS, but one thing is clear. We are speaking of
staggering and alarming numbers. They become even
more frightening when we realize that HIV/AIDS
spreads with a multiplier effect. This holds true in
conflict areas in particular. Soldiers and displaced
civilians on the move are important sources of HIV
dissemination, while, in those circumstances, the fight
against AIDS is particularly difficult.

There are, unfortunately, more and underlying
reasons why HIV/AIDS gets the chance to spread so
rapidly: poverty and gender discrimination.
Misinformation or lack of information are other
important elements in the spread of AIDS. Girls are
especially ignorant about the disease. According to a
survey conducted in 34 countries by the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), it was found that, in about
half of those countries, more than 50 per cent of girls
from ages 15 to 19 said that they did not know that a
person with AIDS could appear healthy. Efforts to
reach and teach those girls are hampered by poverty,
local customs, violence and social or religious bias,
according to UNICEF.

Given this bleak and sombre background, the
Netherlands believes that the fight against HIV/AIDS
should follow an approach that goes beyond sectors or
countries. We also believe that the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council continue to have
a major role to play. Whenever the opportunity arises,
the Netherlands wishes to stress the point that political
commitment, on both the national and international
levels, is equally essential. In this light, we find the
reported progress in a number of African countries
hopeful and encouraging.

The Dutch international policy to combat AIDS is
focused on prevention, care, non-discrimination and
relief, as well as on the promotion of research, both
biomedical and sociological. Prevention and awareness
ought to go hand in hand with relief and care for the
victims of the pandemic. However, in the end, only a
vaccine will provide a lasting solution.

In this context, the Netherlands supports a
research project in Ethiopia. Furthermore, we recently
decided to make $20 million available for the
International AIDS Vaccine Initiative, aimed at
supporting vaccine research and at guaranteeing that
these vaccines become available in developing
countries. The Netherlands is the second-largest donor
worldwide and we will continue contributing to the
battle against AIDS in bilateral and multilateral
frameworks. In this connection, I am pleased to note
that the Netherlands has increased its contributions to
UNAIDS and will start a partnership programme with
that organization for a total amount of approximately
$10 million in 2000 and 2001. Within the UNICEF
partnership programme, which is presently under
consideration, funds for the battle against AIDS will
also be reserved.

As I stated earlier, the Netherlands attaches great
importance to the principle of non-discrimination. That
is why we support non-governmental organizations
working with HIV-positive people and AIDS victims.
The fact that HIV/AIDS has been put prominently on
the international agenda must now lead to concrete
action at the regional and national levels. The
feasibility of organizing a meeting under United
Nations auspices on access to care for HIV/AIDS
should now be analysed in appropriate United Nations
bodies and incorporated and streamlined into existing
international forums.

Access to drugs, whatever the importance of such
an issue may be, constitutes only a part of the
HIV/AIDS pandemic and cannot be treated separately
from the other issues, such as vaccine development,
research, care, efficacy and cooperation with national
Governments. All parties should deal with the HIV
problem in an integral way.

To conclude, in the broader context of the
responsibility of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security, my
delegation commends the work of the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee working group, as described in the
very useful note prepared for this meeting. We
welcome the adopted action plan, in which addressing
HIV/AIDS has been fully integrated into peacekeeping
operations and humanitarian action.

