Mr. Osvald (Sweden): The signing of the peace
Agreement in Guatemala on 29 December 1996 put an
end to 36 years of bitter conflict. Guatemala will now
finally have the opportunity to devote its energies to
peaceful, long-term development, together with the rest of
the Central American region. Since the 19705, Sweden
has worked in support of democracy and peace in Central
America and has played an active part in developments
leading to the historic peace Agreement in Guatemala.
The Swedish Government was honoured to host the
signing of the agreement on constitutional reforms and the
electoral regime in Stockholm last December. Sweden has
pledged substantial contributions in support of the
important tasks of demobilization and the reintegration
into society of former combatants. Sweden participates in
the United Nations Mission for the Verification of Human
Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in
Guatemala (MINUGUA). Sweden is also a substantial
contributor to MINUGUA's fund for institution-building.

The United Nations has played a crucial role in
laying a foundation for peace in Guatemala through the
efforts of MINUGUA, the Guatemala Unit of the
Secretariat and, of course, the United Nations Moderator,
Mr. Jean Arnault. The Group of Friends of Guatemala has
also made important contributions in support of the peace
process. The agreement on the definitive ceasefire
expressly assigns the role of verifying the military aspects
of the peace settlement to the United Nations. As
proposed by the Secretary-General, this task should be
carried out by the attachment to MINUGUA of a group
of military observers and some medical personnel. It is in
keeping with United Nations practice that this military
component should be authorized under a Security Council
mandate. This is a case in which the Security Council is
called upon to exercise its primary responsibility for the

 

maintenance of international peace and security. It is
important that the draft resolution be adopted by the
Council. It enjoys Sweden's full support.

The Guatemalan peace Agreement is multidimensional
in character. It is a good example of how the practical
application of a broader concept of security can create a
basis for peaceful development. In addition to ceasefire and
military provisions, the package of peace accords includes
agreements on constitutional, social and economic issues,
human rights and the identity and rights of indigenous
peoples. It is appropriate that verification is entrusted to a
multidimensional United Nations operation. The
contributions of various parts of the United Nations system,
in particular the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), will be of major importance in supporting
implementation of the peace agreements. Coordination
between all international organizations and agencies
supporting the peace process is important.

Tribute should in particular be paid today to the
Guatemalan parties themselves; they have carried the peace
process forward and will carry responsibility for its success.
The final success of the Guatemalan peace process will, of
course, be measured through the implementation of the
peace agreements in all their aspects - military and
civilian. The decision before us today would enhance the
contribution of the United Nations to assisting the parties in
this endeavour.

