Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, the Chinese delegation would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Coomaraswamy; the Executive Director of
UNICEF, Ms. Veneman; the representative of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
Mr. Melkert; and the World Bank representative,
Mr. Bannon, for their briefings.

Children are the future and the hope of mankind.
The safety, survival and development of children are
prerequisites for human progress and have a direct
bearing on the future and destiny of a nation and its
citizens. However, it is regrettable that, at present,
children in more than 30 countries around the world
are being harmed in various ways by armed conflicts.
Some are killed in merciless wars; others are forced
into armed conflicts as a means of waging war; still
others are kidnapped or subject to various forms of
physical abuse. Such children rightfully belong in
classrooms, studying and acquiring knowledge.
Instead, they have become victims of armed conflicts.
Of particular note is that the recent sudden escalation
of the conflict between Lebanon and Israel has resulted
in the deaths of many children in aerial and artillery
bombardments, which is shocking to us. We strongly
appeal to the parties concerned to abide strictly by
international humanitarian law; to avoid hurting the
innocent, particularly children; and to provide every
facility and help for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.

All countries and parties have the obligation to do
their utmost to protect children from being harmed in
armed conflict. In recent years, the United Nations has
taken a number of measures to promote the protection
of children in armed conflict, and positive results have
been achieved. Over the past seven years, the Security
Council has adopted six consecutive resolutions that
provide a comparatively sound framework for the
protection of children in armed conflict. Treating the
protection of children as an important aspect of their
operations, some United Nations peacekeeping
missions have given full consideration to the special
needs of children in helping host countries in their
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. Some peace agreements concluded with
the facilitation and participation of the United Nations
also include provisions for protecting children.
Countries concerned have taken action to provide
guarantees for the protection of children through
legislation.

To a certain extent, such measures have reduced
the harm that armed conflict inflicts on children and
are commendable. China is deeply concerned that
armed conflict in various regions of the world causes
harm to children. We support all efforts made by the
United Nations, including the Security Council, to
promote the protection of children in armed conflict. In
that regard, I wish to emphasize the following points.

First, the Security Council should step up its
efforts to prevent conflict and maintain peace.
Stemming and reducing armed conflicts at their source
would protect children by creating the objective
conditions for peace. The Security Council bears the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, and no existing mechanism can
replace it. As a vulnerable group, children are most
susceptible to being harmed in various ways in any
outbreak of armed conflict. The Security Council
should therefore seek to resolve conflicts and take
effective measures within its mandate to reduce the
number of armed conflicts. At the same time, the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations should be
strengthened in an effort to improve the humanitarian
situation in conflict areas. Only when various groups,
including children and civilians, enjoy a more secure
living environment will it be possible to avoid many
tragedies at their source.

Secondly, when dealing with the issue of children
and armed conflict, we should always respect and
support the role played by the Governments of the
countries concerned. In its third paragraph, resolution
1612 (2005) stresses

"the primary role of national Governments in
providing effective protection and relief to all
children affected by armed conflicts".

The operative part of that resolution also makes
repeated reference to the important role of the
Governments of the countries concerned. Conflict
situations have their own specificities and complex
causes. Therefore, it is imperative to cooperate with the
Governments concerned in using the monitoring and
reporting mechanism to collect information and carry
out work on the ground in a concerted effort to avoid
harming children in armed conflict. At present, many
national Governments in conflict situations have
adopted various strategies and plans prohibiting the
recruitment of child soldiers and protecting children
affected by armed conflict. All these factors should be
taken into consideration when carrying out
international cooperation in this field.

Thirdly, the work of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism of the Security Council on children and
armed conflict and that of the Working Group should
be further improved and enhanced. Since its

establishment in accordance with resolution 1612
(2005) more than a year ago, some progress has been
made in the functioning of the mechanism. We hope
that the Security Council can analyse the strengths and
weaknesses of the mechanism so that improvements
can be made in the next stage of its work.

The primary objective of the mechanism is to
collect information. It is up to the Working Group to
discuss and agree on specific actions. Under the
coordination of the French chairmanship, the Working
Group has carried out activities over the past year.
Consensus has been reached on such areas as the terms
of reference and the programme of work. Substantive
work has already begun. China expects the Working
Group, through cooperation and constructive
discussion, to utilize its expertise in this area and put
forward effective suggestions on the protection of
children in armed conflict.

Fourthly, the protection of children in armed
conflict is an endeavour on a large scale that calls for
the collective efforts of all parties concerned. China
appreciates the work done by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, including the
cooperation she has engaged in with the Governments
concerned. At the same time, the United Nations
specialized agencies, including UNICEF, and the
Resident Offices of the United Nations system also
have important responsibilities of their own in this
field.

China believes that all parties concerned should
strengthen their coordination and cooperation to
provide concerted assistance to the countries involved
to build up their capacity to protect children. In
addition, certain civil society organizations and
humanitarian organizations have also participated in
numerous efforts to protect children, sometimes
operating in very dangerous environments. We would
like to recognize their hard work, and we hope that
they will abide by the principles of justice, neutrality
and humanitarianism in helping to advance local peace
processes.

Lastly, China once again urges the parties to all
armed conflicts to genuinely discharge their
responsibilities to respect and protect the rights of
children. The international community, while
facilitating post-conflict reconstruction, should give
priority to resolving such issues as the return of
children to their families, to schools and to their
society, and provide adequate resources to that end.
The protection of children has always been a
focus of the work of the Government of China, which
ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict as early as 2002. We call on additional
countries to accede to the Protocol, and we hope that
the Protocol's provisions concerning the age limit for
conscription will be observed.

China hopes that, with the efforts of all parties, a
favourable environment will be created for children all
over the world so that they can live and grow up and
enjoy a bright future.

