Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to thank the briefers for their insightful briefings. The number one priority in the Central African Republic today is the elections, which are coming very soon. I think it is very important to maintain an environment conducive to the proper preparation and organization of successful elections. With that in mind, allow me to make the following points. First, with regard to the political and security situation in the Central African Republic, our delegation takes note with encouragement the continued efforts of the Government to implement the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. We also note the commitments made by the Government to ensure national stability and a calm political environment despite ongoing tensions, including efforts aimed at preparing for the upcoming elections and the important work of the legislative branch and the National Electoral Authority. However, we remain deeply troubled by the increased number of violations of the peace agreement in this reporting period. These violations, particularly by various armed groups, have led to serious concern over protection issues, with civilians being the targets of more than half of the violations recorded. This is not beneficial, especially when the country is in the final stages of the electoral process. In this regard, Viet Nam would like to re-emphasize the vital importance of the full implementation of the peace agreement. We reiterate that the agreement is the one and only viable path towards sustainable peace and stability for the country. We therefore urge the agreement's signatories to refrain from any action that could further deteriorate the situation and to heed the Secretary-General call for a ceasefire. As the upcoming elections are pivotal to the political process, it is crucial that all parties engage in constructive political dialogue to build trust and create favourable conditions for long- term stability in the country. Secondly, the situation in the Central African Republic requires continued support from _ the international community in all areas. Assistance, both technical and financial, is needed to help fill the funding gap for the organization of the upcoming elections, improve the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation, and most urgently, alleviate the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We call on the country's international partners to strengthen their generous support for the Central African Republic at this critical juncture. Thirdly, we always attach great importance to the contribution of regional stakeholders, including the African Union (AU) and the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), to consolidate peace and stability in the Central African Republic. We also welcome the cooperation among the AU, ECCAS, the United Nations and the European Union in assisting the Central African Republic in responding to the country's needs. And last but not least, our delegation would like to reiterate its support for the work of the United Nations and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) in the country. We would also like to highlight the importance of ensuring safety and security of peacekeepers and humanitarian workers. We take this opportunity to express our condolences to the people of the Central African Republic, MINUSCA and the families of those who lost their lives while trying to protect civilians on the ground. We call on the Government and MINUSCA to strengthen efforts and cooperation to combat violations against women and children as mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/994).
