Mr. Bolton (United States of America): We are
all aware of the seriousness of the situation that is
unfolding in the Middle East. Let me state that our first
and foremost goal here in the Security Council should
be to avoid taking any steps that would unexpectedly
exacerbate tensions in the region. To that end, we feel
that we should tread cautiously before issuing any
remarks, much less a formal statement, given the
complexity of the situation. We should not undermine
the limited credibility of the Council by engaging in
debate and rhetoric merely for their own sake. Such
exercises undermine the United Nations generally and
provide evidence for those who say it is all talk and no
action.

The United States calls for the immediate and
unconditional release of Israel Defense Forces
Corporal Gilad Shalit by Hamas. That is the best way
to achieve our shared goal of a peaceful resolution of
the immediate crisis. Terrorism of any kind - which
this clearly constitutes - is intolerable, and the
international community must stand united in opposing
it. The attack and hostage-taking by Hamas last week
precipitated this crisis, and their refusal to release their
hostage continues to place innocent Palestinians in
harm's way. We further condemn the brutal murder of
18-year-old Israeli citizen Eliyahu Asheri, and our
condolences go out to his family.

Upon the safe and unconditional release of
Corporal Shalit, we are hopeful that the parties in the
region can continue discussions about the best way
forward to establish a lasting peace. The United States
is of the firm view that a prerequisite for ending this
conflict is that the Governments of Syria and Iran end
their role as State sponsors of terror and unequivocally
condemn the actions of Hamas, including this
kidnapping.

As we urge for calm in the region, let us remain
cognizant of the fact that we would not be where we
are right now if it were not for Syria's support and
harbouring of terrorists. We call upon President Assad
to lend his support to international efforts to resolve
the situation. An important first step in that regard
would be for Syria to arrest Khaled Meshaal, a known
international terrorist and member of Hamas, and to
close down the various terrorist headquarters in
Damascus. In addition, we call upon Syria to stop
financing the terrorists and to stop cooperating with
other States, such as Iran, that finance terrorists.

At the same time, it is the responsibility of the
Palestinian Authority Government to stop all acts of
violence and terror and to comply with the principles
enunciated by the Quartet: renounce terror, recognize
Israel and accept previous obligations and agreements,
including the road map.

We call upon the current leaders of Hamas and
the Palestinian Authority to fully support and
implement these principles set forth by the Quartet. An
immediate first step in that regard would be for Hamas
to secure the safe and unconditional release of
Corporal Shalit.

The G-8 noted yesterday its concern about the
detention of elected members of the Palestinian
Authority and legislature. We call on all parties to
avoid actions that could escalate this situation or harm
innocent civilians, while acknowledging Israel's
unequivocal right to defend itself and the lives of its
citizens.

During this period of crisis, we urge close
attention to the humanitarian needs of the population of
Gaza and action to ensure that those needs are met
expeditiously.

