Mr. Usackas (European Union) (spoke in Russian):
I should like at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you
and the Russian Federation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March.
(spoke in English)

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European
Free Trade Association country Norway, member of
the European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2013/l33) and presentation, as
well as Ambassador Tanin for his report.

Last July in Tokyo the international conference
reaffirmed the partnership between the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community. The
Tokyo Framework is the core structure governing
mutual accountability between Afghanistan and its
development partners. Its implementation remains
paramount in achieving a successful transition and
transformation in Afghanistan. In that regard, the
EU welcomes the recently presented progress in the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board meeting,
endorsing four national priority programmes. The
finalized set of those programmes should allow for the
more rational allocation of donors' resources in line
with the country's priorities.

Afghanistan has made substantial economic
progress over the past 10 years, but a number of
challenges remain. As Afghanistan continues to move
towards economic self-reliance, it will be vital to build
confidence in the Afghan economy and attract and
retain foreign and domestic investment. It is important
that this confidence not be undermined. Therefore, it is
vital that the International Monetary Fund programme
remain on track and that the structural reforms
suggested by the World Bank on private mining
investment, the introduction of the planned value-added
tax, deep customs reforms to reduce opportunities for
corruption and leakage at borders, the improvement
of land management and land acquisition, and the
strengthening of internal and external controls will be
put in place.

Corruption continues to be a major problem that
touches the lives of many ordinary Afghans. It is vital
that the Afghan Government visibly tackle this issue in
order to strengthen the legitimacy of the State, improve
service delivery for citizens and establish a business
environment conducive to domestic and foreign
investment.

Enduring peace in Afghanistan will have to rest
on a political settlement comprising all national,
regional and international stakeholders. We believe
that reconciliation has to be a totally inclusive, Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned process. Nevertheless, the
European Union and its member States stand ready to
support the process with the advice and assistance we
have to offer, drawing from our own rich experience in
conflict resolution.

The EU will continue to support the High Peace
Council. We also welcome the recent developments
in the infra-Afghan dialogue towards reconciliation,
including efforts to open an office in Doha, as well as
the positive steps towards an improvement in relations
with Pakistan and Afghanistan. Several EU member
States have also facilitated important events, including
the Chantilly talks in France and the United Kingdom's
trilaterals between the United Kingdom, Afghanistan
and Pakistan.

With regard to the human rights situation, the
European Union thanks the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for publishing the
report on the treatment of conflict-related detainees in
Afghan custody in January 2013, and we welcome the
constructive response of the Government of Afghanistan
to that report. We thank UNAMA for publishing its
annual report on protection of civilians in armed
conflict, and we support its recommendations. We also
thank UNAMA for the report on the implementation
of the law on elimination of violence against women
in Afghanistan, and encourage the Afghan Government
to continue to work towards better implementation
of this law. In this vein, we also wish to reiterate the
importance of the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and all subsequent resolutions on women
and peace and security.

We encourage the Government of Afghanistan to
appoint new, qualified human rights commissioners
as soon as possible. The delay in their appointment
continues to constrain the functioning of the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission.
The EU will continue its support for civilian policing,
which is essential to strengthening the rule of law
and contributes to the promotion of human rights.
Assistance to the Afghan National Police while it is
refocusing on these tasks is of significant importance.

With regard to the elections, the European Union
welcomes and is committed to continuing to support the
efforts of the Special Representative in implementing
his mandate with regard to the holding of presidential
elections in April 2014 and parliamentary elections
in 2015 - elections that should be Afghan-owned
and Afghan-driven, inclusive, transparent and with a
legitimate outcome broadly accepted by the Afghans.

We emphasize the importance of adopting a sound
legal electoral framework, including the establishment
of a credible complaints mechanism. We encourage the
Government of Afghanistan to appoint the chairman
of the Independent Electoral Commission and its
commissioners through a consultative process so that
they may be accepted by the Afghans as impartial
and competent. We stress the importance of the
Commission putting in place a robust mechanism
for fraud prevention. Election preparations should be
transparent and inclusive, and they should involve
all relevant stakeholders, including the Independent
Electoral Commission, the Parliament, the Government,
the opposition, political parties and civil society.

Counter-narcotics is a cross-cutting issue and should
be tackled in a holistic way. The EU is contributing to the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime programme
in Afghanistan, as well as complementary regional
elements on enhancing border management. Moreover,
the European Union is promoting the development of a
national policy for agriculture, encouraging alternative
livelihoods to poppy production. The EU is also
supporting the Heart of Asia process and the creation
of a new regional paradigm that would help to reconcile
respective security interests and gradually build new
patterns of mutual interdependence, interconnectivity,
trust and confidence.

The EU reiterates its full support for UNAMA's
essential role during the transition and beyond.
UNAMA will have a vital role to play in enabling
Afghanistan and the international community to work
effectively together to fulfil the commitments made
in Tokyo and in monitoring the human rights and
humanitarian situation. UNAMA must be properly
mandated, adequately present in the country and
sufficiently resourced to fulfil that role, in particular
during the transition year 2014. To this end, we support
the proposed extension of a strong UNAMA mandate.

As the Special Representative for the European
Union in Afghanistan for the past three years, I have
witnessed the progress that we have collectively
achieved in support of Afghanistan. We must all draw
lessons from the past. We have to demonstrate the
staying power of continued support for Afghanistan
through the transformation decade.

Respecting the Bonn and Tokyo commitments is
important not only for Afghan citizens, but as a sign
of progress to taxpayers in the donor countries. The
exceptional support pledged in Chicago and Tokyo will
be continued only if the presidential elections in 2014
are conducted in a credible, inclusive and transparent
manner and produce a legitimate outcome; if genuine
steps are undertaken to deal with corruption, justice
and human rights, especially those of women; and if an
environment conducive to economic development and
revenue generation is created. We count on Afghanistan
to show real commitment to achieving our agreed
objectives, and we will need Afghanistan's neighbours
to take the lead on regional cooperation, together with
and in support of the Government of Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I can assure the Council once again
that the European Union is committed to Afghanistan
for the long term. In that regard, we look forward to
the swift conclusion of our cooperation agreement on
partnership and development as soon as possible.

