Mr. Fernandez (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to thank you, Sir, and the other members of the
Security Council for having organized today's meeting,
the purpose of which is to present to the Council the
most recent report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2012/128).

I welcome today's opportunity to share with the
Council an assessment of the most recent developments
in the political and security situation in Haiti, and of
the activities carried out by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) over the
past six months in support of peacebuilding, political
stability, the strengthening of the rule of law and
recovery work after the earthquake of 12 January 2010.
2
I take this opportunity to welcome the presence of the
Haitian ambassador.

I would like to start by quoting the speech
President Michel Joseph Martelly delivered on
9 January on the occasion of the inauguration of the
Haitian Parliament. In a moving speech, the President
stated the following:

"Eight million Haitians, out of an estimated
population of 10 million, live without electricity.
Five million cannot read or write and are in the
dark both day and night. Eight Haitians out of
every 10 are living on less than $2 a day. Two per
cent of Haitians control 69 per cent of the
country's wealth. With a working population that
is put at 4.2 million, fewer than 200,000 have
regular formal work. At least 84 per cent of
university graduates live abroad."

I wish today to highlight the relevance of those words,
which dramatically reflect and unambiguously confirm
a situation that Council members were able to observe
during their recent visit to Haiti a couple of weeks ago.

After the nearly eight years that MINUSTAH has
been in Haiti, the results of peacebuilding and
stabilization efforts are visible. However, the
earthquake of 12 January 2010 was a serious setback
caused by large-scale human and material losses, the
traces of which Council members saw during their
recent visit. In order to move forward in strengthening
the rule of law, public security and the socio-economic
sphere, a major effort of the entire international
community has been necessary for Haiti's
reconstruction and the recovery of its institutions, the
re-engineering of its police security structure, and
broad cooperation and aid to stimulate socio-economic
development.

Our main goal is to ensure that present and future
progress allows us to consolidate efforts to ensure
stability and peace so that Haiti can overcome the
situation described by President Martelly once and for
all and so that the country can take off politically and
socio-economically.

With regard to the current political situation, the
report of the Secretary-General mentions the recent
resignation of Prime Minister Garry Conille after only
four months in office. His resignation was a worrying
and telling sign of the state of the governability of
Haiti. The credibility and strength of democratic
12-25487
institutions depend on their ability to respond to
political crises and to avoid negative cyclical
situations, the majority of which are artificial, that
threaten Haiti's progress towards democracy.

As noted by the Council during its visit,
throughout our mission we have emphasized the
importance of avoiding such Government crises and of
reducing disputes between the executive and legislative
branches. Avoiding such unproductive conflicts must
be part of an ongoing effort to improve the quality of
Haitian politics. The main problem is the severe
difficulty encountered by the political class in
achieving collective agreements that would allow
consensus to strengthen institutions and public action.
We have therefore stressed the need for a pact for
democratic governance that would facilitate consensus
and provide solutions for Haiti's main political
problems. We have worked for all of society: members
of Parliament, political parties, unions, employers, the
church and representatives of civil society.

Today the President put forward a candidate for
Prime Minister - the current Foreign Minister,
Laurent Lamothe, who must be approved by
Parliament. MINUSTAH is working in earnest to
ensure that Haiti can soon again have a Government.
The times when there has been no Prime Minister and
no Cabinet in Haiti have seen a rise in insecurity and a
clear decline in governability, with obvious negative
repercussions for development. We are therefore
working with Parliament and the Government to
achieve the appointment of a Prime Minister as soon as
possible.

As to the rule of law and security, without solid
rule of law institutions and an agreement on
governability, it will be difficult if not impossible to
lay a firm foundation for peace and security for all
Haitians. Despite the slow pace, after five years Haiti
finally has a fully staffed Supreme Court. The Court
had no President or members for five years. No
democratic judicial system can work without an
independent and self-regulating judiciary. This
progress is very significant when we consider all that
has occurred in Haiti.

The Security Council's visit provided members
with a snapshot, as it were, that was in many instances
quite upsetting. For us, however, it is more like
watching a film that allows us to discern some
progress. I stress the establishment of the Supreme
12-25487

Court because it is extremely important in moving
towards the rule of law. We have worked to strengthen
the rule of law and institutions, not just conceptually
but physically. MINUSTAH has built 50 courthouses to
ensure the effective provision of justice, and will build
another 30 to complement its support for the judicial
system in Haiti.

Another fundamental pillar of the rule of law -
apart from the judiciary, on which we continue to
work- is the main instrument of the rule of law,
namely, the police force. In this regard, we have been
working for quite some time now, and I can assure the
Council that, over the past six months, the MINUSTAH
police, together with the Haitian National Police
(HNP), has carried out 21,000 patrols and more than
31,000 actions in camps for refugees or internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in Port-au-Prince and the
provinces. Alongside the military component of
MINUSTAH, the HNP has conducted operations to
disband criminal gangs that posed one of the most
serious challenges to stability in Haiti.

Although the response of the police to security
challenges has improved, much remains to be done.
Our current task is to remove the obstacles to better
police action and to strengthen the Haitian National
Police. Today, the HNP numbers 10,000, which is
nearly three times as many as in 2004. However, for a
country of 10 million people, it is still insufficient.
Together with the international community,
MINUSTAH has developed a support programme to
ensure that, by 2016 - the last year of President
Martelly's term in office - we will have provided
professional training to 5,000 or 6,000 officials to
endow Haiti with a significant Police force, thereby
enabling a MINUSTAH drawdown by the end of that
period. In the context of this five-year programme, we
convened a special seminar between the Police and the
international community in order to consider, assess
and improve the efforts under way to ensure that the
outcome will be highly positive.

As is noted in the most recent and important
Security Council resolution 2012 (2011) on Haiti, the
reduction of the military and police components of
MINUSTAH is to be completed by June, pursuant to
the Secretary-General's reports and the resolutions of
the Council. This has not affected security, and we
have had an effective redeployment of forces. We have
maintained the staffing levels of the United Nations
police. There are fewer soldiers and formed police
3
units, but the same number of United Nations police,
which remains unchanged. We trust that this will
continue to be the case, given its important cooperation
with the Haitian National Police.

Political violence has virtually disappeared.
Ordinary crime - principally murders - is relatively
low compared to other countries in the Caribbean and
Central America. However, very serious challenges
remain in ensuring security for the most vulnerable
sectors, in particular with regard to domestic violence
and the abuse of women. In order to be more effective
against such crimes, we have increased patrols, trained
police officers, set up solar-powered street lighting,
and patrolled 24 hours a day, seven days a week in the
main IDP camps. Today, 8 March, International
Women's Day, I wish once again to affirm
MINUSTAH's commitment to countering gender-based
abuse and to contributing to the promotion of Haitian
women in their daily lives and in their professional and
civic roles.

Another problem affecting the rule of law and
security is the emergence of illegal military forces in
the wake of programmatic campaign statements made
by President Martelly concerning the restoration of the
Haitian army dissolved in 1995. MINUSTAH and the
international community have clearly told the
Government that, without prejudice to the sovereignty
of Haitian institutions, they will not lend support to
such forces. We believe and have reiterated that illegal
armed forces are unacceptable. The Government
responded to our demands in a communique issued on
3 March, containing a five-point plan to regularize the
situation. The measures proposed include prohibiting
the use of military uniforms and weapons, reviewing
the pensions received by retired military personnel,
ensuring the smooth conduct of this process, and
liberating those areas occupied by the military.

Yesterday, the Haitian Government convened an
important meeting with MINUSTAH, seeking
cooperation in putting an end to this issue once and for
all. We asked the Government to formally declare the
illegality of these groups and to proceed to identify
retired military personnel who are owed pensions in
order to distinguish them from the young people who
are participating in such activities due to lack of
employment. We are ready to assist and to mitigate the
unnecessary tensions that these activities are raising.
The Government has said that it wants Haiti to be
open to business, and we have said that in this regard
words must be followed by deeds. The Government has
yet to address the issues of constitutional reform,
elections, the creation of a land registry and a civil
identification registry, a constitutional tribunal and a
law on political parties. As I have mentioned, the
Government has already completed some of those
tasks, such as with regard to the Supreme Court, and
has announced the upcoming establishment this month
of the Superior Council of the judiciary, which will be
responsible for discipline in the judicial system. All of
that represents a significant step forward.

We have said that Haiti must hold elections soon.
The elections that were scheduled for November did
not take place. We have told the President that he has a
historic opportunity to organize transparent and
irreproachable elections, with the assistance of the
international community. We have also said that
successful elections could serve to strengthen the
socio-political consensus; conversely, delayed,
contested or postponed elections will without a doubt
undermine the efforts to promote the image of a stable
and dynamic country looking towards the future.

Last week, the President invited the entire
diplomatic corps accredited to Haiti to a meeting
intended to launch the electoral process. We view that
as a positive sign. MINUSTAH, which is serving as the
international community's focal point, will this week
meet with Haitian technical experts in order to prepare
pre-election steps.

A few moments ago, I said that MINUSTAH
believes that it is essential for there to be a
Government in Haiti. In the past, when there has been
a President but no Cabinet or Prime Minister, violence
has increased and economic developed has fallen off.
The Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC) projected that there would be
10 per cent economic growth in Haiti during 2011. But
five months without a Government meant that, in the
end, growth would only be 4.5 per cent. ECLAC
projects 8 per cent growth in 2012, which, in the midst
of the economic crisis, is quite high. We have no doubt
that, if the President continues to be without a
Government, growth in Haiti will decrease, resulting in
serious harm to the Haitian people. That is yet another
reason that we are working hard to ensure that the
Haitian President can soon count on a Prime Minister
and that the State can function normally. That will help
to reduce violence and will improve economic results,
as has been shown in various situations that we have
studied.

Major efforts have been made with regard to
human rights, correctional matters and humanitarian
issues. The Council, which had an opportunity to visit
prisons and camps, knows first-hand what is taking
place. We are making strenuous efforts in order to
make significant progress in this area. In recent
months, our team of lawyers has succeeded in securing
the release of 230 people who had been imprisoned
without trial for many years. There is similar success
with regard to prisons. We are working to improve
conditions for prisoners and are contributing materially
to building prisons in Haiti.

Last September, we announced that displaced
persons still included 634,000 victims of the
earthquake. However, that figure represented only a
third of the original 1,800,000. We can today say that
the number of displaced persons at the end of January
stood at 515,000, a reduction of 120,000 since
September. In our view, those are positive statistics, as
those reductions have made it possible to identify new
populations and resources and to abandon certain sites
where habitation is increasingly difficult owing to a
reduction in international assistance with regard to
food, sanitation and supplies necessary for camp living.

I would like to say that those efforts by
MINUSTAH, which include many positive aspects, are
marred by the moral attributions that Haitian society
attach to the effects of the cholera epidemic, which has
resulted in more than 7,000 deaths, as well as the
sexual abuse committed by military and police
personnel members of our force. I personally believe
that there can be no immunity with regard to crimes
committed against minors, such as rape. I support a fair
trial that includes protections for the rights of the
accused. But they must be carried out in a transparent
manner and include penalties adequate to the severity
of the crimes. And there must be a lifetime ban against
those convicted working with the United Nations, as
the moral values intrinsic in peacekeeping operations
are what gains them respect throughout the world. It is
both an honour and a privilege to be part of them, both
for individuals and for the countries that contribute
personnel for the noble task of contributing to
defending peace in any part of the world where there is
a need.
12-25487

In conclusion, I believe that we have an arduous
task before us in Haiti. However, there is no denying,
from the impression that I have developed during the
eight months that I have been in my post, that this is a
slow process that includes certain reversals but that, in
the end, produces a degree of stabilization vis-a-vis
living conditions, political activity, economic
development and attention to social issues. Some
things in Haiti are a matter of history, including the
risk of authoritarianism and a winner-takes-all
situation. But today there is also a process wherein the
President is learning to work with the Parliament and
vice versa. Between them, with the assistance of the
international community, institutions are being built for
the rule of law in a way that, slowly, a legal order is
being put in place that is much more acceptable today
than it was three to five years ago.

