The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of China.

I would like to thank Mr. Dacie, Chairperson-in-
Office ofthe Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, for attending
today's meeting. I listened carefully to his statement.

In recent years, the OSCE has taken active measures
in conducting preventive diplomacy, enhancing
security and mutual trust, mediating regional disputes
and fighting terrorism. China would like to express
its appreciation for that, and we encourage the OSCE
to continue its efforts to settle disputes peacefully
through good offices and mediation, in order to play a
constructive role in the maintenance of peace, stability
and security. The Security Council and regional
organizations each enjoy unique advantages and
strength when it comes to maintaining international
peace and security. China supports the quest of the
United Nations and the Council, on the basis of the
Charter of the United Nations, to continue to deepen
their cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations in a way that complements one another's
efforts, enabling them to work together to uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter and the basic
norms of international relations.

With regard to the issue of Ukraine, the Security
Council recently adopted resolution 2202 (2015)
unanimously, in a show of firm support on the part of
the international community for the diplomatic efforts
of the leaders of Russia, France, Germany and Ukraine,
and for a political solution to the issue. In order to
address that question, it is imperative that we adhere to
the overarching premise of a political settlement, which
is necessary if the legitimate rights and aspirations
of the various ethnicities in various parts of Ukraine
are to be fully accommodated. Attention could also
be paid to resolving the reasonable concerns of the
parties involved, so as to achieve a balance of interests.
What is needed is a comprehensive, balanced and
durable political settlement, whose achievement is in
the fundamental interests of the parties concerned.
China calls on them to act according to the provisions
of resolution 2202 (2015), to fully implement the
consensus arrived at among the four leaders, and to
work to swiftly ease the situation in eastern Ukraine,
in order to achieve that country's peace, stability and
development.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

