Mr. Volgarev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Zerrougui, for the updated
information on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the implementation of the December
political agreement and the election preparations. We
also note the briefings delivered by the President of
the Conference episcopale nationale du Congo and
the representative of civil society. We regret that we
were not able to hear from the head of the Congolese
Independent National Electoral Commission.

We agree that timely elections on 23 December
would allow for a reduction of political tensions in the
country. We understand that the technical and legislative
preparations for the voting in December are consistent
with the Independent National Electoral Commission
calendar. We note the measures taken by Kinshasa,
including the timely adoption of laws distributing seats
in provincial legislative bodies and local councils, as
well as the publication of a list of parties permitted to
run in the elections and other associations.

We welcome the audit of the electoral list conducted
under the auspices of the International Organization of
la Francophonie and the fact that half of the political
parties in the country have signed up to an electoral
code of conduct. We note President Kabila's statement
before the National Assembly in July, at which the
Congolese leader once again restated his commitment
to respecting the national Constitution.

Finally, the registration process for presidential
candidates has very recently come to a close. As
Council members will be aware, the Front commun pour
le Congo has put forward one candidate: Emmanuel
Ramazani Shadary. We believe that these signals are
appropriate and timely, and encourage opposition
parties to refrain from pushing a negative agenda. We
call on colleagues not to demonize the decision of the
Congolese Independent National Electoral Commission
to use electronic voting machines. We agree that in
order to avoid any problems in the electoral process,
Kinshasa must guarantee its sustainable financing.

We respect the decision of the Congolese
Government to support this process mainly on its own
resources, while we also draw attention to the potential
logistical support that the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo could offer.

We do not rule out the need for the Congolese
authorities to update their implementation of
confidence-building measures, including on the
significant aspects of the political agreement regarding
high-profile cases against political actors abroad.
However, we encourage all opposition parties in the
Republic to work with Kinshasa and the Independent
National Electoral Commission to avoid any outbreak
of violence. It is, moreover, imperative in our view
that the national sovereignty and legislation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo be respected.

It is our understanding that the role of the United
Nations Mission in organizing and holding elections
should not go beyond the mandate anchored in resolution
2409 (2017). The protection of civilians in the electoral
context should be carried out with full observance of
basic peacekeeping principles and without interference
in the domestic affairs of Kinshasa. We believe that it
is up to the Congolese people themselves decide their
own fate, and that the objective of the international
community should be to provide assistance in those
areas where it is genuinely necessary.

Elections alone are no panacea. We must focus on
addressing the root causes of the crisis, and on the need
to continue the fight against illegal armed groups in the
east of the country, which continue to pose a threat to
the civilian population.

