Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): The
international community has demanded two simple steps
of Sudan: the surrender of the three remaining suspects
responsible for plotting the terrorist attack on Egyptian
President Mubarak and, secondly, the end of its support
for terrorism.

The Government of Sudan so far has refused to
comply with these straightforward requirements. The
Secretary-General's latest report makes that fact quite
plain.

What we have witnessed instead, and what we have
heard today, is a phony Sudanese public relations
campaign to try to convince the world that Sudan has
cooperated in the security field. As adoption of this draft
resolution will make clear, the international community is
neither confused nor distracted by such tactical ploys.
Instead, it is prepared to apply measured, incremental
pressure on the Government of Sudan until it meets fully
its obligations. The Council will act today in a manner
which carefully avoids aggravating the humanitarian crisis
in the Sudan. We will ensure that if Sudan forces us to
implement sanctions on its airline, humanitarian relief will
continue.

This draft resolution is what I might call a wake-up
call to the Sudanese authorities. In 90 days we will meet
to decide the entry into force of the sanctions agreed to
today and to set up their modalities. Because of the
binding nature of today's decision, there can be no
question of backtracking if the Sudanese remain obstinate.
There must be no confusion on that point.

This grace period has one purpose: to give the
Sudanese a chance to abandon their attempt to defy the
will of the Security Council and the norms of

 

international decency. There is one way, and one way only,
for the Sudanese Government to avoid these sanctions: to
take meaningful and convincing steps to cooperate in
tracking down the three suspects and to bring an end to
Sudanese support for terrorist groups.

International terrorism targets unprotected people,
people who want only to live in privacy and peace. All
Member States face its threat. World leaders have stressed
their commitment to the battle against terrorism time and
time again. Today we take a small step forward in that
campaign. Our patient approach must not be misread in
Khartoum. Our collective commitment to eradicating
terrorism is unflagging. Continued Sudanese
non-compliance with the demands of the international
community not only will bring these measures into force,
but will compel consideration of further steps.

