Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for being with the Council
today to discuss with us the work of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
I also wish to thank him for the useful briefing he has
given us, as well as for the excellent hospitality and
cooperation extended to the mission during our visit to
East Timor.

The report of the mission covers a wide range of
activities of UNTAET and correctly states that
UNTAET has made significant progress so far. It
should therefore receive continuing support from the
Security Council. An ideal opportunity to address some
of the concerns raised in the report and by Mr. Vieira
de Mello today would be presented by the renewal of
the UNTAET mandate in January. Similarly, it is hoped
that progress can be made by other bodies of the
United Nations to remove procedural impediments
hampering the work of the Transitional Administration,
especially in providing it with the necessary resources.

With regard to the performance of UNTAET's
mandate, my delegation is particularly pleased by the
Timorization process and capacity-building to prepare
the people of East Timor for full independence.

The National Council and Cabinet, together with
the Transitional Administration, are now charged with
the important task of preparing for the electoral
process. Mr. Vieira de Mello deserves credit for most
of this.

The full results of this process will, however, be
most visible after the transitional process, when the
new government will have to function immediately and
fully and will have to cope with the many different
challenges.

My delegation supports an international presence
in East Timor upon independence, in particular in the
areas of development, security and law and order. It is
important that specific planning be started as soon as
possible. In this regard, we welcome the strong
commitment made by donors last week for the training
and equipping of an East Timorese defence force.

The situation of refugees in West Timor and
justice and reconciliation remain critical concerns. My
delegation hopes that the recommendations contained
in the report, as well as the undertakings expressed
during the mission's visit, can be taken forward with
the urgency they deserve. This is particularly necessary
for creating security for the return of refugees and the
return of humanitarian agencies. We welcome the
repatriation of the ex-TNI reservists (MILSAS) and
their families and strongly encourage more such group
repatriations.

The Government of Indonesia should be assisted
in its efforts to receive the refugees wishing to stay in
Indonesia, since this is an important element in solving
the overall refugee problem.

My delegation welcomes the considerable
progress made by the Government of Indonesia in
taking the justice process forward, in particular by
arresting suspects and in passing the human rights
legislation. Again, we trust that further progress will
soon be achieved.

My delegation reiterates the importance of the
proposals in the report aimed at enforcing the existing
measures of cooperation between East Timor and
Indonesia and welcomes the undertakings already made
in this regard. We also strongly encourage building
bilateral future relations between East Timor and
Indonesia, and efforts already under way should be
expanded.

I am glad to learn today from Mr. Vieira de Mello
that the meeting of the Joint Border Commission will
take place on Thursday.

In conclusion, East Timor is well on its way to
full independence, and all that is required is continued
support by the international community. In the same
way, outstanding issues, such as refugees, justice and
reconciliation, can be resolved. What is required is for
all the parties to work together to see how best to
implement the various recommendations in the report.

