Mr. Kamilov (Uzbekistan) (spoke in Russian):
Before starting my brief statement, I wish to align
myself fully with the thought expressed by many
previous speakers that cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
has tremendous potential in terms of taking
preventive steps and countering such a major threat
as of our time terrorism.

It quite clear that terrorism represents the leading
and major source of violence around the world today.
Terrorism makes use ofthe latest technology, diversifies
its sources of funding, takes advantage of newly opened
international transit corridors and adopts new methods
and ways of attracting new recruits and income Streams.

I am not going to dwell on the various conventions
and United Nations instruments to which Uzbekistan
is signatory, but will simply say that one of the most
important topics today is preventing the process of
radicalization among young people. I believe that this
issue is crucial to more than just Uzbekistan and our
region. As has been noted, a related and ever more
important issue is the return of foreign terrorist fighters
and of people who for whatever reason find themselves
in areas of conflict - not only adults from Uzbekistan
and our region, but also many women and children,
many of whom are currently in Syria and Iraq.

Uzbekistan has already transported 156 citizens of
Uzbekistan from Syria, mostly women and children,
in a complex and high-risk operation. Today we are
awaiting the return of 65 children from Iraq and 170
people from Syria. Accordingly, we certainly require
the support of international organizations and of States
directly involved in the processes under way in the
Middle East. In this regard, I am referring primarily to
the assistance of permanent members of the Security
Council represented here today.

We are ready to cooperate. We have experience in
the rehabilitation and reintegration of returnees into a
healthy and normal society. I hope that the successful
conduct of such operations can have a positive influence
so that new groups will not travel to conflict areas
in future.

In conclusion, I would simply like to draw
the Council's attention to two points. First, when
discussing terrorism, it seems customary to mention
the region of Central Asia. We in that region would
very much like the international community not to have
the impression that Central Asia is a region with huge
potential for the spread of terrorism, extremism and
other, similar processes. We have been hearing for 25
years that Central Asia is on the verge of exploding.
In fact, Central Asia is developing. There is a brand
new political atmosphere in the region and mutual trust
and cooperation among leaders are increasing. We have
managed over the past few years to resolve a number of
very complex issues, including the demarcation of State
borders, the management of water resources, and the
development of transport links, and established close
cooperation in the security sphere. All of this is to say
that Central Asia has significant capacity and potential
to ensure its own security, but, given the global nature
of the processes we are discussing, broad international
support is required. Today we heard about various
formats of cooperation between countries of our region
and the international community, including other major
States. Of course, we are very interested in pursuing
this kind of cooperation.

The second issue that I wanted to touch upon is that,
in this context, while it is quite justified, we always
mention Afghanistan when we speak of challenges
and sources of extremism and terrorism. However, as
neighbours of Afghanistan in the region that Afghanistan
has historically, culturally and economically always
been a part of, we note that Afghanistan is not only a
challenge, but is also a tremendous opportunity.

By way of example, if we manage to implement the
potential transport and connectivity projects, a quick
look at a map suffices to reveal what could be done
if the European continent were linked to Afghanistan,
Afghanistan to Central Asia and then, further on, to
South Asia. There would then be a direct link between
Europe and South Asia, with Afghanistan as the
lynchpin. Just by implementing these types of projects,
Afghanistan could reap considerable revenue that could
contribute to restoring its economy.

I will not talk about such obvious things as there
being no military solution to the Afghan problem. The
only way to move forward is through direct dialogue
between the Government and the opposition. That is
self-evident. Uzbekistan is actively pursuing a political
solution and is a part of the political process, and we
will continue to do all we can to contribute to further
bolstering the peace process that has begun to coalesce
for the first time in the past 40 years. In spite of a
certain level of tensions, Uzbekistan is implementing
widescale transport and communication projects and
links with Afghanistan and our trade in border areas is
growing. We have also established an education centre
for Afghan students, a medical centre and cargo centres.

Experience shows that despite existing tensions
and problems, we need to work and look towards the
future. This is all being done not to satisfy the current
Government orpolitical forces, but rather for the future of
Afghanistan, where an entire generation that has grown
up over the past 40 years has known only war. In this
regard, in terms of preventing youth radicalization, the
United Nations and other regional organizations, major
States and neighbours of Afghanistan all need to focus
on education programmes. Only through education and
enlightenment will we be able to counter the process of
radicalization among the young population.

Those are the two issues that I wanted to address
today. All the other issues have been covered here, and
I do not want to repeat what has already been said.

