Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me, on behalf of the Senegalese
delegation, to thank the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Miroslav Jenca, and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al
Hussein, for their respective briefings.

My delegation is of the view that each State must
ensure the protection and promotion of the rights of
its citizens, thereby contributing to the reinforcement
of domestic and international peace and security. It is
my country's conviction that the enjoyment of human
rights is essential to the dignity of any human being.
That is why in my country, protecting and promoting
human rights and fundamental freedoms is a cardinal
principle, founded in respect for the diversity of our
human societies and the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States. In that regard, we believe that
it is necessary to create conditions conducive to
strengthened international cooperation in the area
of human rights, while underscoring their universal,
indivisible and interdependent nature.

Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) on
sustaining peace, and the idential General Assembly
resolution 70/262, adopted in April 2016, underscores
the close link between human rights and domestic and
international peace and security. We also believe that it,
as independent and sovereign States, we must engage in
solidarity on all issues, including human rights, on the
basis of mutual respect and constructive dialogue. It is in
that spirit that we have provided special mechanisms to
promote and protect human rights throughout the world.
That remains a constant challenge that also constitutes
one of the three pillars of the Organization. Indeed, the
mechanisms established by the United Nations - the
Human Rights Council, the Universal Periodic Review
and other bodies established through international
instruments - are complementary and relevant tools
that, while always susceptible to improvement, can
address human rights issues, as noted in various reports
of the Secretary-General on the issue.

The information provided by today's briefers,
Mr. Jenca and Mr. Al Hussein, to which the Senegalese
delegation pays great heed, are strongly disconcerting
and indicate that the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, including
that of foreigners held in detention, constitutes a
threat to international peace and security. That is
why we take special note of the briefing of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the situation in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Senegal
encourages that country to better cooperate with the
relevant mechanisms on the promotion of human rights,
including the Office of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and the commission of inquiry on
human rights in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea.

The denuclearization and stabilization of the
Korean peninsula require, inter alia, an improvement of
the human rights situation, including by taking better
into account the humanitarian consequences of the
sanctions measures imposed on the country.

