Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the important briefings delivered by Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres, Ms. Cate Blanchett in
her capacity as United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) Goodwill Ambassador and
Mr. Gettu, Associate Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP).

Peru remains attentive to and deeply concerned
over the situation of the Muslim Rohingya population in
Rakhine state in Myanmar, as well as the largest refugee
camp in the world, established in Cox's Bazar thanks to
the solidarity of the Government of Bangladesh, which
already hosts more than 900,000 people.

A year has passed since the indiscriminate acts of
violence that triggered the mass exodus of hundreds of
thousands of people, and it has been four months since
the members of the Security Council saw in situ the
gravity of the humanitarian situation, the vulnerability
of the population and the horror of the atrocities
denounced. Peru had the honour of leading the visit of
the members of the Council, together with the United
Kingdom and Kuwait.

However, we must recognize that the responses
that have been made remain insufficient to sustainably
resolve the crisis, despite the efforts made by the
international community and the initiative of the
Secretary-General, who brought the matter to the
attention of the Council, exercising, for the first time
since 1986, the prerogatives conferred to him by the
Charter of the United Nations, as my colleague from
the Netherlands mentioned. That is why we must pool
our efforts to achieve the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable repatriation ofthe Muslim Rohingya people.

The agreements signed by Myanmar, Bangladesh,
UNHCR and UNDP and the establishment of a Special
Envoy's office in Naypyidaw were steps in the right
direction, as is the establishment of the national
commission of inquiry. Those arrangements must be
translated into results on the ground in terms of access
to justice and returnees. We welcome recent meetings
aimed at promoting livelihoods and the provision of
basic services for returnees. However, we emphasize the
urgency of fully implementing the recommendations
of the Kofi Annan Advisory Commission on Rakhine
State. We take this opportunity to join in the tributes to
the former Secretary-General and highlight the validity
of his legacy.

We stress the need to address the root causes of
the conflict in Rakhine state and the marginalization
of Rohingya Muslims as soon as possible, which entails
their recognition as citizens and the full exercise oftheir
fundamental rights and freedoms, including freedom
of movement, dispelling dehumanizing narratives and
overturning discriminatory regulations. It is essential
to restore the trust of the Rohingya population by
encouraging dialogue among all stakeholders, including
the affected population and neighbouring countries,
with the support and assistance of the United Nations
and the Security Council.

We believe that it is imperative to deploy on
the ground mechanisms capable of coordinating
and ensuring the short- and long-term conditions
required for the return of refugees and, consequently,
building sustainable peace. The Myanmar-Bangladesh
ministerial meeting held on 10 August is an encouraging
sign. We also believe that a transparent, independent and
comprehensive accountability process, withjurisdiction
over all human rights violations, is essential. Peru is
carefully studying the recent report of the Independent
International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar of
the Human Rights Council (A/HRC/39/64), including
its specific recommendations. The atrocities that were
committed cannot go unpunished.

Lastly, it is urgent to allow access to northern
Rakhine state to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and all independent
international actors who can advocate for the forgotten
victims - as the Secretary-General called them - so
that they have access to justice and so as to ensure the
guarantees necessary for the safe return of refugees and
displaced persons.

