Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the African Group.

Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Mr. President, upon your presidency of the Security
Council for this month and on the wise manner in
which you have been conducting the Council's
proceedings. We want to thank Mr. Le Roy for his
presentation today and to welcome among us
Mr. Romano Prodi.

It has been seven months since the Security
Council adopted its presidential statement on the
agenda item "Peace and security in Africa" on
18 March 2009 (S/PRST/2009/3). That statement
constituted additional proof of the Council's
recognition and awareness of the crucial importance of
establishing more effective strategic relationships
between the African Union and the United Nations.
The ongoing process of continuous consultations and
cooperation between the main bodies of both
organizations is indeed commendable and should be
further strengthened and improved.

We therefore welcome today's Council meeting to
consider the Secretary-General's report entitled
"Support to African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations"(S/2009/470), and
we hope it will contribute to achieving tangible
progress in this area.

While recognizing the Security Council's primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, we are all well aware of the
increasing importance of regional arrangements in the
promotion of peace, security and stability in their
respective regions. Africa is a perfect example of this
rising new dynamism in regional arrangements.

The African Union has established a continental
peace and security architecture and has shown its
unswerving willingness and commitment to meet the
challenges faced by the continent in terms of security
and stability. The Peace and Security Council, the
initiatives undertaken by the Panel of the Wise, the
measures undertaken in the establishment of the
Continental Early Warning System and the measures
aimed at the launching of the African Standby Force
illustrate this new dynamic.

Nevertheless, Africa's strong political will to
overcome the difficulties related to peace and security
on the continent needs to be bolstered by substantial
support for the African Union's resource base and
capacities. That was in fact the spirit of the report of
the African Union-United Nations panel to consider the
modalities of how to support African Union
peacekeeping operations chaired by Mr. Prodi
(S/2008/813) and the main purpose of the Secretary-
General's report. The issues dealt with were, first, how
to establish a close strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union and which
mechanisms and processes should be put in place to
enhance the partnership between the two organizations;
and secondly, what mechanisms are the most
appropriate to ensure the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility of financing African Union
peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations.

In this context, the African Group would like to
share with Council members some of our observations
on these issues. We stress the importance of a more
developed and effective partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations, especially
the African Union.

Secondly, we underline the importance of the
African Union-United Nations panel's report, dated
31 December 2008, on the modalities for support to
African Union peacekeeping operations as a qualitative
and decisive step towards improving this partnership
for peacekeeping operations in Africa.

Thirdly, we take note of the recommendations in
the Secretary-General's report of 18 September 2009.
Those recommendations, as underlined at the 206th
meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council held in Addis Ababa on 15 October 2009,
"provide a good basis for strengthening cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations in
the maintenance of peace and security".

Fourthly, we express the readiness of the African
Union to continue its consultations and close
cooperation with the United Nations in order to ensure
"predictable, sustainable and flexible funding for
African Union-led peace support operations"
(S/2009/470, para. 6).

Fifthly, we note with appreciation the
recommendations concerning capacity-building for
peacekeeping operations.

Sixthly, we underscore the crucial importance of
effective and continuous follow-up of these
recommendations and the means to implement them.

The African Group considers that maintaining the
momentum of fruitful discussion and consistent
consideration of these issues, and ensuring adequate
and timely follow-up on the agreed recommendations
and measures to be taken, is essential to achieving our
common ultimate goal: maintaining peace and security
throughout the world by rendering peacekeeping more
effective and more compatible with the requirements of
each region.

