Mrs. Okonjo-Iweala: I bring greetings to all
present from the President of the World Bank, Bob
Zoellick, who regrets that he could not be here today. I
particularly want to thank you, Mr. President, for
bringing us together to discuss this most important
issue and for inviting the World Bank to contribute. I
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his strong
leadership of the United Nations family on this issue.

As 2015 fast approaches, the world's attention is
turning to progress in achieving the Millennium
Development Goals. The analysis that the World Bank
has commissioned to inform its 2011 world
development report on conflict and fragility confirms a
disheartening fact - countries that are wracked by
conflict and that suffer endemic fragility are not
making the progress they need if the Millennium
Development Goals are to become a reality for their
people.

We are all aware of the desperate needs of these
countries. Our research suggests that fragile States and
those recovering from fragility account for only 37 per
cent of population of developing countries if we
exclude China, India and Russia. However, they
account for 58 per cent of poverty in the developing
world, as well as 67 per cent of infant deaths and 69
per cent of the deaths of children under five. Our
analysis indicates that no fragile State has yet achieved
a single Millennium Development Goal. By 2015, only
10 per cent of fragile States are expected to achieve the
goal of halving poverty and hunger.

Against this backdrop, today's debate is a most
timely one. These findings are a stark reminder of the
enormous and complex challenges that lie ahead, but
they are also a call to mobilize our combined resources
on behalf of the poor and powerless.

Violent conflict is one of the most profound
development challenges. Without peace and security,
there can be no sustained development, as we have
heard from our colleagues who spoke earlier. However,
focusing on peacebuilding alone is not sufficient. Just
as development cannot occur in the absence of peace,
peace without development is a peace that may not
last.

In recent years, the international community's
discourse addressing violent conflict and its
consequences has become more nuanced. We
increasingly recognize that humanitarian action,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, State-

building and development do not happen in a
mechanical linear sequence, but are closely interlinked
and overlapping. Such a complex landscape calls for
cooperation and coherence among actors. It challenges
us to address the short-term demands of a deeply
damaged society while making sure that our actions do
not compromise the longer-term goal of building an
effective State.

Against this background, I would like to propose
one overarching principle that must inform all that we
do - results matter. By this, I mean that all that we do
must contribute directly to results on the ground.
Whether we are working in our headquarters offices to
shape a new policy, engaging with a partner
Government on a national development plan, or
rebuilding a road for a war-ravaged community, we
must constantly ask a single question: How will these
actions provide people with a better life now and in the
future?

The Government of Burundi clearly understands
the importance of results. In 2006, with the support of
the World Bank Institute, it introduced a rapid-results
approach. This approach, which breaks down long-term
development plans into manageable lOO-day chunks, is
now applied in 80 Government projects. A pilot project
in the Ministry of Education resulted in the distribution
of 250,000 textbooks to primary schools in 60 days,
when previously this had required an entire school
year. As part of a health care pilot project, 482
pregnant women visited health centres and were
subject to HIV/AIDS screening in one month - far in
excess of the previous monthly average of 71.

As we debate here on some of the best ways to
get results, I would like us to focus on three crucial
areas: country context, partnership and accountability. I
believe that if we pay attention to these three areas, we
will be able to contribute something substantial and
enduring towards the immense challenges of helping
countries create an environment of peace and security.
Let me briefly elaborate on these three points.

First, it is about country context. Of course, we
must learn from and build on our experience but, in the
urgency of a post-conflict environment, it is often too
tempting to simply apply a solution that worked
elsewhere. We must guard against trying to replicate
what we have done in the past without ensuring that it
is appropriate to the present context. We must guard
against any prescription that prevents adaptation and
flexibility. We need to do a better job of understanding
the drivers of conflict and to understand the structure
of elite incentives. We must also identify each
country's fundamental strengths, comprehend the limits
of its capacity to absorb change and act on what that
knowledge tells us.

The World Bank-supported Justice for the Poor
programme works to support the development of
context-specific approaches to improving access to
justice in South-East Asia, Africa and the Pacific. In
Sierra Leone, the programme, along with other national
and international efforts, is helping to scale up
grassroots justice services. Trained community
paralegals employ a combination of mediation,
education and advocacy, and occasionally litigation, to
seek redress for Violations of rights. They engage both
customary and formal institutions and provide a
flexible, cost-effective method for delivering justice
services that is tailored to Sierra Leone's particular
socio-legal context. The Government is establishing a
legal aid board, which will recognize and certify the
paralegals, and it is expected that, within five years,
about 100 community paralegals will serve all 154
chiefdoms in the country.

Our coordination efforts must be driven by our
need to deliver meaningful results. I know that some
see comfort in predictability - that our response in
post-conflict situations would be improved by
predetermining who does what. I must challenge that
notion. While it is important that we recognize where
our overall comparative advantage may lie, it is
essential that our response should be determined by the
dictates of the situation and our relative capacity to
deliver in the particular context of the partner
countries. Predetermination could easily result in
inflexibility at a time when adaptability and nimbleness
are most needed. Decisions must be delegated to where
the best information is and be made at the lowest
effective level. That means that we need to put our best
people into the field, for it is our field staff who are
best placed to decide, in consultation with their country
partners, who should do what, when and how.

Secondly, partnerships are key. We must
recognize that achieving a sustainable peace and
setting in train a broad-based agenda for development
are ultimately the work of a State and its citizens. We
at the World Bank and in the development community
need to be humble and to remind ourselves that we
play a supporting role. We provide our resources,

expertise and security assistance so that a people may
be able to take back the reins of Government. The only
credible coordinator of a State-building process is a
legitimate sovereign Government. Our assistance must
be shaped to support the country in mobilizing the
human and material capacity that it has at its disposal
to provide the services that its citizens need. That will
mean many things for us. For example, we must pool
our funding wherever possible to maximize coherence
and reduce the burden on the Government, such as
through multi-donor trust funds. We must support and
work through the national budget and strengthen
national fiduciary systems. We must use our
comparative advantages and tailor our efforts to local
needs and preferences, and we must reach agreement
with our country partners on when it is appropriate to
press for change and when we should stand back to
allow a population to determine the need for reform.

Just as we need to strengthen our partnership with
the countries that we seek to assist, we need to look too
at our own partnerships. Are we working together
effectively to achieve the results expected of us? The
World Bank has recently appointed a senior envoy to
Haiti, and a similar appointment to the Sudan is
expected soon. Those will strengthen our partnerships
in the field in countries in particular need. We are
heartened by the support that we and the United
Nations have received from the Swiss Government,
which will enable us to exchange senior officers
between the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office and the World Bank's Fragile and Conflict-
Affected Countries Unit to help facilitate and deepen
our complementary efforts.

My third point is that we are all accountable.
While Governments must ultimately be accountable to
their citizens for what they do, we must do everything
that we can to reinforce that line of accountability.
Running a parallel service delivery programme may
give us results in the short term but it will not
contribute to, and may even undermine, efforts to build
the social compact that lies at the heart of a well-
functioning State.

Shifting accountability also requires us to change
the way that we monitor our efforts. We must get away
from our traditional preoccupation with tracking inputs
and focus our attention, and that of our partners, on
achieving outcomes. Confronted by an uncoordinated
and poorly performing health-care system, the Afghan
Ministry of Public Health has established a basic
package of health services, delivered through
community health workers and health centres. For the
first time in many years, Afghans, particularly in rural
areas, are seeing the delivery of valued health services
made possible by a committed partnership between
Government and local providers. Access for the people
living in districts where the programme is being
implemented has increased from 9 per cent in 2003 to
over 80 per cent now. The most recent data for 2008
shows a fourfold increase in the number of outpatient
Visits to a level three times higher than in a
neighbouring country. The programme has also seen a
decrease in the under-five mortality rate from 257 per
1,000 in 2000 to 161 in 2007 to 2008.

In the spirit of mutual accountability, we too
should be held accountable for what we deliver. For
example, if we demand transparency in our partners,
we should expect to provide it ourselves. In that
regard, I am pleased to report that the World Bank has
adopted a new Access to Information Policy that will
open up the Bank's work even further, enhance public
ownership of the development agenda, strengthen
partnerships and encourage greater participation in
Bank-supported operations.

So, as we turn to our deliberations today, I would
ask us all to keep those three points in mind: the
importance of the country context, true partnerships
and appropriate accountability. I know that such ideas
may sit uncomfortably with our limited appetite for
risk and our need to demonstrate to our domestic
constituencies the quick wins expected in an immediate
post-conflict period. It is clear to me that addressing
the challenges of development through such lenses will
require fundamental changes to the way in which we
do business.

Fortunately, the next few months will bring a
number of opportunities to reshape and improve the
way in which we do business. For example, the
Secretary-General will report on progress since
launching his report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304) last June, and, at the
end of the year, the World Bank will present its World
Development Report on the themes of conflict and
fragility.

Let us make no mistake. If we are to deliver real
results for the people living in fragile and conflict-
affected situations, those areas deserve our full
attention. We know that the costs of failure are great,
but let us hear in mind that the benefits that flow from
success can be even greater. Starting with our
deliberations here today, let us take every opportunity
to ensure that success.

