The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I, too, would like to welcome the presence here
in the Council of the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), Mr. Leonid Kozhara, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine, and to thank him for having
presented, inter alia, his country's priorities for its
chairmanship of the OSCE.

My country shares his expressed desire to
continue to strengthen the cooperation between the
United Nations and the OSCE in particular and, more
generally, between the United Nations and regional
organizations under Chapter VIII of the Charter.
We believe that concerted responses by the United
Nations and regional organizations and closer and more
sustained partnerships will prevent and permanently
resolve frozen and latent conflicts and those under way
almost everywhere in the world.

In this sense, my country welcomes the major
contribution the OSCE has made to conflict resolution.
In working to create a security community through
continuous dialogue and based on the concept of global
and indivisible security, the OSCE has been able to
ensure stability in its region and improve the lives of
its individuals and communities, despite the several
remaining areas of tension. Indeed, its multifaceted
work in Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
particular, have provided support for the creation of
institutions designed to avert future conflicts, strengthen
governance in those countries, and encourage the
consolidation of multi-ethnic and multi-faith societies,
even ifprogress in that area is still needed.

My country believes that, in order to achieve the best
results and avoid duplication of efforts in their areas of
responsibility, the OSCE and the United Nations must
continue to strengthen their cooperation on the basis
of their respective experience, which could benefit
other regional organizations. Indeed, the recognized
expertise ofthe OSCE in electoral processes, supporting
for democratization process, the implementation of
confidence-building measures, the strengthening of
security and the fight against terrorism - all of which
are issues that Africa faces - could be very useful,
particularly to the African Union. That is why we
welcome the focus of the Ukrainian chairmanship
of the OSCE on strengthening cooperation with the
United Nations, and we hope that such cooperation will
extend to other regional organizations. No State and no
institution, no matter how powerful, can stand alone
against threats to international peace and security.

Togo welcomes Ukraine's decision to include, in
the list of priorities of its chairmanship, a new effort
to resolve unresolved or prolonged conflicts within the
OSCE region, including the conflict in Transdniestria,
which has not been able to reach a viable resolution
for over 20 years. In that regard, we welcome the
announcement of a new round of negotiations on
the issue under the "5+2" format in the coming days
in Odessa. Togo urges the parties to the conflict to
become more involved in those negotiations in a spirit
of consensus so that a mutually acceptable political
solution can finally emerge. My country believes that
a proposal for a resolution to the conflict that takes the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and Constitution of the
Republic of Moldova into account, alongside a special
guaranteed status for Transdniestria, could be a good
basis for negotiations.

Furthermore, we hope that, in chairing the OSCE,
Ukraine will achieve the desired success in reconciling
the positions of the parties to the conflicts in Nagorno
Karabakh, South Ossetia and Abkhazia, and thereby
allow for progress towards their final resolution.
The Nagorno Karabakh conflict, which has already
lasted too long and has had a negative impact on the
relationship between Armenia and Azerbaijan, should
receive special attention so that the suffering of the
people of that region can be brought to an end. We hope
that Mr. Kozhara's visit to Baku in June will allow
move the process forward.

Let me conclude by wishing every success to
Ukraine in implementing its mandate. In addition to
the priorities it has identified for its tenure, it must
overcome, on the one hand, the lack of interest shown
by some members of the organization that no longer
recognize its usefulness, and, on the other hand, the
current disagreements regarding the activities of the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights,
which have been largely responsible for delays in the
adoption of the budget this year.

I new resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Kozhara to respond to the
comments and questions of Council members.

