Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I will address the Security Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau and
Chair of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. I will share some exclusively personal
opinions with members regarding my responsibility
within these organs.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau,
Guinea-Bissau is experiencing a political crisis and
the root causes of instability in the country remain
unresolved. International and regional efforts to find
a lasting solution to the political crisis seem to have
no effect on the ground, as none of the provisions of
the Conakry Agreement has been implemented. This is
mainly due to a lack of political will. The international
community could encourage the use of different tools
such as dialogue, good offices, maintaining special
political missions in the field, sanctions and so on.
Ultimately, however, the solution to end institutional
instability and achieve peace in Guinea-Bissau lies in
the hands of its leaders.

The country continues to be affected by the
uncertainty of the political situation, without clear
indication of substantive progress towards the
achievement of a solution in the near future. Next
year will an electoral year in Guinea-Bissau, and the
stability, transparency and legitimacy of its institutions
will be the cornerstone of the democratic process and
crucial to consolidating peace in the country.

In June, I paid a visit to the country, where I
met with various political, military and civil society
representatives of Guinea-Bissau. It should be
highlighted that, in the five years since the sanctions
were approved, this was the first time that a Chair of
the Committee had visited the country. The visit on
the ground showed me that there is a need for greater
dialogue between the Committee i in fact, the Council
itself - and the citizens of Guinea-Bissau. In this
regard, I encourage the new Chair of the Committee
to make at least one visit to the country in order to
obtain information on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
first hand.

I have no intention of reiterating what I already
conveyed to the Council on 24 August (S/PV.8031), but
I would like to highlight some of the findings of my
briefing that are still valid. First, the lack of political
will to reach a solution is based on personal interests
and ambitions, and not on religious, ideological, ethnic
or philosophical differences.

Secondly, since 2012 the sanctioned military
officers have maintained a conduct that respects the
constitutional order and the laws of the country, and
abstained from interfering in the political life of Guinea-
Bissau. It should be noted that these people continue to
rise in the ranks of the army and that some have been
promoted to higher ranks. This has contributed to a
certain climate of impunity.

Thirdly, since last year two persons listed on
the sanctions regime have travelled outside Guinea-
Bissau. However, both were arrested at the airport of
destination and repatriated to Guinea-Bissau. I have
received no other information that other persons have
violated the travel ban. This is a positive indication that
Member States are maintaining the proper attitude and
are increasingly vigilant in enforcing sanctions.

Fourthly, the mission of the Economic Community
of West African States Mission in Guinea-Bissau has
played a vital role in contributing to preventing the
constitutional order from being threatened.

By way of striking a balance, I would like to
say that sanctions have played an important role in
maintaining the constitutional order in Guinea Bissau,
but they are not driving the current political situation.
As I have said on other occasions, I believe that it is
necessary to consider the sanctions list cautiously,
taking into account the current situation and events in
Guinea-Bissau. The imposition of sanctions as a means
or tool available to the Security Council to achieve an
explicit goal. Their maintenance or revision must work
to achieve that end.

In conclusion, it is important for the international
community to continue to support Guinea-Bissau
through various means, as has been done to date.
However, it is also vital that this supportbe accompanied
by positive signals and tangible progress being made by
the political leaders of Guinea-Bissau.

I shall now turn to my role as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on the International Criminal Tribunals.

During the past two years, the Group has met
regularly. As is its practice, it has also met before
presenting the semi-annual reports of the Courts to
the Security Council and when the situation required
it, in order to discuss various cases, some of which
have been brought to the Council's attention by the
Presidents of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. The Group also
prepared and negotiated the text of various Security
Council resolutions, such as that referring for example
to the appointment of the Prosecutor of the Residual
Mechanism, the amendment of the ICTY statute, or the
extension of the mandate of the President and Judges,
among other examples.

The annual reports of the Informal Working Group
on the International Criminal Tribunals have provided
detailed information on its activities. The Group has
also been able to monitor the work of these institutions
and their operation through its comprehensive and
detailed reports. Specifically, if we consider the ICTY,
we witnessed progress in the implementation of its
completion strategy. The Tribunal has been able to
successfully overcome the difficulties that arose and
complied with its forecasts and calendar of Closures.
I note that on 31 December, the ICTY will reach the
end of its mandate, and we are currently drafting a
consensual press statement to mark that historical
event in a positive way.

Allow me to say in my personal capacity that the
Tribunal, in serving international justice, has allowed
States to prosecute those responsible for crimes
against humanity, crimes of genocide and war crimes.
It has contributed to the development of international
law and has pioneered certain areas of international
humanitarian law. It has defined the concept of armed
conflict and contributed to a more precise definition
of the crime of genocide. It has developed important
jurisprudence regarding sexual crimes and crimes
against cultural patrimony. It has contributed to the
elaboration of a concept of command responsibility by
stating clearly that justice applies to everyone, whether
they be Head of State or Government or other high-
ranking official. It has contributed in that manner to
the establishment of historical truth.

I also call on the Security Council, and especially
States, to continue to work with the Residual
Mechanism, since, as indicated at the Security Council
debate that took place on 6 December (see S/PV.8120),
the prosecution of all perpetrators of serious violations
of international humanitarian law committed in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia is not over. Many
victims still await justice.
Finally, I thank the Office of Legal Affairs and the
Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat for
their valuable support over the past two years of our
chairmanship of the two subsidiary bodies of which I
have spoken. I wish every success to those who will
succeed me in this task: the Permanent Representative
of Equatorial Guinea, Ambassador Anatolio Ndong
Mba, who will chairing the Guinea-Bissau committee,
and the Permanent Representative of Peru, Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, who will chair the Informal
Working Group on the International Tribunals.

