Mr. Cardi (Italy): In the period following the
most recent Security Council debate on Afghanistan
(see S/PV.7526), the security situation in the country
has deteriorated, as highlighted in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2015/942). In recent months, we
have seen a further increase in violence by insurgent
groups, confirmed as well by data of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
on civilian victims, indicating a 26 per cent increase
between August and October 2015, as compared to the
same period in 2014. We strongly condemn the most
recent terrorist attacks in Kandahar and Kabul, as well
as today's attack in Bagram.

The National Unity Government continues its
steadfast commitment to combat those aiming to
destabilize the country and to foil the progress made in
democratic and social sectors, and the achievements on
civil rights and on the situation of women in the past 14
years through the efforts of Afghan institutions and the
support of the international community.

Italy will continue to support the Afghan
Government and institutions, in its commitment
to sustaining the country's security and stability
and to fulfilling the aspirations of its people for a
future of peace and prosperity. Evidence of that is
our decision to maintain in 2016, together with our
partners, our contribution to the train, advise and
assist mission - Resolute Support - led by NATO to
continue efforts in strengthening the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces units that are fighting
insurgent hostile groups. Italy will also continue to play
its role as framework nation in the western region of
Afghanistan.
We are all well aware, of course, as underscored
in the General Assembly resolution on Afghanistan
adopted in recent weeks, internal reconciliation is
paramount to achieve long-lasting peace and stability.
Promising signs have emerged from the Islamabad
Conference of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process,
with the high-level participation of the region's main
countries, and of President Ghani in particular. Those
are positive indications for strengthened cooperation
among the region's main actors, particularly Afghanistan
and Pakistan, with the support of the international
community, in the fight against terrorist groups and in
creating conditions that are conducive to resuming the
negotiation process between the Government and the
Taliban.

Italy supports all efforts and initiatives in that
direction, based on closer cooperation among actors
that can lead to an internal and inclusive peace process.
That entails the rejection of violence; breaking all
links with terrorism; and respect for human rights,
in particular those of women, whom we hope to see
actively participating in future peace negotiations, and
of girls.

This year has witnessed a worrying increase in the
flux of Afghan citizens fleeing their country because of
the worsening security situation.

Self-sustaining development will be untenable
without the necessary internal reforms. We reiterate
our appreciation for the efforts of the National Unity
Government and the plans arranged under its Self-
Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework,
launched last September. An articulated programme
based on indicators and clearly defined timelines is
certainly the best premise for any action on reform. But
that must be accompanied by effective implementation
with measurable results in the areas of political
governance, electoral reform, the rule of law, the fight
against corruption, economic governance and human
rights.

Against that backdrop, priority must be given to
the protection and promotion of women's rights, to
strengthening women's empowerment in all sectors
of society, and to their physical protection - because
episodes of violence against them have increased in
recent times, as shown by some extremely serious
cases, which we strongly condemn. This, despite the
commendable efforts of the Afghan Government,
shows how much work must still be done. Of course,
we commend the work done by the United Nations and
Special Representative Nicholas Haysom.
In conclusion, the hard work of the Afghan
authorities and institutions, with the support of the
international community, is crucial if the reform
process is to achieve its goals of further democratic
consolidation and self-reliance. The Brussels ministerial
conference of4 and 5 October 2016, to be co-hosted by
the European Union, will be an opportunity to confirm
this partnership, which, considering the extraordinary
level of mutual commitment between the international
community and Afghanistan, must lead to concrete
progress in the area of reform.

