Mr. Sharma (India): I would like to express our
appreciation to you, Sir, for calling an open meeting on
this important issue. I would also like to extend to you
a welcome to New York. It is indeed a great pleasure to
see you presiding over this meeting. Your personal
presence throughout this meeting is a testimony to the
importance which you attach to the subject. In keeping
with your direction, I shall abridge the statement which
I was about to make.

India has an abiding connection and concern with
Africa. With the waning of the colonial era, we did not
regard the liberation of Asia as complete without the
liberation of Africa, and we have fought for African
causes since becoming a founding Member of the
United Nations. For instance, the item of apartheid was
inscribed by India on the agenda of the United Nations.
Indeed, we have considered the destiny of independent
nations of Asia and Africa as linked in the quest for an
equitable world order. This focused debate in the
Council, therefore, on a continent with which we have
historic ties of solidarity and an emotional bond is one
which we particularly welcome.

We would also like to thank Ambassador Koonjul
for the guidelines prepared for this meeting to
stimulate a more focused debate. While the questions
posed in the list are all very pertinent, we will dwell
upon only a few.

To Africa's credit, within decades of gaining
freedom, it has collectively endorsed the firm principle
of participative governance, and the democratic norm
has already been established in the continent. The
dynamics and fundamental freedoms of democracy are
the antidote to repression, injustice and social,
economic and political marginalization. Democratic
processes nurture a culture of reason and
accommodation and work towards balance in resource
allocation and distribution. They ensure openness and
transparency in decision-making and impart a sense of
all-embracing participation and ownership - and your
country, Mr. President, is a shining example of this.
They give a shared stake to all in a society's future. It
is a tribute to African leadership and wisdom that the
continent has taken collective action to invest belief in
this process, strengthen it and not allow any regression
by deciding to stigmatize regimes usurping power
through force and unconstitutional means. On this
issue, Africa is leading by example. It is something that
the United Nations should draw lessons from. The
obligation is now on Africa's partners to strengthen
African resolve by their actions in every way and to
ensure its success by supportiveness and an
engagement of effective solidarity.
Mr. President, your question regarding the record
of the international community in preventing intra-
State instability and other conflicts in Africa is very
pertinent. Some honest soul-searching would bear out
that it is mixed at best. There have been some success
stories, but we cannot seek solace in those. Even one
failure is bad enough, and in Africa there have been
many. In Angola, the conflict would not have taken
place or continued with so much avoidable suffering
and loss but for the misguided involvement of the
international community. In Rwanda, it was clearly
tragic neglect and the dereliction of a required course
of determined action. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the engagement, as this Council was
reminded in an earlier debate, is far short of what is
required. One could add to these examples, but that
would not be necessary. Clearly, there have been
failures on the part of the international community. We
need to draw lessons from them for future engagement.

There is a feeling among African countries, and
shared by many others, that peacekeeping in Africa
does not receive the priority it deserves. Often the
response of the international community is a case of
doing too little too late. A recent example is the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
United Nations has been extremely cautious in
expanding the operations of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). While a degree of caution is
certainly justified, and indeed should infuse our
decision-making, it is imperative that the international
community dispel any misgivings regarding neglect of
African needs, as compared to the promptness with
which it can respond to crises in other parts of the
world, of which Kosovo and East Timor are notable
examples. The reluctance of developed countries to
participate in any meaningful manner in operations
such as MONUC gives further credence to such a view.
The Council, by its resolution 1376 (2001) of 9
November 2001, had supported the Secretary-General's
recommendations regarding the launching of phase III
of the deployment of MONUC. Almost three months
down the road, Member States still await a revised
concept of operations for phase III. Caution should not
assume the aspect of neglect.

It is also argued that there is a limit to how much
the international community can do. The fact is that,
even in comparative terms, the quantum, speed and
magnitude of the response of the international
community to African crises has not been the same as
for Kosovo or East Timor. This, too, is a sore point. An
example: Kosovo has 40,000 peacekeepers; the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, larger than Western
Europe in area, has about 2,000. We should be chary of
inviting the charge of "humanitarian favouritism".

Much has been made of enhancing Africa's
peacekeeping capacity. While creditable efforts have
been made at the bilateral level, there has unfortunately
been little progress to report on the ambitious efforts
initiated by the Secretariat in August 1998 in this
regard. Such assistance should be carefully tailored to
the requirements of Africa and be based on solutions
articulated by the countries of the continent, rather than
imposed from the outside as prescriptions.

In this context, we support the ongoing
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), as well as with
subregional organizations in Africa. A number of
African countries have emerged as major troop
contributors to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, particularly in Africa. However, many lack
the resources to provide fully equipped and self-
sustained contingents. The General Assembly and its
relevant bodies should expeditiously approve proposals
by the Secretariat to build up strategic stocks at the
United Nations Logistics Base in Brindisi to assist such
troop contributors. Another important element is
training, and in this regard, we are happy to note that
the Secretariat has begun taking initiatives to
qualitatively improve training standards in troop-
contributing countries.

While on the face of it the idea of building an
African peacekeeping capacity looks attractive, some
caveats would be in order. First, it should not imply or
lead to the onus for peacekeeping in Africa being left
to Africans. The maintenance of international peace
and security is first and foremost the responsibility of
the United Nations through the Security Council. There
should be no dilution of this by shifting the obligation
to regional organizations or to coalitions of the willing.
Within this framework, cooperation with the regional
organizations should, of course, be welcome. Secondly,
building peacekeeping capacity involves building
military and related logistics capacities. These are
expensive to build and maintain. It would also not
easily be reconciled with the message received by
African countries to reduce their defence expenditure.

The important role that regional and subregional
organizations play with regard to conflict resolution,
peacemaking and peacekeeping is widely
acknowledged. Regional and subregional organizations
indeed can and do play a useful role, as the OAU has
done in Ethiopia and Eritrea or Burundi. We support
encouraging their efforts and capacity-building.
However, we notice a tendency, particularly evident in
Africa, of the international community to transfer its
responsibility and subcontract initiatives to regional
and subregional organizations, which may not
necessarily be prepared for them. This tendency needs
to be arrested, and, in certain situations where regional
and subregional organizations can play a meaningful
role, they should be backed both politically and, more
importantly, through an infusion of the resources
required.

The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes are often an
important ingredient in sustaining the peace.
Experience has shown that for a DDR programme to be
successful, there should be strong international
peacekeeping deployment and adequate financial
resources. The study by the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research convincingly demonstrates that
this was the lesson learned in Liberia, which,
unfortunately, was ignored in neighbouring Sierra
Leone and had to be relearned at a high cost later. We
congratulate the Government of Sierra Leone on the
successful conclusion of the disarmament programme
earlier this month. We hope that the United Nations and
the international community will distil lessons learned
carefully from its various DDR programmes to avoid
costly mistakes.

Much killing and wanton mayhem has been
inflicted, often on innocent civilians, women and
children, leading to the spread and exacerbation of
conflicts, due to the easy and ready availability of
small arms and weapons. But most of these arms and
weapons are not manufactured in Africa and are often
supplied illegally. On its own initiative, Africa is doing
a great deal to address this problem. The Declaration of
a Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and
Manufacture of Small Arms and Light Weapons in
West Africa and the Declaration concerning Firearms,
Ammunition and Other Related Materials in the
Southern African Development Community are some
examples. But by itself, the action taken by African
countries will not be enough. It needs to be reinforced
and supported by matching restraint and action from
the international community. We have two suggestions.
First, as with conflict diamonds and drugs, the control
should be exercised where it is most likely to work: at
the source of production. It is therefore important that
effective controls be exercised by the countries of the
manufacturers and exporters of arms and weapons.
Secondly, as is well known, once weapons enter the
grey market, it is almost impossible to control their
movement. It is therefore important that the
international community accept an obligation not to
supply weapons to non-State actors. This would ensure
that the Savimbis and the Sankohs would be deprived
of their means to wage wars.

Post-conflict peace-building in intra-State
conflict, as is often the case in Africa, is by definition a
multidisciplinary approach integrating, inter alia,
institution-building, justice, economic progress and
social development. While of pivotal importance, these
fall outside the mandate of the Council. Furthermore,
the Council is not equipped to handle such activities.
These activities are the responsibility of the General
Assembly, which is where these should be discussed
and dealt with.

India has an unmatched record in peacekeeping
operations in Africa, having participated in some
capacity in each and every United Nations
peacekeeping operation established in the continent,
including in some of the most difficult ones, such as in
the Congo, Somalia, Angola, Sierra Leone and now in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A large number
of Indian soldiers have made the supreme sacrifice for
the cause of peace in Africa, and there can be no better
testimonial to our enduring commitment to peace in
this brotherly continent.

This commitment has been further strengthened
through bilateral cooperation programmes with
individual African countries. A large number of
African military personnel attend professional courses
in staff colleges and other training institutions in India,
including at the recently established Centre for United
Nations Peacekeeping in New Delhi.

But more importantly, in keeping with our firm
belief that a key ingredient of long-term solution to
conflict is economic progress, we have attached the
highest priority to technical and economic cooperation
with Africa. About 15,000 foreign nominees, primarily
from Africa, have received training in India in diverse
fields. We provide around 1,350 training slots every
year in some of our best educational institutions for
foreign trainees, of which nearly 60 per cent are from
Africa. Thousands of students from Africa receive
heavily subsidized education in Indian universities
every year. For us, cooperation with Africa is not just
sound policy - it is an article of faith.

It is our sincere hope that today's deliberations
will contribute to crafting better solutions to Africa's
problems, but, more than that, that they will galvanize
the Council and the international community's will and
determination to address the challenges to peace and
security in Africa more resolutely and promptly and
demonstrate effective solidarity with it. Africa deserves
nothing less.

Mr. President, before concluding, let me place on
record our deep appreciation of the outstanding
contribution to the Council's work by Ambassador
Koonjul and his dedicated team.

