Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to welcome
you once again, Madam, to the presidency of the
Security Council. We wish also to thank you,
Ambassador Mufioz and the Chilean delegation for
having convened this important debate and for the
Arria-formula session which was arranged with non-
governmental organizations (NGOs). I should like also
to thank Under-Secretary-General Kalomoh for his
important statement as well as the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
Mr. Mark Malloch Brown, and Ms. McAskie, Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

The conclusion of the cold war, instead of
promoting universal peace, coincided with the eruption
of a number of conflicts among, and especially within,
States in various regions of the world. The agenda of
the Security Council and the list of our peacekeeping
operations over the last decade reflect this.

The Pakistan delegation has consistently
emphasized the point - which was raised this morning
by the UNDP Administrator and Ms. McAskie - that
prevention is better than cure. The Security Council,
the Secretary-General and our other agencies have
considerable scope for action to prevent conflicts
through the modalities and mechanisms available under
Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter.

Reconciliation entails a multifaceted process. The
first fact which must be acknowledged is that there is
no "one size fits all" approach to promoting post-
conflict national reconciliation. Each situation is
different and unique. However, some general
guidelines, or parameters, as my German colleague
said, can be identified in promoting post-conflict peace
and reconciliation.

The first step in all situations must be to end the
conflict and the accompanying violence and violations
of humanitarian law and human rights. Without this,
expressions of the desire for post-conflict peace and
reconciliation will continue to ring hollow. The onus
for halting existing violence must fall equitably on all
parties, but especially on the Governments concerned,
because they have an institutional capacity and the
clear international obligation to halt the recourse to
imposed and violent solutions.

The second step, which can be initiated in parallel
with the first, is to address the root causes of the
conflict. These causes can be both internal - religious
or group differences, political and social injustices, a
struggle for power among rival groups and local
leaders - and, often, external - conflicts which are
fuelled by external influences such as foreign
occupation, arms supplies and the illegal cross-border
exploitation of natural resources. In such cases, internal
and external steps to halt conflicts and violence would
have to go hand in hand in a parallel and reciprocal
process.

Economic deprivation and discrimination
exercised over extensive periods prior to the conflicts
are often ignored, although in most cases they are the
root causes of the conflict. Post-conflict reconciliation
can be facilitated considerably by equitable socio-
economic development.

In the process of national reconciliation,
transparency and openness, especially to impartial
international actions such as those of civil society
organizations and the United Nations, can be helpful in
arresting ongoing violence and violations and in
encouraging the parties to address the underlying
causes of the conflict. The focus on providing
transitional justice and redress for past violations and
injustices for affected individuals and groups no doubt
constitutes an important element in promoting national
reconciliation. This can obviously happen only once
ongoing violations and violence have been halted. The
pursuit of justice, while essential, should not become
an obstacle to peace, as the Secretary-General noted at
our previous meeting. Brazil's reference to "restorative
justice" is an interesting concept.

However, in any case, there must be no impunity
for the most serious violations, such as genocide and
violations of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which
must not go unpunished.

The Security Council, the Secretary-General, the
United Nations Secretariat and our agencies such as
UNDP are well placed to play an active role in post-
conflict reconciliation. This is indeed the desire of
world public opinion and of the people who are
involved in such conflicts.

Over the past decade, the United Nations has
gained considerable experience and developed
institutional mechanisms and methodologies to respond
to the serial conflicts and post-conflict situations in
various parts of the world, such as East Timor, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Cambodia, Sierra Leone and
Afghanistan. United Nations efforts must therefore
receive adequate financial and political support from
all Governments in order to attain the objectives which
have been espoused by the world community.

The precise response of the Security Council and
of the United Nations at large will naturally depend on
the specific nature and content of a given situation.
Such responses can include the dispatch of a special
envoy to mediate, a fact-finding mission, utilizing the
specific mechanisms of the Commission on Human
Rights and of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the appointment of a
special representative of the Secretary-General and
dispatching a peace observer mission.

And where efforts at post-conflict reconciliation
are being conducted in parallel with containing a
conflict, there will be a need to buttress the process
with full-fledged peacekeeping operations, such as
those in Afghanistan, in Liberia and soon, we hope, in
Cote d'Ivoire. Such peacekeeping operations should
encompass wider mandates to monitor human rights
violations and progress in peace-building and
reconciliation; to identify responsibility for war crimes
and crimes against humanity; to implement
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes; and to provide technical, legal and
institutional support to the parties concerned.

One issue that often needs to be addressed is the
question of the consent of the parties concerned to the
mediatory and peace-building role of the United
Nations. Refusal by any State or other party to allow
the United Nations to play a helpful role in conflict
resolution and peace-building cannot be a sign of good
intentions. Obviously, where a conflict situation cannot
be successfully addressed by the parties, the need for
the Security Council and the Secretary-General to
assume a role should be evident, in accordance with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter.

Yet even where the parties are engaged in peace-
building, the United Nations can and should play a
useful role in encouraging them, in monitoring
progress and in playing a good-offices and mediatory
role, as outlined in Chapter VI of the Charter,
especially where the United Nations has obvious and
direct responsibilities under resolutions and decisions
of the Security Council.

Finally, we cannot ignore the fact that many
conflict situations arise from the politics of poverty and
scarcity. Post-conflict reconciliation will inevitably
have to be built upon the provision to destitute and
desperate people of hope for a better tomorrow. Thus,
economic and social development must constitute an
integral part of the international community's
endeavours to promote peace and reconciliation on a
sustainable basis in various conflict situations. The
United Nations and its family of organizations,
including the Bretton Woods institutions, as well as
civil society, have a vital role to play in generating
equitable socio-economic development in those
countries and regions.

To that end, the principal organs of the United
Nations - the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council - must promote
and pursue a coherent approach in helping to build
peace and reconciliation in complex crisis situations.

