Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): My delegation is
very grateful to you, Sir, for scheduling this open
debate on the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). In particular, we thank Ambassador
Andrey Denisov, Chairman of the CTC, and Executive
Director Javier Ruperez for their respective briefings
on the work of the Committee.

We are meeting today to consider the thirteenth
quarterly work programme of the CTC. This is a good
occasion for assessment, for identifying some lessons
learned and for reiterating my delegation's firm
commitment to the fight against terrorism.

In the past my country has had painful
experiences with terrorism, and for decades the essence
of our strength, resources and manpower was directed
towards its final defeat - the fight against terrorism.
We were able to witness the evolution of the terrorists'
motivations, the concealment of their true intentions
and how their tactics were able to make headway for
many years, causing untold suffering to Angolans and
the generalized destruction of our country. Angola still
bears a heavy burden left behind by terrorism.

The Security Council has adopted a very firm
stand against terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations by reaffirming that it constitutes one of
the most serious threats to peace and security and that
any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivations, whenever and by
whomsoever committed. This translates into an
awareness that terrorists and their tactics must be
condemned and firmly combated, without any
ambiguity.

The international community possesses standards
and an array of best practices to combat terrorism.
However, much still has to be done in the operational
domain in the development of best practices in
international cooperation to fight terrorism and in the
development of standards. Here, United Nations
Members should move quickly towards the completion
of a global convention against terrorism, the adoption
of which would be an important step forward and a
decisive tool in the global fight against terrorism.

In this regard, my delegation wishes to
acknowledge and thank the Russian delegation for the
contribution that it made with resolution 1566 (2004),
which the Security Council recently adopted
unanimously. That resolution will greatly facilitate the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee by
providing the international community with a tool to
fill a gap that remains wide open due to the lack of a
global convention.

Since my country joined the Security Council
nearly two years ago, terrorism has pursued its deadly
crusade, with the number of victims, including
children, rising to unacceptable heights. Despicable
terrorist acts are committed daily in all regions of the
world as a grim reminder of the great threat posed by
terrorism and of the urgent need for nations and
peoples to unite in building a world free of the scourge
of terrorism.

It is my delegation's View that to reach such an
objective a different set of tools must be applied,
namely, military force, tighter law enforcement
measures and the addressing and solving of regional
conflicts, as well as of the grave problems that remain
entrenched in international life, such as poverty, human
exploitation, inequality and sheer injustice: factors that
create fertile ground for terrorism to breed and grow.

Since joining the Security Council, Angola has
been a member of the CTC Bureau and has taken part
in its efforts to make the Committee's work more
effective and transparent. An important exercise
towards that end has been the revitalization process
and the implementation of the decision to establish the
CTC Executive Directorate. That has been an effective
contribution indeed.

The recently adopted resolution 1566 (2004) laid
down an important framework for the coming work of
the CTC, and today's briefing by its Chairman, clearly
set out the way forward by calling for closer
cooperation between the CTC and other United Nations

bodies, namely, the Al Qaeda Taliban sanctions
Committee and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). The Chairman said also that
other main tasks include strengthening practical
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations, speeding up the
revitalization process, enhancing the structural and
operative capabilities of the Committee and, in
particular, developing a direct dialogue with Member
States and facilitating the provision of technical
assistance to them.

In his briefing to the Security Council,
Ambassador Denisov stated that 78 States are late in
submitting their reports to the Committee pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001). In our view, this reflects a
double reality. First, it raises the issue of what is called
reporting fatigue, when States are called upon to
present reports in a seemingly never-ending process,
with each report raising additional questions calling for
further reports of ever-increasing complexity.
Secondly, the countries late in submitting the reports,
all of them developing countries, face serious
difficulties in complying with the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001). In reality, this requires a
concerted national, regional and international effort in
which the Counter-Terrorism Committee must play a
central role in the enhancement of Member States'
capacity to combat terrorism.

The thirteenth work programme, the revitalization
of the CTC and the integration into the report review
process of an analysis of a country's assessment of its
needs constitute innovative methods that have with the
objective of facilitating the provision of technical
assistance adjusted to a country's needs. This is going
to be of crucial importance in making reporting
countries better able to comply with the obligations of
submitting the information needed to close the gap.

Before ending, I should like to refer to the
difficulties encountered by my country in complying
with the relevant provisions of resolution 1373 (2001),
namely in acceding to the 12 international conventions
and protocols relating to terrorism and the
enhancement of anti-terrorism legislation.

Nevertheless, I want to reiterate my country's
unwavering commitment to the fight against terrorism;
this morning's meeting makes a positive contribution
to that end.

