Timor-Leste would like to congratulate the Russian Federation on its leadership as President of the Security Council for the month of October and to commend all its efforts in convening this important annual open debate. Timor-Leste also thanks the Secretary-General and the other briefers for all their insights. Timor-Leste regards the role of women in peace and security and their involvement in decision-making at all levels in preventing, managing and resolving conflicts as being of paramount importance. As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), it is important to reflect on how far we have come with the implementation of that resolution and the impact that it has had on our daily life, particularly towards the advancement of women and their important role in the area of peace and security. Timor-Leste is committed to its efforts on the empowerment and the advancement of women. The Constitution of Timor-Leste guarantees protection against discrimination based on gender and ensures equality of rights and obligations and the fact that men and women must be treated equally in all aspects of life. Timor- Leste is also a firm believer in the United Nations as a key multilateral organization and in the fundamental role of the Security Council in upholding international peace and security. Since the restoration of our independence on 20 May 2002, Timor-Leste has made remarkable progress in the empowerment and the advancement of women. Timor-Leste has the highest proportion of women parliamentarians in the Asia- Pacific region. Timor-Leste's Law on the Elections of the National Parliament, as amended in 2011, established a quota that requires one out of every group of three candidates in political party lists to be filled by a woman. In 2016, the Government of Timor-Leste approved a national action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, to include women in decision-making positions. Those positive developments have placed women at the core of policy and decision-making processes. Recently, the Government of Timor-Leste approved a project against gender- based violence aimed at contributing to the prevention of gender-based violence and to the implementation and monitoring of legislation and policies on gender-based violence in public spaces, with special attention to women in the most vulnerable situation. The policy also aligns well with the spirit of article 7 of the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women. While the issue of women and peace and security has been on the Security Council agenda for the past 20 years, we continue to witness growing discrepancies and gaps between the rhetoric and the reality in terms of the implementation of the women and peace and security resolutions. That is despite the number of resolutions on women and peace and security, as well as the normative frameworks, such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women and the Beijing Platform for Action, which guide us on the advancement of gender equality. It is regrettable that, despite the countless commitments that we have made as Member States over the past 20 years, war, violence and instability continue to exist and ravage humankind in many parts of the world and women, children, the elderly and the most vulnerable continue to be disproportionally affected. That should serve as a call to attention on all of us as Member States to work together to ensure that the Security Council can effectively exercise its fundamental role in upholding international peace and security, particularly in promoting and protecting the rights of women and the most vulnerable. Our experiences have also taught us that exclusion greatly contributes to conflict and the violation of basic human rights should be an early warning. Hence Timor-Leste would like to announce its endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration to ensure safe education for women and girls. Timor-Leste is committed to ensuring the promotion of peaceful, just and inclusive societies, where women are able to reach their full potential by having their voices heard and being part of decision- making at all levels, as well as living a productive life, free of violence.
