Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me thank you, Mr. President, for your
determination to include this wrap-up meeting on
December's programme of work, especially as this is a
month in which delegations must divide their attention
among so many end-of-year activities.

I have listened attentively to the very interesting
statements made by my colleagues, who have given
valuable summaries of their Council activities over the
past two years and of their vision for the Council. I
thank them for this effort in the last days of their
membership of the Council; for their cooperation with
all delegations, in particular the Colombian delegation;
and for the friendship extended by our colleagues in all
other delegations.

Colombia continues to attach great importance to
meetings of this kind. We are convinced that they are
extremely useful and beneficial, especially held in this
public setting, because they enable Council members to
consider the thrust of our deliberations in the course of
the month and to discuss how to improve our working
methods. Also, such meetings make it easier for non-
members of the Council, in a more transparent manner,
to gain greater knowledge of what the Security Council
is doing. We voice that conviction because at last
month's wrap-up meeting some members expressed
concern about the usefulness of these meetings,
especially given the very low attendance by non-
members - which, I must confess, has occurred again
today.

Nevertheless, we must take two things into
account. The first is that it is not easy for many
delegations, particularly small ones, to follow up items
of maintenance of international peace and security
while responding at the same time to the broader
agenda, the items of the Assembly. For that reason, it is
important that we ourselves think about providing these
open debates with a better atmosphere and making
them more attractive. Secondly, perhaps it is necessary
to use documents or some type of guidelines to better
direct the debates, and also to the meetings more. In
my opinion, today's meeting was not publicized
enough because it was rescheduled at the last minute,
and perhaps that explains the smaller presence of
members. Because of that, it is important that we think
about our duty to interact more among ourselves - not
less - and at the same time, to allow the non-members
of the Council to participate interactively in this kind
of meeting.
On the month's programme of work, we must
highlight the skilful way that, in scarcely two weeks,
we dealt with the two situations of greatest tension in
the world at the moment - Afghanistan and the
Middle East - and we were updated on the status of
other conflicts on the Council's agenda, conflicts in
Africa. As we are not going into substance at this
wrap-up meeting of the items on our agenda, I want to
limit myself to three comments.

First, regarding the situation in Afghanistan, my
delegation believes that with the adoption of the
resolution yesterday, we have found an innovative way
to respond to a complex reality that combines threats to
international peace and security with regional tensions
and a grave humanitarian situation. The Council acted
in a timely manner and authorized the deployment of
forces that were put together thanks to the decision and
the generosity ofa group of States.

Secondly, regarding the Middle East, it is clear
that the Council missed another opportunity to
influence a situation that demands urgent attention.
Many citizens of the world continue to fail to
understand why action by this organ is impeded at
times when its presence is most needed. However, we
recognize the political realities, the differences of
opinions and the convictions that motivate the various
members of the Council. However, I must also say that
absolutely all members have always shared, and will
continue to share, the desire for peace to reign in the
Middle East. For this reason, it is my hope that in the
new year we will find common language that will
enable us to express this common view that is of the
greatest interest and value and that should direct the
Council's action: search for peace in the Middle East.

Thirdly, on Africa, we have completed important
updating work on conflicts and have dealt with two
aspects of threats to peace and security in that
continent. On one hand, we examined the cross-border
effects of internal conflicts, which helped us highlight
the value of the regional focus taken by the Secretariat
in its dealings with West Africa. On the other hand, we
considered the effect of economic agendas in armed
conflicts, in the context of the report we debated on the
illicit use of natural resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Finally, Mr. President, I wish to pay a tribute to
you for your proven leadership. You have conducted
the deliberations during the month of December
impeccably. We greatly admire the way you made room
for the emerging issues and unforeseen situations so
that, from one day to the next, it would be possible for
the Security Council to take the required and
appropriate action.

