Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate the Republic
of Korea on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. At the same time,
I would like to express our welcome to Mr. Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota, Minister for External Relations of
Brazil; Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Regional Cooperation of Rwanda; and
Mr. Elmar Maharram oglu Mammadyarov, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan, and to thank them for
their contributions to this debate. I also welcome the
presence ost. Navanethem Pillay, High Commissioner
for Human Rights, and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

Bolivia aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia respects
all its obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations, international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and refugee law, in particular
the four Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols. Our political Constitution proclaims that
Bolivia is a peaceful country that promotes the culture
of peace and the right to peace, as well as international
cooperation. As one way to prevent harm to civilians,
our Constitution prohibits the installation of foreign
military bases on our territory.

The report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2012/376) underscores
ongoing and emerging concerns with regard to the
issue. They include the proliferation and fragmentation
of non-State armed groups, the displacement of the
civilian population within and across borders, the
continuing violence and the difficulties facing women
and children during armed conflicts, as well as the
prevailing culture of impunity.

Bolivia believes that, in analysing and considering
the situation of civilians in armed conflict, it is essential
to define the root causes of many such armed conflicts
that the world has suffered and continues to experience.
We live in a reality characterized by frequent attacks by
an empire, ongoing interference in the internal affairs
of developing States, the plundering of their wealth and
the promotion of regional conflicts for economic and
political gains.

Many wars, and consequently the civilian victims
of those wars, occur because of expansionist goals
and the desire to take over the energy resources of
peoples. That reason causes the continuing destruction
of the infrastructure of the various countries and the
indiscriminate killing of blameless civilians, leading of
course to violations of international law.

One of the topics to be considered at the United
Nations in the near future is the arms trade treaty.
Bolivia hopes that that international legal instrument
does not become, as have some others, a tool of the
arms industry and the multinationals that profit from
weapons and from war.

Bolivia expresses its concern over the use of
unmanned aerial vehicles, which have killed and
wounded blameless civilians. Such equipment and their
operations violate international law owing not only to
their effects but also to the fact that those who command
and control them remain unpunished.

We commend the decision to investigate several
of the strikes by those unmanned aerial vehicles. We
wonder whether those responsible will be referred to
the International Criminal Court if the investigation
finds that war crimes have been committed through
the use of such unmanned aircraft. Or are there double
standards in determining which civilian victims merit
international protection and which do not or which
of those responsible for such crimes should or should
not be subject to the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court?

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
cannot be addressed selectively. In some situations, the
Security Council has acted by choosing which civilians
merit such protection and which do not. That is why
it has often been reported that the Security Council
has taken decisions that have led to a lack of security
on the planet. One colleague, the representative of
another State, very clearly pointed out the outcome
of events in Libya and Syria. Why is there such rapid
action purportedly to protect some civilians in Libya
and similar steps are not taken to protect the civilians
in Palestine? Powerful nations that have unfortunately
shown themselves willing to manipulate international
institutions or to apply such double standards have
frequently committed widespread abuse, while at the
same time denying any responsibility for the killing.

The protection of civilians is sometimes a
smokescreen. We believe that, among others, at least
two tasks are essential if we are truly willing to act in
accordance with our words. The first has to do with
the fact that all countries, in particular those that seek
to protect civilians and to defend democracy beyond
their borders, have not only the moral but also the
international obligation to ratify the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. There are major
countries not party to such international instruments
that are not subject to the same courts as other States
and individuals.

The other issue that we believe is crucial - I am
sure that members have often heard it discussed - is
the vital and urgent need to reform the Security Council.
Such reform would make this body not only more
democratic but also more legitimate. The status quo
may comply with the interests of a handful of States but
not of the international community or the principles on
which the Charter of the United Nations is founded and,
in the case of our debate, the protection of civilians.

We believe that the use of force should be avoided
and that the tragic humanitarian situation facing many
countries should be brought to an end. We are convinced
that the world would be much safer and would of course
have fewer civilian victims if the problems and root
causes of armed conflicts were resolved. It is matter of
the need to respect all human rights, including the right
to water, energy, food, communications and all basic
services. We are convinced, andI confidently reiterate,
that if development and the fight against poverty
prevail, our objective of preventing civilians from
being the victims of armed conflict will also succeed.

