Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to congratulate Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock and Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director
of UNICEF, on their comprehensive briefings on the
peace process, the humanitarian situation and the fate
of children in Yemen. We also thank Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014), for his high-quality briefing on the Panel of
Experts mission he led in March 2019 to Amman,
Riyadh, Tehran and Muscat.

Regarding the peace process, my delegation
believes that resolution 2451 (2018), endorsing the
Stockholm Agreement; resolution 2452 (2019),
establishing the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA); and resolution
2456 (2019), renewing the sanctions regime and
extending the mandate of the Panel of Experts, remain
the principal tools for a lasting exit process from the
crisis in Yemen. Cote d'Ivoire welcomes once again the
adoption of these important resolutions and welcomes
the initial withdrawal of Houthi rebels from the ports of
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa, in accordance with
the first phase of the ceasefire agreement signed in
Stockholm. The effective implementation of this phase
can be attributed to the work of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee, which held constructive
discussions with the protagonists on the ceasefire and
the mutual redeployment of military forces.

Against that backdrop, my delegation once again
urges the parties to the conflict to comply with their
commitments and calls on them to refrain from any
unilateral action that could provoke a resumption of
hostilities, which wouldjeopardize the gains achieved.
We urge them to pursue cooperation in good faith with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and the
Head of UNMHA.

My country wishes to stress the need for the
Council and other stakeholders to undertake further
initiatives so as to ensure that the parties to the
conflict fully implement the other provisions of the
Stockholm Agreement, particularly those concerning
the exchange of 15,000 prisoners and the memorandum
of understanding on the city of Taiz for the opening of
humanitarian corridors.

Cote d'Ivoire remains concerned by the
humanitarian crisis, which is affecting approximately
22 million people, 14 million of whom are facing
acute food insecurity and are at risk of the resurgence
of endemic disease. My delegation would also like to
express its concern regarding the use of child soldiers
in the Yemeni conflict, which, according to the United
Nations, is facilitated by the fact that 2 million of the
7 million school-age children there are not attending
school. This high level of school absenteeism is,
according to human rights non-governmental
organizations, primarily the result of the destruction of
schools during clashes, in violation of international law,
and also to due to the repeated failure to pay teachers'
salaries.

My country calls compliance with international
law by all parties to the conflict, particularly the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, which, inter
alia, prohibits the use of minors in armed conflict.
My delegation commends UNICEF in that connection
for its significant and ongoing support of education
in Yemen and encourages it to continue its assistance
programme for teaching staff, in particular by paying
their salary arrears. We also welcome the fact that a
World Food Programme mission was finally able to
access the warehouses of the Red Sea Mills, where
approximately 51,000 tons of cereals intended for the
Yemeni population had been stored for several months.
In order to build on that momentum, my country urges
the belligerents to fully observe the ceasefire, which
is an essential condition for the safe and unhindered
delivery of food aid and basic necessities to the
populations ravaged by several years of war.

Cote d'Ivoire expresses its appreciation for the
outstanding work recently carried out by the 2140
Committee, in liaison with the Panel of Experts on
Yemen, to assist the parties to the Yemeni conflict
in fulfilling their obligations, in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the decisions
of the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and the
inclusive National Dialogue Conference. My country
reiterates its full support for the work of the Committee
and urges it to strengthen its cooperation with the
United Nations country team and the countries of the
region in order to promote the exchange of information
and good practices.

My delegation is also pleased that the visit by the
Chair of the 2140 Committee to the Arabian peninsula
made it possible to raise awareness among individuals
and entities of the scope of the sanctions measures
concerning Yemen and to gather first-hand information
on their implementation.

In conclusion, my country reaffirms its support for
Mr. Griffiths in his tireless efforts to find a political
solution to the Yemeni conflict, as well as Mr. Lowcock
for his commitment to mobilizing all the necessary
resources to address the humanitarian crisis in Yemen.
My country also takes this opportunity to commend the
observation teams of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and UNMHA, led by Lieutenant General
Michael Lollesgaard, for their determination to give
real impetus to a definitive and lasting resolution of the
crisis in Yemen.

