We thank Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for their invaluable updates on the situation in Yemen. It remains critical, particularly at this moment, that we continue to remain fully aware of all developments amid the ongoing pandemic. We have also seen the devastating flash floods in Sana'a, where the people are in urgent need of assistance, and we express our solidarity with those who are suffering. We must do all that we can to assist in efforts to help to overcome the damage caused by the flash floods and to mitigate the chances of increasingly severe weather patterns. The coronavius disease (COVID-19) and its far-reaching consequences add another layer of complexity to the conflict and dire humanitarian situation in Yemen. It threatens to further deteriorate the living conditions of the Yemeni people and undermine the humanitarian response. Yemen's infrastructure has been devastated during the years of conflict, making it extremely vulnerable to the adverse impacts of this pandemic. In that regard, we encourage cooperation between all relevant national agencies and the World Health Organization (WHO) to contain the spread and stress the need for regional and international collaboration in this shared fight. We take this opportunity to welcome the cooperation between the United Nations, WHO and the Yemen authorities in managing preparedness for the coronavirus, including through the provision of thousands of tests to all the governorates of Yemen and the establishment of a quarantine facility in Aden. We also welcome WHO's efforts to build the capacity of the intensive care units in hospitals, as well as the training of health-care workers. Furthermore, we welcome the announced ceasefire by the coalition and the subsequent commitment of the Government of Yemen to the ceasefire. We encourage all parties to engage and implement a permanent cessation of hostilities in good faith amid the efforts to combat the spread of COVID-19. We also encourage safe and unhindered access for health-care workers and humanitarian personnel operating to slow the rate of infection and provide life-saving assistance. In that vein, we emphasize the important role of donors, which secure and sustain that critical aid. While the people of Yemen are threatened with the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, they are also suffering from the consequences of a five-year conflict. Sustaining humanitarian aid at this juncture is critically important. Before concluding, we express our continued concern over the inaccessibility to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which represents a looming marine environmental disaster. For Yemen, the region and the protection of our global commons, that remains an issue that must be urgently addressed. We conclude by underscoring Mr. Griffith's assessment that "an opportunity has emerged to bring peace to Yemen". Let us seize it. We reiterate our support for the work of the Special Envoy and encourage all parties to the conflict to resume negotiations towards a sustainable and inclusive peace. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its support for this peace process and stands in solidarity with the people of Yemen.
