Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Mr. Saren Jessen-Petersen for the
excellent introduction he gave us to the report of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and to pay tribute through him to
members of the United Nations mission for the
outstanding job they have accomplished in the field.

The Council's consideration of the progress
report on its agenda today allows us to appreciate the
progress made - limited, of course, but still
significant - in the process of the stabilization and
normalization of the overall situation in Kosovo.

My delegation welcomes the establishment of the
coalition government following the elections of last
October and its commitment to continue on the path of
reform, to consolidate local institutions and to
implement established standards for Kosovo. The
commitment of Kosovar leaders to quickly complete
the rebuilding of property and the social and
educational infrastructure that was damaged during the
reprehensible events that took place last year, and their
resolve to relaunch the process of the return of
displaced persons, are a positive development. That
commitment is also a sign of the beginning of a
process of detente and of an improvement in the
situation in the best interests of all.
However, the progress remains insufficient, vis-a-
vis the standards set by the international community
and the expectations of the local people for improved
economic and social conditions. Moreover, the fact that
the Kosovo Serbs are not participating in the
democratic process remains a source of concern for the
international community and is a major obstacle to the
advent of a democratic, tolerant and multi-ethnic
Kosovo.

We take the opportunity to reiterate once again
our appeal to all parties to participate fully in
confidence-building efforts, to strengthen relations and
to promote reconciliation among all Kosovars. The
attainment of those goals is primarily incumbent upon
the leaders and people of Kosovo, but it is no less for
the international community to create all conditions for
the comprehensive and successful implementation of
established standards and to proceed, as soon as
possible, to consideration of the basic question of the
final status of Kosovo.

