Mr. Haekkerup: I will focus on the key areas of
the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and on
the challenges ahead in ensuring the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

When I took office, I outlined the road map for
the work of the Mission. The first goal was to move
forward in drawing up a legal framework for
substantial autonomy defining the provisional self-
government, which will lead to Kosovo-wide elections.
The second was to strengthen Kosovo's law
enforcement and criminal justice system. The third was
to create the preconditions for self-sustained economic
growth within overall fiscal and budgetary stability.
These tracks are, of course, interrelated, and all three
must be pursued simultaneously. An important element
in this is to try to engage the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia authorities in substantial and constructive
cooperation on issues of common concern.

As the Security Council recognized a year ago,
providing the Kosovars with a political road map
towards interim self-government and putting in place
the institutions of substantial autonomy following
Kosovo-wide elections are the key elements in
UNMIK's way forward. This is strictly in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

Immediately upon my arrival, I therefore
accelerated the process of defining a legal framework
for provisional self-government, a key step in this
direction. On 6 March, I established a Working Group
composed of international and Kosovar legal experts,
including representatives from the major ethnic groups.
The Working Group is tasked with elaborating the
structure of the future institutions of provisional self-
government in Kosovo. It will also clearly indicate
which powers and competencies will be transferred and
which will remain under the control of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and will
therefore not address questions of sovereignty. In
accordance with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), the legal framework will not address or in any
way prejudge a final political settlement on Kosovo's
status.

Seeking the Kosovars' active and constructive
engagement in the definition of the legal framework is
the only way to guarantee that both the process and the
outcome prove successful. For this very reason, I note
with regret the withdrawal of the Kosovo Serb member
of the Working Group. For the Kosovo Serbs, full
participation in this process and in the coming
elections will be decisive as to whether Kosovo Serbs
will become fully reintegrated into Kosovo society.
This would pave the way for an improved security
situation, a precondition for the return of internally
displaced persons on a larger scale. Nevertheless, the
elaboration of the legal framework will proceed as
planned, and I will continue consultations with
representatives of the Kosovo Serbs and with the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

I will try to get as much agreement as possible
through intensive consultations with the Kosovars and
the international community, but at the end of the day
there will probably not be complete consensus, and a
decision will have to be made. That decision is my
responsibility.

The levels of violence in Kosovo continue to he
unacceptably high. The general security situation has
not improved in the last two months. In particular,
ethnic violence is high in Kosovo, and the Kosovo
Albanian population must actively support measures to
stop this.

There is a need for a strengthening of the law
enforcement institutions. We are planning to bring the
police and judicial institutions together forming a
single new UNMIK pillar. This would ensure a better
use of resources and tighter coordination, and it would
enhance the Mission's capacity to combat crime.

Kosovo's judiciary now numbers over 400 local
judges, but the quality of the judges and their ethnic
bias leave room for considerable improvement.
Therefore, 12 international judges and 5 prosecutors
have been appointed and are handling cases of a
particularly sensitive nature or those in which there
may be an ethnic bias on the part of local judges. There
is, however, a clear need for additional international
judges and prosecutors. UNMIK is still identifying the
actual numbers required.

In terms of law enforcement, the current level of
support by UNMIK police needs to be maintained, and
appropriate management, training and capacity-
building for the Kosovo Police Service (KPS) should
be provided, with the goal of increasing both the
quantity and quality of KPS officers. The international
community should ensure adequate resources to meet
these needs.

In the economic sphere, there have been positive
steps in drawing Kosovo's emergency reconstruction
phase to a close and shifting the economy towards
sustainable long-term development. UNMIK has
recently taken important steps in this area as well. The
creation of a more market-friendly business
environment has been at the forefront of our efforts.
Regulations have been passed that establish a
favourable legal and regulatory regime for the creation
of new enterprises, while providing domestic and
foreign investors alike with critically important legal
guarantees.

Kosovo's public finances are also moving in the
right direction. Revenues generated domestically are
scheduled to increase from 50 per cent to 68 per cent of
the Kosovo consolidated budget in 2001. Increased
reliance on Kosovo's own productivity and resources
for revenue, coupled with sound economic
development, are important elements for functioning
public institutions within substantial autonomy.

Unemployment is extremely high, and the
economic situation for a sizeable part of the population
remains very bleak. It is imperative that the
international community maintain its current level of
financial commitment for the foreseeable future.

An important element in UNMIK's strategy is the
improvement of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina. Advances in this area are of utmost
importance, not simply for Kosovo, but also for the
stability of the entire Balkan region.

It is crucially important that Belgrade formulate a
new policy towards Kosovo. The international
community must ensure its continued political support
for engaging the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Government in constructive dialogue over Kosovo.
Belgrade must not only say the right things; Belgrade
must do the right things.

Constructive and pragmatic dialogue requires the
opening of an UNMIK liaison office in Belgrade, and I
have initiated this process. Day-to-day contact and
close cooperation are needed in a number of areas and
will be of benefit to both the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Kosovo.

The Parliament of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has passed a law on amnesty. While this is
a positive and long-needed step, only a minor part of
Kosovo Albanian detainees are covered by this act, and
close to 500 are still being kept in prisons in Serbia.
This is perceived in Kosovo as too little too late.
Belgrade ought to transfer all detainees to UNMIK, and
their cases then should be reviewed according to
international standards.

In Mitrovica, parallel security structures must be
abolished. UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) are
now working closely with political leaders on both
sides to find a solution to the problems connected with
the Kosovo Serb "bridge watchers".

The democratic leadership in Belgrade is sending
positive signals but has not yet taken sufficient
concrete steps. What is needed to further the
normalization process are two clear messages from
Belgrade: one to the Kosovo Albanians, that there is a
new, democratic Government in Belgrade that is
prepared to take the necessary steps towards
normalizing the relations between Belgrade and
Pristina; and one to the Kosovo Serbs, that their future
lies in Kosovo and that they should participate in the

structures put in place to govern the area.

Alongside the priorities I have set, out UNMIK is
faced with security problems in the region outside
Kosovo.
Developments in the Presevo Valley, while not
falling under my remit, do not have a direct impact on
Kosovo's internal stability and on the political process
there. UNMIK strongly supports the international
community's intervention and its backing for a
negotiated political solution that will make it possible
to abolish the ground safety zone.

The extremist actions in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia are also destabilizing the
situation in the region. First and foremost, it is an
internal problem, but it is important that KFOR and
UNMIK support the Government of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in solving the
immediate problems, including by sealing off the
border. However, closing the border crossings at Blace
and Globocica does not address the problem and is
unacceptable.

The terrorist attack on the regular convoy from
Nis to central Kosovo demonstrates that extremists
continue to attempt to undermine the process towards
establishing coexistence between Kosovo Albanians
and Kosovo Serbs. All efforts should be made to
marginalize those bent on destabilizing the area while
guaranteeing the fundamental rights and safety of the
populations there.

In conclusion, we have to move the process
forward. A precondition for a better security
environment is the creation of meaningful provisional
self-government through the elaboration of a legal
framework, followed in due course by Kosovo-wide
elections - not the other way round. This involves,
first, reinforcing law enforcement policies and
procedures and the quality and efficiency of Kosovo's
judiciary in order to better combat organized crime and
those who aim to destabilize Kosovo; and, secondly,
engaging the authorities in Belgrade in a constructive
dialogue on practical considerations which concern
both Kosovo and the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

It is with these priorities in mind that, pursuant to
security Council resolution 1244 (1999), UNMIK will
continue its determined efforts to build peace,

democratic self-governance and growing prosperity for
Kosovo.

