After listening carefully to today's briefings, we are encouraged by the fact that there are still no serious violations of the ceasefire and that the issue of the distribution of portfolios at the state and county levels has been largely resolved. However, we are concerned about the fact that the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan has yet to produce tangible results, owing to the political crisis and the violence, food insecurity and economic collapse that continue to plague South Sudan. The slow implementation of the Revitalized Agreement, the wave of intercommunal fighting, the increasing violations of human rights and international humanitarian law and the limited efforts to address transitional tasks are areas of particular concern. In that regard, we welcome the process led by the Community of Sant'Egidio, with the support of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, to include non-signatory groups from January 2021 onwards. Regrettably, political progress is inextricably linked to security and humanitarian issues, and the increased intercommunal violence continues to have devastating consequences for vulnerable populations. As the primary victims of sexual violence, women and children remain disproportionately affected by the conflict. We call on the parties to make a greater effort to prevent violence and identify those responsible for such crimes. We therefore welcome the information that the Office of the Legal Counsel of the African Union has submitted a memorandum of understanding to the leaders of South Sudan on the establishment of the hybrid court for South Sudan. We urge the Government to sign the memorandum as a way to help end the prevailing culture of impunity. In addition, we are deeply concerned about the food insecurity in South Sudan, where more than 7 million people suffer from alarming levels of hunger and malnutrition. The latest analysis of the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification confirms that the populations of six counties in South Sudan are facing "famine likely" or "catastrophic" conditions and those of 73 other counties are dealing with extremely worrying levels of acute food insecurity. It is unacceptable that the people of South Sudan continue to bear that heavy burden and grapple with the adverse consequences of this conflict. With regard to the participation of women in the decision-making process, we welcome the announcement of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement that the 35 per cent quota for women will apply to the remaining seats allocated to the party and that the country's two main parties are now led by women. It is essential that the gender provisions of the Agreement be fully implemented at all appointment levels through political will. We also welcome the initiative of the Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sports to establish an enterprise development fund for young people. Capacity-building for youth is an essential part of the peace process in South Sudan. It will be crucial to ensure that greater attention is paid to the remaining transitional tasks in the areas of governance, security, economy, humanitarian assistance and justice. When these provisions are effectively implemented, they will pave the way for State-building in South Sudan. Since the end of our term on the Council is approaching and this is the last time we will speak on this issue, we hope that all parties to the conflict will show genuine leadership and political will in the near future and that the peace process will continue to move forward for the benefit of a population that has endured far too much suffering.
