Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too want
to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing and
her report.

As a key actor in the multilateral system and a
permanent court of universal scope, the International
Criminal Court requires the full cooperation of us all.
More than ever, it must be able to successfully carry out
its assigned tasks, namely, delivering independent and
impartialjustice where nationaljurisdictions are unable
to do so, as well as ending impunity for the most serious
crimes and, in doing so, contributing to stabilization
and reconciliation efforts. The Court continues to be
responsible for carrying out those tasks in Darfur today,
14 years after the adoption by the Council of resolution
1593 (2005).

France reiterates its support for the work that
has been done by the Office of the Prosecutor and its
teams - which we too commend - to bring justice
to the victims of the crimes that were committed.
France is convinced that that is a necessary condition
for a successful Sudanese transition. The fight against
impunity must indeed be made a priority in order to
move towards a fair and democratic system. We welcome
Prime Minister Hamdok's commitments in that regard,
and we call on the Sudanese authorities in particular
to provide the relevant commission of inquiry into the
events of 3 June with the necessary means to conduct
its work independently. The results of that investigation
should enable us shed to light on the violent dispersion
of the sit-in and identify those responsible, who must
be held accountable before the courts for their actions.

The situation in Darfur remains precarious.
Fighting continued to claim dozens of civilian lives
during the reporting period and displaced several
thousand people, in particular women and children.
Women and girls continue to suffer sexual and gender-
based violence, While serious crimes continue to be
committed against children. In that regard, France too
would like to reiterate the crucial role that the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur plays
in protecting civilian populations and reporting human
rights violations. Despite the precarious situation,
however, France views the transition as an opportunity
to begin a new chapter between the Sudanese authorities
and the International Criminal Court that would enable
the Sudan to finally comply with its obligations under
resolution 1593 (2005). We call on the Sudan to allow
the Prosecutor's teams to travel to Darfur. That would
serve as a strong signal that would also make it possible
to establish the dialogue needed to form a relationship
of trust.

France welcomes the arrest and detention of three
of the five Darfur suspects wanted by the International
Criminal Court. We also take note of the decision
of a national court this past Saturday to sentence
Mr. Al-Bashir to two years in detention for acts of
corruption, as well as the case that was filed against
those primarily responsible for the 1989 coup d'etat.
We call on the Sudanese authorities to prosecute the
alleged crimes detailed in the corresponding arrest
warrants issued by the International Criminal Court
or to submit them to the Court, in accordance with
the principle of complementarity. Such developments
would very concretely demonstrate the Sudan's
commitment to taking a decisive step towards justice,
peace and providing recognition to the victims of the
crimes committed in Darfur. In parallel, we hope that
the negotiations with the armed groups in Darfur and
in two states in the Sudan, which have just resumed in
Juba, will lead to an agreement that will enable lasting
peace to be built. We encourage all the armed groups
to join that negotiation process without delay. It was
in that spirit that we facilitated a meeting between
Prime Minister Hamdok and Abdul Wahid Al-Nur on
29 September in Paris.

