President Mugabe: In the past the United Nations
General Assembly and the Organization of African Unity
Council of Ministers have adopted resolutions on
cooperation between the two Organizations. Those
resolutions have over the years provided a framework in
which a nascent partnership was beginning to find
sustenance and added impetus.

 

Today I would like, at the very outset, to thank the
Security Council for convening this special ministerial
meeting with the purpose of launching a new partnership
between the Organization of African Unity and the United
Nations. This initiative is most commendable and welcome.
We hope the deliberations of this meeting will be carefully
examined by both the Security Council and the General
Assembly with a View to producing an action-oriented
resolution that will not only help launch that new
partnership but also ensure that it is nurtured in order to
make a substantial contribution to the African renaissance.

Security Council meetings and debates on African
issues were in the past often convened on an ad hoc basis
and were devoted to addressing crises and armed conflicts
afflicting one country after another on the continent. I
believe today's meeting is different in a unique way. It is
being held against the backdrop of a perceptible African
renaissance, a rebirth and a renewal, that is reshaping not
only African societies but also Africa's relations with the
rest of the world. We hope that this special meeting will
provide greater momentum to this process.

The post-cold-war era has presented Africa with the
unique opportunity to take greater responsibility for and
control over its fate without undue and often disruptive
foreign interference. In so doing, we seek to cement our
constructive ties with the rest of the international
community. Thus, in the area of peace and security Africa's
decision and determination to take greater responsibility for
and leadership in the resolution of African crises, including
armed conflicts, are being pursued in full cognizance of the
symbiotic relationship that exists between African countries,
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the United
Nations.

The United Nations Security Council is endowed with
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. There can therefore never
be an exclusively African agenda for peace. It will,
perforce, be the United Nations agenda, to which the entire
international community subscribes and lends support. This
is our understanding of the provisions of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, which is devoted entirely
to cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations.

We in the Organization of African Unity place a
premium on the establishment and maintenance of peace
and security at the national, regional and continental levels
for the achievement of sustainable economic growth and
development. Conversely, we strongly believe that the
peace and security that we so ardently seek to achieve
cannot be attained in the conditions of abject poverty that
are prevalent in Africa today. We are convinced that a
politically stable, prosperous and Vibrant Africa is the best
place to contribute to greater global peace and security.

Through such subregional groupings as the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), we have activated subregional mechanisms
in the search for solutions to subregional crises. The
Organization of African Unity itself, through the Central
Organ of the Organization of African Unity Mechanism
for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, has
endeavoured to play its part in these efforts. International
support to such efforts, including in the area of capacity
building, is needed for these institutions and mechanisms
to play their role effectively in support of the United
Nations peacekeeping activities in Africa.

The beginning of this decade has witnessed a
phenomenal increase in the number of African countries
that have adopted economic and political reforms. The
majority of African countries have embarked on and are
pursuing economic structural-adjustment programmes
involving, among other elements, trade liberalization,
investment-climate improvement and market-oriented
economic policies. For Africa, the need for investment in
infrastructure development is critical. The success of these
policies will be greatly enhanced by improving support
from the international financial institutions and the donor
community.

Since 1990, more than 20 African countries have
held free and fair elections. These, however, have not
proved to be the panacea that some had hoped they would
be. This is largely due to the prevailing economic
conditions of underdevelopment. The OAU has now
begun to take an unequivocal stand against military
Governments or those that assume power through
undemocratic and unconstitutional means. We have stated
quite clearly that we can no longer tolerate such regimes.
We call upon the international community to stand solidly
behind us in denying legitimacy and recognition to such
regimes and in our efforts to restore democracy and good
governance.

It is poignantly clear, particularly in such countries
as Sierra Leone and Burundi, that the newly established
democracies there were thwarted militarily and thus failed
to be sustainable. It is imperative that the United
Nations - and, indeed, the international community at

 

large - should assist African countries in ensuring that
democracy becomes an irreversible process. The present
trends towards democratic governance and the rule of law
need to be buttressed economically if African countries are
to enjoy the peace dividend following the end of the cold
war.

I would be remiss were I not to raise another matter
of concern to the African continent that requires the
attention of the Council and that was debated at the last
summit meeting of the Organization of African Unity,
namely, the need to find a solution to the dispute between
Libya, the United States of America and the United
Kingdom over the Lockerbie tragedy. In addition to the
families of those who lost their lives, many other innocent
third persons continue to suffer as a result of the sanctions
imposed on Libya. Now that Libya has agreed that the two
accused Libyans can be tried under Scottish law, by
Scottish judges but in a third country or at the International
Court of Justice, we feel that this offer should receive your
serious consideration so that matters can move forward. The
Organization of African Unity stands ready to assist in
trying to break the present impasse.

Today's initiative must spur us to improve on previous
United Nations initiatives on Africa, initiatives which
foundered and collapsed for lack of requisite resources for
their implementation. These include the United Nations
Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and
Development, the precursor of the present United Nations
New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 19905,
the United Nations System-Wide Special Initiative for
Africa and the Alliance for Africa's Industrialization of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO), none of which can be cited as an example of
success. Because Africa's economic and social conditions
remain desperate, particularly in the 33 countries classified
by the United Nations as least developed, there is need to
develop realistic programmes that yield tangible results. At
the 66th meeting of the OAU Council of Ministers, held at
Harare in May of this year, the Executive Secretary of the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa reviewed
Africa's economic predicament and confronted us with the
grim statistics of an increasingly bleak African reality, in
spite of the positive economic growth rates that most
African countries have begun to register.

Out of sub-Saharan Africa's approximate population
of over 500 million people, about 262 million, he said, live
on less than $1 a day; 290 million are illiterate; 200 million
are without access to health services, while 274 million
have no access to safe water. Clearly, we are not talking of
poverty merely as a case of relative social deprivation.
This is absolute poverty.

The credibility of international cooperation is
obviously at stake in the face of such damning and
distressing statistics. Similarly, the international
community's assertions of true partnership with Africa in
the face of failing official development assistance and
impossible debt repayments - to mention just two major
constraints - may soon sound hollow unless that
partnership manifests itself in concrete programmes of
action. Debt relief is therefore urgently called for.

At the level of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government, Africa has defined its priorities as the
establishment of the African Economic Community by
way of regional and subregional integration; the
maintenance of conditions of peace and stability; human
resources development; eradication of poverty; promotion
of human rights; improvement of the condition of women
and children; consolidation of democracy; and good
governance. Often in the past, Africa had been dictated to
and never had the opportunity to define its own priorities.
We would want our partners to become committed to a
new partnership based on sovereign equality and mutual
benefit.

In conclusion, I wish to state that what Africa is
asking for is not charity, but a new partnership which is
mutually beneficial. We see today a growing worldwide
interest in investing in and trading with Africa. We
welcome and encourage that disposition. As the frontiers
of peace, democracy and stability broaden on the African
continent, a favourable environment for secure and
lucrative investments will undoubtedly grow.

Africa seeks to be an integral part of the emerging
international economic environment and stands ready to
play its part in addressing the global challenges of the
future. It is in light of this important need that, on behalf
of the Organization of African Unity as well as on behalf
of Zimbabwe, I wish once again to express my gratitude
and appreciation for the convening of this special
ministerial meeting of the Security Council aimed at
launching a new partnership between the Organization of
African Unity and the United Nations.

