Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba endorses the letter (S/2012/257) addressed by the
representative of Egypt to the President of the Security
Council on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Addressing organized crime and illicit acts is an
important matter for the Organization. Member States
coordinate actions in the General Assembly and in
other organs and specialized agencies of the United
Nations system, as well as through relevant
international treaties to combat and eradicate scourges
such as drug trafficking and the traffic in human
beings, the illicit trade in nuclear material, terrorism
and the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
One of the common traits of all those efforts is the
universal, or near majority, participation of Member
States, which means that the issue before the Council
today - securing borders against illicit flows -
exceeds the functions and powers of the Security
Council as set forth in Article 24 of the Charter. Yet
again, the Council is encroaching upon the functions of
other key organs of the Organization.

The General Assembly is in the midst of a
discussion on reforming the United Nations. It has
adopted a number of resolutions and decisions in that
regard, including agreements at the highest level. It is
also involved in other conversations on the global
struggle against terrorism and the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons, combating the drug trade, and
addressing human trafficking.

The so-called illicit movement described in the
concept paper distributed by the rotating presidency of
the Council (S/2012/ 195, annex) in the context of this
meeting requires coordinated action by all Member
States, including the possibility of participating in
decision-making. If the goal is to maximize
coordination among existing structures and to avoid
embarking on duplicate actions, the General Assembly
needs to be in charge.

Neither nuclear proliferation nor the illicit trade
in its component parts can be eradicated without the
total elimination of nuclear weapons. Some permanent
members of the Council are opposed to adopting
immediate measures that would establish a time frame
for the total elimination of the 23,000 nuclear weapons
that still exist. Terrorism cannot be successfully
addressed while it is promoted and utilized as a form of
statecraft. The drug trade cannot be successfully
combated without taking forceful and decisive action
in the markets that consume them. The illicit arms
trade cannot be eradicated so long as acts of imperialist
aggression are being employed to topple Governments,
or without prohibiting transfers to non-State actors.
In order to strengthen border security against
illicit actions, there undoubtedly needs to be decisive
action on the part of States. Governments have the
primary responsibility for that task.

Cuba has been subjected to a war consisting of
illicit acts for more than 50 years. As a result of
terrorist actions, 3,478 people have died and 2,099
have been physically affected. Thousands of weapons
and explosives were illegally introduced in Cuba in
order to overthrow the Government, and were used to
murder innocent people. Cuba is subjected to an
adjustment law that stimulates illegal emigration for
political ends, with no regard for the means utilized by
those involved, who have at times resorted to violence.

Eleven million Cubans suffer from the economic
and financial blockade that has for 20 consecutive
years been rejected by the Member States of the
General Assembly. In what constitutes an extreme
expression of savagery and disrespect for the basic
principles of civilized coexistence, the leader of the
Cuban Revolution, Fidel Castro, has been the object of
more than 600 attempts against his life. In order to
remain within the established time limit, I will not
belabour the point with further examples. Moreover,
abundant information on these facts is available in the
official archives of one of the permanent members of
this Council, most of it accessible on the Internet. Cuba
has provided the Council's Counter-Terrorism
Committee with abundant information that is also
available to the general public.

If we truly seek to combat illicit international
activities, hypocrisy and double standards must cease.
Let all countries unite in genuine cooperation on the
basis of the principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations. Cuba will continue to adhere to
those principles and to its obligations under the
relevant international treaties and agreements. We are
ready to cooperate in that spirit with all other Member
States, without exception.

