Ms. Wensley (Australia): I welcome the opportunity
to address the Security Council.

The adoption by the Council today, in a few
moments, of this draft resolution on East Timor represents
a further important step in putting into effect the historic
5 May 1999 New York Agreements between the
Governments of Indonesia and Portugal and the Secretary-
General of the United Nations.

 

As a neighbour and a country with historical ties to
East Timor, Australia welcomed the 5 May Agreements.
We said at the time, however, that this was the start of
what would be a difficult process. In the time since the
signature of the Agreements, a great deal of hard work has
been done by all the parties concerned, and while the
historic ballot is now only days away, a considerable
distance still remains to be travelled.

We congratulate the parties and the Secretary-General
for their efforts and for the spirit of accommodation and
compromise with which some very sensitive and difficult
issues have been approached. Particular credit is due to the
Secretary-General's Personal Representative, Ambassador
J amsheed Marker, whose patient and skilful diplomacy has
played a major role in the success of the United Nations
efforts so far.

Australia supports fully the steps taken in today's draft
resolution to restructure the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) in the interim phase following the 30
August consultation. The draft resolution includes, as the
Council knows, an increase in the civilian police component
of UNAMET to 460, and of military liaison officers from
50 to up to 300. It envisages assistance in training an East
Timorese police force, whether the outcome of the
30 August consultation is to accept or to reject the
autonomy package offered by the Government of Indonesia.

This draft resolution will make it possible for the
United Nations to continue to assist during the crucial next
phase - between the consultation and the implementation
of its result - in helping resolve the East Timor issue. Key
United Nations responsibilities in the post-consultation
period - again, irrespective of the result - will be to
build confidence, to support stability and to reassure all
groups, including those who are disappointed by the results.

Australia will continue to give its full support to
UNAMET during this crucial period. Our support for
UNAMET goes beyond the rhetorical. We have made a
significant contribution to the trust fund. We are providing
substantial in-kind assistance, including the provision of
electoral assistance, transport equipment, training and
administrative facilities in the Australian city of Darwin.
We are also contributing civilian police to the civilian
police contingent and military personnel to the military
liaison contingent. We welcome, and we have worked
energetically to encourage, the participation of a wide range
of Member States in UNAMET.

Australia is very conscious that a difficult time lies
ahead, in the few days remaining to the ballot, on the
ballot day itself and in the period after the vote. But we
share the hope that the ballot will be conducted
peacefully. However, the security situation in East Timor
remains tense: there have been continuing violence and
intimidation in many parts of East Timor. The violent
clashes which occurred in Dili on 26 August, which were
referred to by my colleagues from Indonesia and Portugal,
are a matter of serious concern, and the Australian
Government forcefully condemns such acts. We, like the
United Nations and other members of the international
community, believe it essential that the ballot be allowed
to proceed and that it not be derailed by the actions of
those whose only response to this historic moment is to
resort to violence.

We have attached the highest importance to creating
an environment that is secure and free from violence and
intimidation. This is a precondition for a free and fair
ballot on 30 August, and we have urged - and will
continue to urge - all parties to take all necessary steps
to create this environment. In recent days, the Australian
Government has, at the very highest levels, again
emphasized to the Government of Indonesia that ensuring
security in East Timor remains its responsibility. My
Government has urged the Government of Indonesia on
many occasions to take the necessary steps to restore law
and order in East Timor.

Under the 5 May New York Agreements, the
Government of Indonesia remains responsible for security
after the ballot, whatever the result. We recall and we
welcome assurances from the highest levels of the
Indonesian Government of its undertakings to uphold its
international commitments.

The popular consultation on 30 August represents a
historic opportunity for the East Timorese people to
express a view on their constitutional future. At the same
time, there is a pressing need for reconciliation between
the factions in East Timor if the process that was
embarked upon on here on 5 May is to lead to a peaceful
and lasting resolution of the East Timor conflict. Australia
urges all parties to make the utmost efforts towards this
end, and we remain committed to assisting all genuine
reconciliation efforts among the East Timorese. In
particular, we, like others, have been greatly encouraged
by the steps taken in recent days to establish an East
Timorese consultative commission, with representation
from both pro-integration and pro-independence leaders.
The commission, we believe, offers hope that East

 

Timorese of different views will see the need to
accommodate their interests peacefully.

We also very much welcome reports received
overnight that the Government of Indonesia has decided to
release Xanana Gusmao. Like the United Nations, Australia
has consistently said that Xanana Gusmao should be
allowed to return to East T imor.

Australia is strongly committed to supporting the
implementation of the 5 May Agreements and the
consultation process conducted by UNAMET. We recognize
the historic challenge that this poses for the Government of
Indonesia and for the international community. We are
pleased to support it and to contribute as best we can to
ensuring its success.

