Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me first to thank you, Madam, and the
Government of the Argentine Republic for the invitation
conveyed to the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States (CELAC), which Cuba is honoured to
preside, to participate for the first time in a debate of
the Security Council.

The history of Latin America and the Caribbean has
changed. Two hundred years after our independence, the
ideas of "a Nation of Republics" and of "Our America"
envisaged by Bolivar and Marti, respectively, are
taking shape. Thus, our Heads of State and Government
decided in the Caracas Declaration that,

"in accordance with the original mandate of our
liberators, CELAC must move forward in the
process of political, economic, social and cultural
integration, based on a wise equilibrium between
the unity and diversity of our peoples, so that the
regional integration mechanism can become the
ideal space to express our rich cultural diversity
and also the forum to reaffirm the Latin American
and the Caribbean identity, our common history
and our ongoing struggles for justice and liberty".

They also agreed that,

"recognizing the right of each nation to build freely
and peacefully its own political and economic
system, in the framework of the corresponding
institutions according with the sovereign mandate of
its people, the processes of dialogue, exchange and
political negotiation carried out by CELAC must be
pursued taking into account the following common
values and principles: respect for international law,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, the prohibition
of the use and the threat of use of force, respect
for self-determination, respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity, non-interference in the internal
affairs of each country, and the protection and
promotion of human rights and democracy".

Latin America and the Caribbean have resolved to
walk in closed ranks, like the silver in the roots of the
Andes. We have provided ourselves with institutions
that allow us to promote unity within our diversity,
integrate ourselves and cooperate, discuss among
ourselves the issues that are germane to us, and be in
solidarity to one another to solve the pressing problems
that still encumber Latin America and the Caribbean.
We intend to develop ourselves, live in peace, protect
human dignity and preserve and enrich our culture.

We congratulate ourselves on the fact that CELAC
is reaching common views in areas such as social
development, education, health, the environment,
energy and financing, among others, and now is
preparing to work together in the areas of cooperation,
nuclear disarmament, fighting corruption, agriculture,
science and technology.

I pay tribute to President Hugo Chavez Frias, one of
the founders and principal architects of CELAC. I can
feel his presence among us.

Upon founding CELAC, our Heads of State and
Government reiterated "our commitment to the building
of a more just, equitable and harmonious international
order based on respect for international law and
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including the sovereign equality of States, the peaceful
settlement of disputes, respect for territorial integrity
and non-intervention in the internal affairs of States".
They reaffirmed our commitment to the defence of
sovereignty and the right of any State to establish its
own political system, free from threats, aggression and
unilateral coercive measures and in an environment
of peace, stability, justice, democracy and respect for
human rights.

They expressed their conviction that the unity and
political, economic, social and cultural integration
of Latin America and the Caribbean constituted a
requirement for the region to successfully confront
the challenges before us. And they decided to promote
and project a unified voice for Latin America and the
Caribbean in the discussion of the principal issues and
in the positions of the region on the relevant global
events at international meetings and conferences, as
well as in the dialogue with other regions and countries.

Likewise, they reiterated that CELAC was an
important mechanism to promote the interests of
developing countries in multilateral organizations in
order to reinforce our capacity to react in a coordinated
manner to the challenges of a world in the process of
a profound economic and political change, as well as
our commitment to strengthen CELAC to promote and
project the interests and concerns of Latin America and
the Caribbean on the main issues of the international
agenda and to bring together positions and coordinate
ourselves, when possible, at international meetings and
conferences of global reach. In that regard, we highlight
the work done by the Permanent Representatives of
CELAC member States to the United Nations, who
have agreed on an internal mechanism for concerted
participation in the discussions at the various
committees to which the consensual position of
CELAC has been put forward. As a result, we commit
to strengthen coordination efforts at the Headquarters,
including promoting joint initiatives on issues of
interest to the region.

On several occasions, CELAC has put forward
before the United Nations its common vision about
some of the main challenges faced by the maintenance
of international peace and security and the prevention
of conflicts.

In relation to current United Nations peacekeeping
efforts, CELAC believes that, with the purpose of
achieving stability in the long term, as well as to prevent
the recurrence of conflicts, it is necessary to strengthen
the strategic, comprehensive and coordinated presence
of the United Nations in the field, not only in the
area of peacekeeping, which is essential, but also by
strengthening national institutions and promoting
reconstruction and economic and social development in
areas of conflict. In that regard, CELAC urges greater
interaction and coordination among Member States and
all the relevant organs of the United Nations. Regional
and subregional organizations have an essential role to
play in conformity with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. In that regard, CELAC recognizes
in particular the contribution made by the African
Union, which has proved to be most useful in some
peacekeeping operations, where its cooperation has
complemented the efforts of the United Nations.

CELAC reiterates that there can be no lasting peace
without development and the eradication of poverty,
hunger and inequality. That principle is the essence
of the solidarity and cooperation of CELAC members
countries towards the sister nation of Haiti - a
country whose heroic role in the independence of the
countries of the region continues to inspire our current
integration efforts. While recognizing the fundamental
role of the presence of the Organization in Haiti
through the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the efforts of the international
community to support Haiti, CELAC reaffirms that
those efforts will be effective as long as they are part
of a long-term sustainable project under the leadership
and guidance of the Haitian Government, with full
respect for its sovereignty.

It is high time for our region to contribute to
the equilibrium of the world with all the might of its
almost 600 million inhabitants, who are seeking equal
opportunities; its abundant natural resources, over
which we shall permanently exercise our sovereignty;
its economic capabilities, even in circumstances of
global economic crisis; and its extraordinary ancestral
culture and the unyielding determination of our peoples
to achieve peace, development, justice and progress.

The fact that numerous countries and organizations
have found in CELAC a valid interlocutor with Latin
America and the Caribbean is a source of satisfaction.

We are pleased that the Community of Latin
America and Caribbean States is able to participate
in this Security Council debate. CELAC has already
started to appear before the United Nations as a united
force. Our common positions on numerous topics of
interest for the international community portend our
possibilities.

At the First CELAC Summit, we renewed our
countries' commitment to multilateralism and to a
comprehensive reform of the United Nations system,
as well as to the democratization of international
decision-making forums, in particular the security
Council.

Latin America and the Caribbean is a zone of
peace free from nuclear weapons. CELAC has adopted
a unanimous position with regard to some far-reaching
topics on the international agenda, such as, for example,
Argentina's legitimate claim in the dispute concerning
the sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands and - today,
on the anniversary of the bombing of Hiroshima - on
so-called nuclear disarmament.

As for Cuba, which continues its struggle, I shall
say nothing on this occasion on which I am speaking on
behalf of CELAC.

We must now continue to go forward. Let no
difference hold us back. Let us remain united. Let
nothing prevent us from honouring the legacy of the
liberators of our America.

