Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We attach great importance to our regular
meetings with the Chairs of the three Security Council
Committees with mandates in counter-terrorism, the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We
share your positive assessments of the cooperation
among these subsidiary organs, Mr. President, including
in the areas of exchanging information, preparing
analytical documents and organizing joint meetings
and monitoring missions.

The Council's specialized bodies face the difficult
challenge of adapting to the rapidly changing conditions
on the counter-terrorism front. The subsidiary bodies'
experts agree that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), Al-Qaida and their affiliated organizations are
now trying to expand their presence into States that were
previously fortunate where security was concerned.
And yet it is extremely difficult to determine exactly
where the next flare-up of terror will be.

In the circumstances, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) should devote every effort to
monitoring the implementation of the relevant
resolutions in all key regions. We call on States that are
on the Committee's current list for assessment visits to
take a constructive approach to coordinating those visits
with the CTC leadership and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). We have
noted CTED'S efforts to analyse new trends in the
area of counter-terrorism. We believe it is essential to
continue studying the problem of cooperation between
terrorist organizations and international crime. By
exploiting the potential of criminal groups, terrorists
can significantly expand their subversive capabilities
on a transnational scale. In that connection, we believe
that the efforts of Peru's chairmanship to develop this
subject in the Committee are especially critical.

In the CTC we traditionally highlight the
importance of paying close attention to modern
digital technologies, and particularly the problem of
their unlawful use by terrorists for radicalizing and
recruiting new supporters. Resolutions 1624 (2005)
and 2354 (2017) should continue to form the basis for
those efforts. We urge all States to thoroughly study
the Council's new requirements in resolution 2462
(2019), on combating the various forms of support for
terrorists. Acting in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, the Council called in
particular on all States to criminalize the full spectrum
of criminal acts related to illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons. The verification of national
legislation and law enforcement practice in this area
now comes under the CTC's purview.

Against that backdrop, I would like to once again
caution our colleagues on the Committee and its
Executive Directorate's experts about getting too caught
up in the secondary elements of the CTC's mandate.
Attempts to fill its agenda with human rights issues and
replace counter-terrorism with the infamous concept
of the prevention of violent extremism distract States
from fulfilling their primary obligations in the area.

On the positive side, I would like to take this
opportunity to especially thank and congratulate
Ms. Michele Coninsx, Executive Director of CTED,
for her contribution to strengthening the Committee's
cooperation with the specialized organizations. We
welcome the signing of a memorandum of understanding
between CTED and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization's Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure and
stand ready to assist in its implementation, if necessary.

In our view, the task of effectively implementing the
Council's resolutions on the counter-terrorism sanctions
regime in relation to ISIL and Al-Qaida is absolutely
crucial. We note the work of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da'esh) Al-Qaida and associated
individuals groups undertakings and entities, which has
established itself as one of the Council's most effective
counter-terrorism mechanisms. Given ISIL's growing
presence in Afghanistan and the possibility of fighters
spreading further into the countries of Central Asia,
extending the Council's counter-terrorism sanctions
regime to individuals and organizations linked to ISIL's
Afghan wing is a priority. Despite the limited losses
they have sustained in the north, it is those groups that
remain one of the key factors in the destabilization of
the situation in Afghanistan. ISIL's activity there is
also being driven in part by foreign terrorist fighters
who have gained combat experience in Syria and Iraq.
The high number of terrorist attacks involving the use
of suicide bombers indicates that the group has major
human resources. In that connection, we underscore
the importance of continuing to focus on the problem
of foreign terrorist fighters, including in the context of
adding to the counter-terrorism sanctions lists.

We support the effective work of the 1267
Committee's Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, whose reports are an important
support to the Committee's work, and we encourage
Member States to work closely with its experts.
However, we also trust that the Monitoring Team's
reports will be as objective as possible and rely only on
verified sources of information. While we consider the
Monitoring Team's country visits an important factor in
this work, we hope that it will focus on trips to countries
that are dealing directly with a terrorist presence.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is a key universal, legally
binding instrument in the area of the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), which
requires all countries to take effective measures to
prevent WMDs and any related materials, as well as
their means of delivery, from falling into the hands of
non-State actors. Combating the proliferation of WMDs
is one of Russia's military and political priorities.
As with any other pressing issue, it requires the joint
coordinated efforts of every State, without exception.
We are interested in finding common positions with
our partners in order to advance the non-proliferation
agenda as quickly as possible, especially since the
problems in this area unfortunately continue to worsen.

On the whole, we are pleased with the progress in the
resolution's implementation and with the international
community's recognition of its importance. We
commend the efforts of the 1540 Committee under
Indonesia's chairmanship, and of its Group of Experts.
We note its organization of courses for national focal
points, country visits for formulating voluntary national
action plans, the provision of assistance to countries that
need it, the maintenance of contacts with the relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations
and so forth. However, a great deal remains to be done
to achieve the core objective, which is every country's
full implementation of the resolution.

In the light of the continuing activity in the
Middle East of ISIL and other terrorist groups that
have mastered the technology for producing chemical
weapons and making active use of it, the importance of
working collectively to prevent the horrific problem of
chemical terrorism is only increasing. But we have to
act quickly, especially considering that as the situation
regarding a settlement in Syria continues to improve,
the terrorists there, including those who have practical
experience with chemical weapons, will try to hide in
third countries. In that regard, we would like to remind
the Council of the Russian Federation's initiative to
develop and adopt a convention on combating acts of
chemical and biological terrorism.

