Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President and your team, and all of
today's briefers.

Canada was pleased to welcome Special
Representative Yamamoto at the meeting of the Group
of Friends of Afghanistan yesterday. As always,
we welcome his comments and are grateful for his
leadership role in the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

Canada believes that a lasting solution to the
conflict in Afghanistan cannot be achieved through
military means alone. At this critical juncture, the
international community must continue to show its
support, including through the Security Council, which
will renew UNAMA's mandate later this month.

My statement today will focus on two
important issues: the peace talks and the upcoming
presidential elections.

The Afghan people and the international community
look forward to a political settlement as the necessary
first step towards achieving lasting peace. The recent
devastating attacks in Afghanistan have prevented
building the necessary trust for realizing those efforts
to bring about peace and have intensified the urgent
need to achieve an inclusive and lasting political
settlement that protects civilians and strengthens
economic security in Afghanistan.

(spoke in English)

We have listened to the voices of Afghan women,
who are not willing to settle for a political agreement
with the Taliban that sacrifices the hard-earned gains
made with regard to their rights; nor are we. Canada
welcomes the fact that Afghan women were able to
attend the Doha talks. We strongly encourage Afghan
leaders to formally include women in any future
negotiating team and intra-Afghan peace talks.

Canada and the international community
have supported Afghanistan through military and
police deployments, development and humanitarian
assistance, and reconstruction and stabilization efforts.
In partnership with Afghanistan, our collective efforts
have contributed to the foundations of a stable and
inclusive society in Afghanistan, and those gains
must be protected. An agreement that does not bring
peace to all members of society - men and women, all
ethnicities and all religions - is not a durable peace.
Men need to stand in solidarity with women to reach a
settlement that benefits all Afghans.

Canada is working together with partners to build
the capacity of women's organizations to take their seat
at the table and engage meaningfully in peacebuilding
and peace talks. For example, through its Women's
Voice and Leadership project in Afghanistan, Canada
is providing $8.4 million to help women's organizations
provide services and strengthening networks among
women's rights organizations.
With regard to my second point, concerning the
upcoming presidential elections, Canada welcomes
the efforts of the Independent Election Commission
to ensure that the elections are held fairly and
transparently. Providing sufficient security so that
women are able to safely participate is a critical step in
ensuring that women's voices are a permanent part of
Afghan political life.

Finally, with those political processes under way, it
is now more important than ever to redouble our efforts
to build Afghanistan's economic security and empower
UNAMA to support that work. I really believe that it is
also important that the UNAMA mandate also focus on
leveraging the economic integration already happening
in the region. When the poverty level rises from year
to year, when more than half of the Afghan population
lives below the national poverty line and when more
than 40 per cent of young adults have no occupation,
the narcotics trade and terrorism will remain attractive.

There will be no peace in Afghanistan without
minimal economic security, and I believe that one of
the most promising pillars for Afghanistan's peace and
development that I have heard about since I have been
here at the United Nations and that I have seen in recent
years is through the enhanced regional integration that
is already under way.

UNAMA therefore needs to be better equipped to
leverage the economic integration that is happening
in the region, to ensure the coordination of the United
Nations-Afghan country team and to ensure the latter's
coordination with the neighbouring country team.
UNAMA is the best place for acting as that coordinator,
and Canada submits that Council members should think
about that as they discuss the renewal of the UNAMA
mandate this month.

