Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Terrorist acts are one of the gravest threats to
international peace and security. Therefore, the fight
against terrorism concerns the entire international
community. In that regard, Switzerland welcomes the
holding of an open debate and is pleased that the Swiss
delegation of the Inter-Parliamentary Union had the
opportunity to listen to this debate today.

We thank Ambassador Denisov and Executive
Director Ruperez for the work accomplished thus far,
and particularly for the very useful information they
provided to us this morning. Switzerland thanks the
chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) for having prepared the work programme for the
thirteenth 90-day period. We must also thank the
Committee for the remarkable work it has
accomplished in three years.

The adoption of the Executive Directorate's
organizational plan will enable the CTC to continue
and strengthen its dialogue with Member States. We
are convinced that the Committee's future visits to
Member States, as envisaged in the procedures recently
approved by the Committee, will be carried out in a
spirit of transparency and in a way that will ensure
close cooperation with the countries concerned.
Switzerland has already cooperated closely with the
Committee in the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), and we intend to continue that cooperation in
the future.

Switzerland has noted the Security Council's
adoption of its resolution 1566 (2004). We welcome
the Council's resolve to strengthen the means of
combating terrorism. Switzerland regrets that the
adoption of resolution 1566 (2004) was not preceded
by an open debate enabling all United Nations
Members to express their points of View. The fight
against terrorism is a long-term challenge. It is
therefore necessary to think in terms of duration and
effectiveness by ensuring the participation of everyone.
Switzerland would like all Member States to be
included from the outset in the efforts of the new
working group established by resolution 1566 (2004).

Terrorist groups intentionally target civilians and
can obtain access to modern technologies with
unprecedented destructive power. The persons
responsible for such acts must be either prosecuted and
judged or extradited. The international community
must be careful not to sacrifice respect for human
rights and the rule of law in the fight it must wage
against terrorism. Switzerland is also convinced that it
is not necessary to infringe fundamental freedoms to
ensure the effectiveness of the fight against terrorism.

Under the mandate envisaged in resolution 1566
(2004), the working group must consider and
recommend to the Council measures to be imposed on
persons or entities that participate in or are associated
with terrorist activities. Such measures include the
freezing of financial assets, bans on travel and arms
embargoes. The possibility of establishing a
consolidated list has also been raised in Council
discussions. However, for reasons of legitimacy and
effectiveness, we should consider whether it is
appropriate that the Security Council alone decide on
the content of such a list. Switzerland believes that, if
necessary, mechanisms should be developed to enable
all Member States to be included. Moreover, if such a
list were to be established, it is important that it be the
result of a process that would provide sufficient
guarantees of impartiality and transparency and would
ensure that the persons and entities whose names were
on the list would have the opportunity to challenge
such a listing if they considered themselves victims of
errors or abuse.

In addition, Switzerland regrets that resolution
1566 (2004) contains formulations of a legislative
nature that do not correspond to the definitions used in
the draft comprehensive convention on international
terrorism and in the 12 international conventions
against terrorism; nor do they comply with the
principle of legality in criminal law, which requires the
clear and precise formulation of laws. In order to avoid
such inconsistencies between the work of the General
Assembly and the actions of the Security Council,
Switzerland hopes that in future the Council will fully
respect the prerogatives of the Assembly with regard to
developing and codifying international law.
At the same time, Switzerland calls on the
General Assembly to swiftly find a consensus on the
aspects of the comprehensive convention on
international terrorism that are still being negotiated.
An objective definition of terrorism would facilitate
Security Council actions against terrorism.

Switzerland must recall once again the statement
we made in March this year during the open debate on
the revitalization of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
On that occasion, we proposed setting up a central
counter-terrorism office under the authority of the
Secretary-General, which would assume the main
responsibility in the medium term for the fight against
terrorism carried out within the framework of the
United Nations. Costa Rica recently developed a
proposal whose objectives are somewhat comparable;
it deserves our full attention.

