Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): My delegation welcomes the participation in
today's meeting of Mr. Tadic, President of the Republic
of Serbia, and of Mr. Jessen-Petersen, Head of the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo, as well as the
delegation accompanying him. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his report (8/2006/45) on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo and to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing
on the situation in Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro.

We, like the Secretary-General, have some
serious concerns about the stalling and, in some cases,
the regression, in the process of the implementation of
standards in the province, particularly with regard to
the still very low rates of returns of refugees and
internally displaced persons. Important steps have not
yet been taken to enable those who want to return to do
so. It is too early to talk about the existence of the
required guarantees in terms of rights, security and
freedom of movement for minorities, particularly
Serbs. The problems of decentralization are far from
being resolved, as are those relating to the protection
of the religious and cultural heritage of minorities.

Despite the efforts of the United Nations Mission
and of the Kosovo Force (KFOR), the situation in the
province is far from stable. We associate ourselves
with the Secretary-General's urgent appeal to the
leaders of the province to intensify their efforts to
guarantee real, solid progress in the implementation of
standards, particularly those standards that are of
priority importance for the national minorities.
Progress in those areas will be an important indicator
of the willingness of the leadership of Kosovo to lay
the foundations for a multi-ethnic democratic society in
which members of all communities can live in decent,
safe conditions.

Like our partners in the Contact Group, we are
convinced that, with regard to implementing standards,
only concrete, practical results - not symbolic
gestures - will have an important influence on the
pace and productiveness of the negotiating process that
is to determine the future status of Kosovo. So far in
Kosovo, the necessary conditions are not in place for
finding a status solution, particularly because of the
lack of progress in implementing key standards.

In the context of the settlement of such problems,
we welcome the organization of direct meetings
between the Serbs and the Kosovo Albanians, with the
facilitation of Mr. Ahtisaari, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Future Status Process for
Kosovo. We are prepared to lend support to his efforts
to establish direct dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina.

The passing of Ibrahim Rugova was a severe loss
for the Albanian community of Kosovo. We will
remember him as their most authoritative leader, who
strove for a non-violent solution to the Kosovo
problem. We hope that the leadership of the province,
including the new President, Mr. Sejdiu, will do
everything possible to ensure calm and security and
will demonstrate a responsible and constructive
attitude during the talks to determine the future status
of Kosovo, in the interests of peace, stability and
prosperity for all of its people.

The basis for defining the future status of the
province should be the principle of gradualism. We
should start by reaching agreement on specific aspects
of the status process, and only then move on to
discussing actual future status. Such a gradual
approach could create the necessary atmosphere for
subsequent agreement between the parties on a status
formula.

We believe that there are various possible status
options. During the direct talks, the parties must
themselves reach agreement on the future status of
Kosovo, without any decisions being imposed on
them- with, of course, international facilitation,
represented by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ahtisaari. Such agreement must be
equally acceptable to Belgrade and to Pristina and must
be in keeping with international legal norms and with
resolution 1244 (1999), and must then be backed up by
a new Security Council resolution.

Working out a compromise will require time and
a major effort by the parties, as well as by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General and the Contact Group.
The Security Council has a lead role to play in
Kosovo's affairs, and it will continue, on an ongoing
basis, to monitor the implementation of standards in
the provinces and the development of the status
process.

We believe that it would be counterproductive to
set any strict time frames in that regard. We are not
talking about protracting the talks indefinitely.
However, as experience in resolving many conflict
situations has shown, arbitrary time limitations could
undo any possibility of reaching necessary compromise
decisions.

Ensuring the success of the international effort in
Kosovo will depend on subsequent compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999) and the guiding principles of
the Contact Group, and on the parties to the process
agreeing on a mutually acceptable negotiating
outcome. That is the only way to achieve the goal of
solid stabilization in Kosovo and in the Balkans as a
whole.

When resolving conflict, the international
community should not use double standards. It is clear
to us that the formula for resolving the problem of
Kosovo objectively will have an impact on the
development of the situation with regard to other
conflicts, too. That is precisely why the Security
Council can support only a negotiated decision, not a
one-sided one. This would not create a negative
precedent in international crisis settlement. At any
event, the situation in the province cannot be called
unique, and the exact way in which a solution to the
future status issue is found will have a universal
character.

In conclusion, I wish once again to welcome
President Tadic, who has come here to be present at
today's meeting.

