Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We
welcome the presence at today's meeting of His
Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan. We listened with great interest
to his remarks today.

I thank the Secretary-General for his valuable
report (S/20ll/590), and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura, for his
informative briefing.

We are deeply concerned about the security
situation in Afghanistan, especially regarding the
continually increasing loss of civilian lives due to
overall intensified fighting. We reiterate our
condemnation, in the strongest possible terms, of
attacks against schools and mosques, and we repeat
that such heinous attacks, which have taken the lives of
children and innocent civilians, are simply not
acceptable.

Furthermore, we condemn the targeted
assassination of high-ranking Government officials and
prominent political and religious leaders. We also
strongly condemn the recent tragic killing of the Chair
of the High Peace Council, Mr. Rabbani, and a number
of his colleagues. We express our condolences to the
Afghan Government and all Afghan people.
Despite all these difficulties, we sincerely hope
that Afghanistan is now on the right path towards
sustainable Afghan-led reconstruction of governance
and of its economy, accompanied by the transition of
responsibility over security in the country.

We welcome the formal start, on 17 July, of the
transfer of security responsibilities to Afghan
authorities. The increase of Afghan National Police
forces and Afghan National Army will certainly and
considerably facilitate this essential process, which
should, in the end, bring greater security and stability,
and, consequently, opportunities for the country's
development.

In that regard, we noted positively the recent
review conference organized by the Afghan
Government and welcome its conclusion that it is
necessary to include governance and development
strategies in transition areas. It is therefore important
that negotiation between the Afghan Government and
the International Monetary Fund soon result in an
agreement, which will protect the interests of the
Afghan people and facilitate the much-needed
reconstruction of the country. Furthermore, in the
context of post-conflict reconstruction, we strongly
support the mine clearance and demining programmes,
and welcome the recent results obtained in the field.

We have always strongly supported the process of
reconciliation in Afghanistan and, in that context, the
role of the High Peace Council. We believe that there is
no alternative to the national reconciliation process. We
commend UNAMA for the continuous assistance it
provides to the High Peace Council through its Salaam
Support Group.

We welcome the increase of reintegrated persons
who have joined the Afghanistan Peace and
Reintegration Programme, and express our hope that
this trend will continue in the future, with even greater
success.

Dialogue and reconciliation must be the priority
for all parties in Afghanistan for the sake of Afghan
children and their hopes for a better future, generations
of whom have already borne the enormous burden of
war. We are also very concerned about the findings of
the research conducted by UNAMA regarding child
recruitment by anti-Government elements for military
and suicide attacks. We call upon all parties to respect
the rights of the child and expect the action plan to
tackle perpetrators to be implemented by the
authorities as a matter of the highest priority.

We also encourage UNAMA to continue to
observe detention facilities across Afghanistan and to
monitor and investigate arbitrary detention, ill
treatment and fair trial guarantees.

We reiterate our strong support for cooperation
between Afghanistan and its neighbours, and we
encourage all countries to continue strengthening it in
the spirit of friendly relations.

The Afghanistan-Pakistan Joint Commission for
Reconciliation and Peace certainly represents a good
example of how to improve the reconciliation process
in Afghanistan, bearing in mind the economic, political
and trade issues that are being improved with
neighbours.

We look forward to the conferences on
Afghanistan, to be held in November and December in
Istanbul and Bonn, respectively. We thank the Turkish
and German Governments for their efforts and for the
strong support they have given to Afghanistan's peace
and prosperity.

With regard to UNAMA's security issues, we
welcome the continuation of the process to upgrade the
physical security of its field offices.

In conclusion, we would like to thank all the
UNAMA and other United Nations staff for their
dedicated work and for delivering on their mandates in
a very difficult environment.

