The Secretary-General: I am grateful for the
opportunity to brief the Council on the United Nations
work on preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa.

All our work on conflict prevention and resolution
relies on partnerships with Member States, regional
and subregional organizations, regional economic
communities and others. The African Union is our key
strategic partner across the continent. I welcome the
leadership of His Excellency Mr. Moussa Eaki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, who
has participated in so many of our debates.

We are making progress on conflict prevention,
together with our partners, in many parts of Africa.
In the Gambia, for example, joint action two years ago
by the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the United Nations
and neighbouring countries prevented a political
crisis from spiralling and supported a peaceful and
democratic transition. In Madagascar, we worked with
the African Union, the European Union, the Southern
African Development Community and the International
Organization of la Francophonie to facilitate dialogue
that contributed to the peaceful presidential election in
that country this past year. Our good offices efforts,
together with those of the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS and the
European Union, have been instrumental in addressing
political tensions in Guinea-Bissau. I urge all parties
to work towards a peaceful, transparent, free and fair
election in that country next month.

In Cameroon, my Special Representative for
Central Africa is working with the authorities and with
national and regional stakeholders to support efforts to
address, through an inclusive dialogue, the root causes
of the crises in the North-West and South-West regions.
The conclusions of the national dialogue in Cameroon
have just been published. The recent agreement in the
Sudan, brokered by the African Union and Ethiopia,
is an opportunity for the international community
to support peace at a delicate time, in a country that
has seen terrible conflict and suffering. My Special
Representative for West Africa and the Sahel has also
conducted joint efforts with ECOWAS and the African
Union to support peaceful and inclusive election
processes in Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal.
(spoke in French)

Terrorism is a growing threat to the entire continent
of Africa and has serious implications for global peace
and security. In the Sahel, terrorist groups regularly
attack local and international security forces - there
was yet another death yesterday - including our United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) peacekeepers. The
violence is spreading to the coastal States of the Gulf
of Guinea. In Nigeria, Boko Haram and its splinter
factions are terrorizing local communities and
attacking security forces, despite the efforts of the
Multinational Joint Task Force. We are seeing terrorist
networks spread throughout Libya and North Africa,
extending across the Sahel to the Lake Chad region, and
appearing in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo and
Mozambique. This is a battle that we are not winning.
It is notjust a regional issue, but a clear and immediate
danger to global peace and security. I welcome the
ECOWAS summit that was held this past month in
Burkina Faso, as well as the renewed commitment of
ECOWAS member States to participating financially
and militarily in the fight against terrorism.

We must recognize that the impact of the crisis
in Libya is growing and spreading throughout the
region as weapons and fighters continue to constantly
cross its borders. As the Council is aware, my Special
Representative is working with national, regional and
international partners to prevent a further escalation of
violence and encourage a return to the political process.
I have also already sent the President of the Security
Council a copy of the letter from the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, in which the proposal
from the African Union Peace and Security Council is
presented to the Council. In that regard, I look forward
to enhanced cooperation with the African Union
on Libya.

Peace in Mali is also essential to peace in the
Sahel. Despite the terrible attacks in the Mopti region
this past week, I hope plans for an inclusive political
dialogue will facilitate the implementation of the 2015
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Our
peacekeeping Mission, MINUSMA, plays a critical
role in supporting implementation of the agreement and
requires consistent and strong support.

African military operations, including the African
Union Mission in Somalia, the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) and the Multinational
Joint Task Force against Boko Haram, among others,
deserve our full support. I welcome the decision to lift
geographic restrictions on provisions by MINUSMA
to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, but we must understand
that this alone is not enough. I once again urge the
Council to provide African peacekeeping and counter-
terrorist operations with clear mandates, backed by
predictable and sustainable financial support through
mandatory contributions.

Sustainable, inclusive development is an end in
itself; it is also the most effective way to address the
underlying causes of conflict, extremism and terrorism.
Tackling poverty and inequality, strengthening State
institutions and civil society and promoting human rights
are critical to preventing conflict and building resilient
communities and societies. These goals are central to
both the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the African Union Agenda 2063. We are working
harmoniously with the African Union, through our
joint framework for sustainable development, in order
to build a peaceful and prosperous Africa with a
strong focus on inclusivity, women's rights and gender
equality. The meaningful participation of women and
women's leadership will strengthen our responses and
are essential to lasting peace.

Addressing the climate crisis is another vital
preventive measure. Climate-related risks, including
droughts, floods and changing rainfall patterns, often
intersect with political, social and economic factors.
We must urgently reduce our emissions to prevent
consequences that would be catastrophic for sustainable
development and security across Africa and step up
support for the countries that are worst affected. Today,
it is indisputable that climate change has aggravated
security challenges, particularly in the Sahel.

Nearly half of Africa's population of 1.3 billion
people are under the age of 15. Education, training and
job opportunities for this generation must be central
to any development strategy. As we saw most recently
in the Sudan, women and young people are the key
builders of peaceful societies. I urge the Council to
work with them and for them far more effectively.

(spoke in English)

When prevention fails, the United Nations works
with our partners to reduce suffering, resolve conflicts
and build sustainable peace. We strongly support the
African Union's Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative as
a basis for advancing peace and security and offering a
safer and better future. I commend the Security Council
for its resolution 2457 (2019) on this initiative and for
emphasizing the role of young people. Our enhanced
strategic partnership with the African Union on peace
and security is based on the Joint Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security agreed in
2017. It was demonstrated again in February when the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2457 (2019),
on steps towards ending conflict in Africa through
enhanced international cooperation and partnership
(see S/PV.8473).

Our largest peacekeeping missions are on the African
continent, where more than 80,000 peacekeepers are
serving. Africa is now the largest troop-contributing
region. We owe these Blue Helmets our strong and united
support through robust funding and strong mandates. I
commend the Council's cooperation with the African
Union, including with its Peace and Security Council.
Across the continent, the United Nations is working in
steadfast and close cooperation with the African Union
and African subregional organizations to prevent and
resolve conflicts.

The Central African Republic is just one example
of this. The United Nations, the African Union and
others are cooperating in support of the historic
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
reached in February to end violence against civilians,
strengthen the extension of State authority and bring
social development to that conflict-ravaged country.

Conflict prevention is difficult to quantify and may
not make the news, but no news is good news for the
people we serve. Prevention brings enormous rewards.
Conflict prevention and resolution depend on the
engagement of the parties involved. Beyond that, they
require a united international position and a commitment
to shared goals. The Council's strong engagement
in prevention efforts on the African continent, in
collaboration with regional and subregional partners, is
needed and appreciated more than ever.

