Mr. AI-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to welcome Mr. Tom Koenigs,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and to thank him for his presence among
us and for his briefing to the Council. I wish him every
success in his mission.

The international community has made much
progress towards the political and economic
stabilization of Afghanistan and in the area of security.
To date, that process has gone through several
important phases, beginning with the Berlin
Declaration of 1 April 2004 - the cornerstone of the
process - and then the London Conference on
Afghanistan, held in January, resulting in the
Afghanistan Compact. The Compact provides a
framework for action aimed at effective coordination
and cooperation between the international community
and the Afghan Government over the next five years in
order to continue the rebuilding of Afghanistan and the
consolidation of peace in the country with the support
of international donors.

Qatar reaffirms its position of principle, which is
based on the need to work to establish stability in
Afghanistan while guaranteeing its national unity and
full sovereignty. Qatar also reaffirms its support for the
Afghan people and their readiness to work together
with the international community to attain those
objectives.

Thus, on 28 February 2006, Qatar hosted the
Second Doha Conference on Border Management in
Afghanistan, in collaboration with the German
Ministry for Foreign Affairs. The Conference
concluded with the adoption of the Doha Declaration
on Border Management in Afghanistan. However,
because the Declaration was adopted after the drafting
of the Secretary-General's report, the report does not
mention that international Conference, which saw the
participation of 26 countries, in addition to the United
Nations, the European Union, the Asian Development
Bank, the World Bank, NATO and neighbouring
countries. The Conference sought to strengthen the
cooperation among the countries of the region to
establish police services and manage border security,
while supporting Afghanistan in its fight against
narcotics, including by strengthening border controls
and the monitoring of roads leading to crossing points.

The Doha Declaration welcomes the measures
taken to strengthen and deepen the cooperation among
the region's countries through the signing of
memorandums of understanding among Afghanistan,
Iran, Pakistan and China with the support of the
international community.

While it is true that tangible progress has been
made in Afghanistan in the area of the practice of
democracy and respect for human rights, there are still
a number of deficiencies that must be addressed
carefully. For example, in his report (S/2006/145), the
Secretary-General takes note of the deplorable
situation of the prison system, whose structure requires
thorough reform and control of human rights
violations.

The next phase in peacebuilding in Afghanistan
will require a greater focus on economic development,
on rebuilding and rehabilitating the infrastructure and
on reducing poppy cultivation. In fact, narcotics
smuggling has grown alarmingly in recent years: more
than 85 per cent of the global poppy production comes
from in Afghanistan. According to statistics, that
production has increased further since the beginning of
the year.

Therefore, we must do our utmost to reduce and
eliminate drug smuggling and poppy cultivation in
Afghanistan, without overlooking the need to improve
health care and education services. Those are also
crucial factors for preserving security and stability in
Afghanistan.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has played a significant role in
safeguarding stability and establishing an atmosphere
conducive to economic stability and security in order
to help the Afghan people develop successfully.
UNAMA continues to play a central role in that regard.
Therefore, we believe that the proposals contained in
the Secretary-General's report are extremely useful and
should increase UNAMA's effectiveness in carrying
out its mandate. We thus favour extending UNAMA's
mandate for a 12-month period.

