Mr. ngowe (Botswana): It is a matter of public
record that Security Council resolution 918 (1994), of 17
May 1994, was adopted at the height of one of the most
tragic events in the history of Rwanda. The arms embargo
was aimed at a Government which had planned,
masterminded and presided over the mass execution of its
own people. Today, the embargo is clearly applied not only
against the wrong Government but against the one that has
stopped the genocide.

The delegation of Botswana fully understands that,
while it is true that the arms embargo now applies to a
Government which committed no crime at all, it is equally
true that the geopolitical and military situation in the Great
Lakes subregion of Africa made it necessary for the
Security Council to maintain the arms embargo for some
time. There was no deliberate intention on the part of the
Security Council to punish Rwanda or its new
Government. The primary concern was to stem the flow
of arms to a volatile subregion of Africa which could
easily be engulfed by military conflict and thus threaten
international peace and security. In our view, the arms
embargo was also in the interests of the people of
Rwanda, who needed relative peace and stability to re-
establish their State institutions without the threat of war.
However, recent developments have rendered the
maintenance of the arms embargo politically untenable.

Elements of the former Rwanda armed forces have
for some months now been engaged in military training
and an arms build-up, in readiness for ultimately invading
Rwanda. The Secretary-General's report submitted to the
Council in June 1995 indicated that there was an increase
in the militarization of the refugee camps and in cross-
border incursions. These developments were of such a
magnitude that the Security Council adopted resolution
997 (1995), of 9 June 1995, in which it affirmed that the
arms embargo applied to Rwandese nationals in
neighbouring States as well. The Council also deemed it
appropriate to request the Secretary-General to undertake
consultations with neighbouring States to explore the
possibility of deploying military observers in the airfields
and other transportation routes. A solution has still to be
found, as no agreement was reached on the deployment
of the observers.

The Security Council has repeatedly reminded the
Government of Rwanda that it has primary responsibility
to create conditions conducive to national reconciliation.
This responsibility entails guaranteeing the security and
safety of the people of Rwanda. The Council reaffirmed
this primary responsibility of the Government of Rwanda
in resolution 997 (1995). There can no longer be any
justification for the continued denial to the Government
of Rwanda of the wherewithal to defend itself and the
people of Rwanda when a clear threat exists to the
national security of the country.

Rwanda, like every other State, has the legitimate
right of self-defence. We all know that no one would
come to the defence of the people of Rwanda in the event
of a determined offensive by elements of the forces of the
former Rwandese Government. The Government of
Rwanda continues to make concerted efforts to create a
climate conducive to national healing and reconciliation,
and we do not believe that elements of the former

 

Government forces should be allowed to disrupt this
process.

The lifting of the arms embargo on Rwanda should not
be misconstrued as licence for military preparations by
anyone. This would be unacceptable as it would lead to an
increase in tension and instability in the subregion. It is the
hope of my delegation that the action of the Council will
serve to deter those who committed genocide and who still
entertain the idea of shooting their way back to Kigali to
continue their despicable deeds. The international
community should be united in its resolve to ensure that
there will never be any repetition of the events which
started in April 1994. The message to the Government of
Rwanda is also loud and clear. Paragraph 6 of the draft
resolution before us calls upon the Government to create
conditions which will enable the over 2 million refugees to
return in honour and dignity. The return of the refugees is
at the heart of Rwanda's problems. The acquisition of
defensive capability is only a temporary measure. The real
solution will come with the return of the refugees, national
reconciliation and durable peace in the country, and we
encourage the continued efforts of the Government of
Rwanda in this regard.

My delegation attaches the utmost importance to the
political and diplomatic efforts aimed at finding solutions
to the problems facing Rwanda and the States of the Great
Lakes subregion. Operative paragraph 5 correctly requests
the Secretary-General to report on his efforts for the
preparation and convening of a regional conference on
security, stability and development within one month of the
adoption of this draft resolution.

According to the Secretary-General's report, the
Government of Rwanda has taken steps to improve
relations with its neighbours. These efforts form a good
basis for subregional cooperation and they have the full
support of my delegation.

