The President (spoke in Spanish): At the outset
of the meeting, I should like to acknowledge the
presence at the Council table of the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Norway, His Excellency Mr.
Vidar Helgesen. On behalf of the Council, I extend a
warm welcome to him.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Report the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2002/ 1300)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Argentina, Austria, Bangladesh,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Denmark,
Egypt, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, the Republic of Korea,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste and Ukraine, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cappagli
(Argentina), Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria),
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh), Mr. Kafando
(Burkina Faso), Mr. Ouch (Cambodia),
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Valde's (Chile),
Ms. Laj (Denmark), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt),
Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia), Mr. Jacob (Israel),
Mr. Yamamoto (Japan), Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea), Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland), Mr. Guterres
(Timor-Leste) and Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine) took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Kenzo Oshima, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Oshima to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Angelo
Gnaedinger, Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Gnaedinger to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/l300, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

For my country, Colombia, and for me personally
it is a great honour to preside over the Security Council
on this International Human Rights Day. Colombia's
activities in the United Nations, and especially on the
six occasions when we have been a member of the
Council, have been undertaken in the context of the
most profound respect for the purposes and principles
expressly established in the Charter, as well as for the
precepts and rules of international law. My country has
defended multilateralism as a fundamental tool with
which the international community can achieve a more
balanced and just international order. In this context,
Colombia upholds the principal of shared responsibility
in the discussion of global issues such as the
worldwide problems of illicit drugs, terrorism and
illegal trafficking in arms, munitions and explosives.

Colombia firmly believes that concern for the
defence of life, liberty and independence, the
preservation of human values against the use of force
and the need to preserve international peace and
security, which were the origin of the United Nations,
remains equally valid today.
I wish to take this opportunity to express once
again, on behalf of President Alvaro Uribe, our
gratitude to the Secretary-General, for his leadership,
and to the Organization for the work that they are
doing in promoting a better future for our people, who
have suffered as no other the violence arising from the
worldwide problem of illicit drugs and the crimes
connected with them.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and I give him the floor.


