Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Said
Djinnit, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
for their comprehensive briefings on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and on the process
of implementing the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. We also very grateful to all of the staff
of the Secretariat and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), as well as the other United
Nations agencies that helped us to carry out a very
successful and important visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

During our time in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, all the members of the Council expressed
the hope that the timely holding of elections on
23 December will help to reduce the country's political
tensions and stabilize the situation there. As we all had
the opportunity to see for ourselves, the technical and
legislative preparations for the December elections
are proceeding in accordance with the electoral
calendar established by the Independent National
Electoral Commission. It is important to note that the
electoral rolls were audited under the auspices of the
International Organization of la Francophonie and a
final version from which repetitions and inaccuracies
had been removed was published in September.

We welcome the fact that half of the country's
political parties have already signed on to the electoral
code of conduct. The election has also been advanced by
the publication of the final list of registered candidates.
We urge the opposition forces to abandon their negative
agendas, take an active part in the election campaign
and not expect the Security Council to evaluate the
decisions of the Congolese courts. At this important
stage it would be unacceptable and irresponsible,
in terms of the future of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to try to sway the situation. That also
particularly applies to the issue ofbringing in electronic
machines for printing ballots, which is well under way,
as we were able to see for ourselves.

At the same time, however, we call on the
leadership of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
make additional efforts to build confidence among the
main political forces in the country. As we understand
it, the logistical preparations for the elections are
already being carried out by the Independent National
Electoral Commission. We agree that in order to avoid
disruptions during the electoral process, it will be
essential to ensure its sustainable financing. We respect
the decision of the Congolese Government to rely
largely on its own resources in that regard, while at the
same time we want to draw attention to the logistical
capacities of MONUSCO, which is ready to contribute
to the efforts of the authorities at any time. However,
MONUSCO'S role in organizing and holding the
elections should not go beyond the mandate outlined
in resolution 2409 (2018). The protection of civilians
in the context of the elections must be carried out with
full respect for the basic principles ofpeacekeeping and
without interfering in Kinshasa's internal affairs.

The elections in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are not a panacea in themselves. We must focus
on the social and economic agenda and on resolving the
underlying reasons for the crisis, while not forgetting
how important it is to continue countering the illegal
armed groups in the eastern areas of the country,
which are still a threat to the civilian population and
one that is capable of destabilizing the Great Lakes
region. We are certain that this last issue should be
considered the chief indicator of the country's stability
and that decisions on the prospects and time frame
for MONUSCO's withdrawal should depend on how it
develops, since the Mission's main function is rectifying
the security situation.

It is impossible to stabilize the situation in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo by
military means alone. The implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
will have to continue in the eastern and Great Lakes
regions, as will the provision of assistance to State
authorities and the restoration of social institutions in
the parts of the country that have been liberated from
the rebels. We should not fail to note the significant
progress that has been made in implementing the
Framework's provisions. We welcome the launch of
the mechanism for repatriating former combatants,
which is unquestionably bringing positive momentum
to relations between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. We sincerely hope that
they will eventually be able to resolve that long-
standing problem. It is encouraging that the problem of
relocating the members of the South Sudan opposition
who arrived in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in August 2016 is close to being resolved. We also want
to note Mr. Djinnit's role in supporting the effort to
attract private investors in order to boost economic
cooperation among the countries of the region and
strengthen peace and confidence there.

We agree with the view of the regional Powers that
resolving the problems of illegal armed groups in the
Great Lakes region could be helped by improving the
effectiveness of MONUSCO's Intervention Brigade. In
that regard, we believe it makes sense to focus their
main activity on the most problematic areas of the
country. In conclusion, I would like to urge that we not
relax our attention to ensuring peacekeepers' security
and safety.

