Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today. I am delighted to
also welcome to the Council His Excellency Mr. Hashim
Thaci, Prime Minister of Kosovo, and His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Daeic', Prime Minister of Serbia.

Kosovo continues to make progress, both internally
and on the international stage. We encourage those
countries that have not yet recognized Kosovo to do so.

The United Kingdom welcomes Kosovo's progress
towards meeting the short-term conditionality, set out
at the December 2012 European Union (EU) General
Affairs Council session, for opening negotiations on
the Stabilization and Association Agreement with
the European Union. The implementation of the
conditionality is crucial for sustainable reform and for
Kosovo's continued progress towards a more secure
and prosperous future. Active engagement in the EU-
facilitated dialogue is vital to Kosovo's EU accession
path. In that respect, the United Kingdom welcomes
Baroness Ashton's personal engagement and the
tangible progress made in the dialogue, particularly
with regard to integrated border management. The
continued assistance of EULEX in the implementation
of dialogue agreements is indispensable. We continue
to urge full cooperation with EULEX by the authorities,
in both Pristina and Belgrade.

I would like to echo the words of Baroness Ashton
by paying tribute to both Prime Ministers for the
courage, vision and determination they have shown over
the past five months in that dialogue. I also welcome
the commitment they have each expressed today to
the success of that process. They are on the brink of
a historic agreement that will open a new chapter in
Serbia/Kosovo relations and ensure that both countries
make progress towards the European Union in a more
cooperative and stable manner. There is more work to do.
It is crucial that an agreement be reached on 2 April and
that its implementation begin immediately. Serbia must
do all it can to ensure agreements are communicated
to, and accepted by, the local communities in northern
Kosovo. Kosovo must make greater efforts to show that

it is working in support of the rights and culture of all
its minority communities.

The Secretary-General's most recent report
(S/2013/72) indicates a reduction in 2012, compared
to the previous year, in the overall number of recorded
incidents affecting minority communities. We hope
that trend will continue and, indeed, intensify. There
is of course no room for complacency in that area. The
United Kingdom was deeply concerned by the violence
in Kosovo that followed the removal of the monument
in Presevo in January. Those attacks were completely
unacceptable, and it was right for the international
community and the Government of Kosovo to
universally condemn them. All the perpetrators of
those acts should be arrested and brought to justice. In
that respect, we welcome the suspension of five police
officers in Viti/Vitina who allegedly did not adequately
respond to the removal of a monument from the Second
World War, and the arrest of five individuals on the
suspicion of having desecrated a Serbian Orthodox
cemetery. Kosovo must continue to combat illegal
activities and violence committed against all of its
communities, and must investigate fully when incidents
do occur.

While socioeconomic factors remain the overriding
consideration for individuals returning to Kosovo,
the Government must continue on its commitment
to creating the conditions necessary for sustainable
returns. The United Kingdom remains committed to
the returns process through political engagement and
bilateral projects.

The United Kingdom welcomes the comprehensive
update in the EULEX annex to the work being carried out
by the Special Investigative Task Force. We continue to
support the important work carried out into the serious
allegations made in the Marty report. We are confident
in the Task Force capacity and its determination to take
forward this important investigation.

I welcome the update in the Secretary-General's
report concerning the high-level round table on the
status of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence,
involving the Kosovo Government, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and other international representatives. I welcome
the work of UN-Women in organizing this round
table. Initiative preventing and responding to sexual
violence are a priority for the Government of the United
Kingdom. We will give strong support to efforts that
address the challenge posed by this tragic legacy ofpast
conflict in a number of countries, including Kosovo.

Let me take this opportunity to thanks Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif for his
continuing efforts to drive down the UNMIK budget.
At a time when countries across the world are having
to face tough decisions regarding cuts to their own
national budgets, it is only right that the United Nations
and its institutions respond accordingly. I encourage
Special Representative Zarif to make further efforts to
identify cost savings in the future.

Important though budgetary rigour is, I would not
want to end my remarks on that note. Let me re-emphasize
the United Kingdom's commitment to the irreversible
progress ofboth Kosovo and Serbia to EU membership.
We hope that both deliver on the conditions set out
at the December General Affairs Council in order to
move forward on their respective EU accession paths.
We welcome the continued constructive engagement
by both Belgrade and Pristina in the dialogue and look
forward to further tangible results.

