Mr. Sisa (Botswana): I would first like to join
other delegations in congratulating you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. My delegation
would also like to thank you for convening today's
open debate on water, peace and security under the
agenda item on the maintenance of international peace
and security. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank Mr. Danilo Tiirk, Chair of the Global High-
Level Panel on Water and Peace; Ms. Christine Beerli,
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross; and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar, President of
the Strategic Foresight Group, for their detailed and
insightful briefings.

Botswana welcomes this open debate because
water is increasingly becoming a scarce resource in
our country. In that regard, we consider the sustainable
use of natural resources, including water, as critical
to national development and to the maintenance of
international peace and security, since water is a scarce
and shared resource. Botswana therefore supports
regional and global initiatives that promote a sustainable
and resilient development pathway. The principle of
sustainability underscores the importance of meeting
the current generation's needs without affecting the
ability of future generations to do the same.

The scarcity of water and its inequitable

geographical distribution makes it a potential source of
conflict. In that respect, it is important that neighbouring
countries sign bilateral and multilateral agreements on
shared watercourses in order to promote cooperation in
the management and sharing of water. In furtherance of
that objective, States members of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), of which Botswana
is a member, signed the Revised Protocol on Shared
Watercourses on 7 August 2000. The Revised Protocol
is underpinned by concepts of environmentally sound
management, sustainable development and the equitable
and reasonable utilization of shared watercourses in the
SADC region. In addition, the Revised Protocol also
promotes the exchange of available information and
data on hydrology, hydrogeology, water quality and
the meteorological and environmental conditions of
shared watercourses.
It is important to stress that the conservation,
protection, development and the economical use of water
resources should be promoted to meet the declining
levels in water supply, the growing demand for water
for domestic, agricultural, industrial, navigational and
environmental purposes and for the benefit of current
and future generations.

I have to underscore here that shared watercourse
agreements are necessary to resolve any potential
conflicts on shared watercourses. In that regard, we
commend Member States that have signed international
watercourse agreements and the United Nations
Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of
International Watercourses. Transboundary water
resources play an instrumental role in Botswana's water
security, as the country relies on international waters.
In that connection, Botswana has signed and ratified
agreements in respect of four river basin commissions
established with riparian States to promote closer
cooperation in the management of shared watercourses.

We recognize the importance of holding continuing
debates on this matter, as studies forecast that water
scarcity, exacerbated by climate change, may threaten
international peace and security in the future. Studies
estimate that the number of regions that will experience
inadequate water supplies will continue to grow, hence
the high risk of water conflicts.

In conclusion, we applaud the efforts made by the
Security Council to regularly convene open debates on
water, peace and security and for adopting a forward-
looking approach.

