The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Belarus, Germany and India, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Martynov
(Belarus), Mr. Kastrup (Germany) and Mr. Sharma
(India) took the seats reserved for them at the side of
the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I have received a
request dated 24 March 1999 from Mr. Vladislav Jovanovie
to address the Security Council. With the consent of the
Council, I would propose to invite him to address the
Council in the course of its discussion of the item before it.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jovanovic' took
a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council is meeting in response to the request
contained in a letter dated 24 March 1999 from the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, document S/1999/320.

I should like to recall Security Council resolutions
1160 (1998), 1199 (1998) and 1203 (1998).

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to letters dated 24 March 1999
from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent
Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council and from the
Permanent Representative of Belarus to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, documents S/1999/322 and S/1999/323
respectively.


