Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank Uruguay and
congratulate Foreign Minister Nin Novoa on organizing
this debate. I would like to thank the Secretary-General,
the Vice-President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and the Deputy Executive Director of
Human Rights Watch for their briefings.

We thank the Secretary-General for his first
report on this subject (S/2017/414) and we value
his recommendations and description of the three
protection priorities. Again, we must regret the fact
that, according to this report, civilians continue to
constitute the majority of victims of conflicts. The lack
of distinction between combatants and civilians results
in civilians being killed, wounded and displaced, and
in situations in which there are serious impediments to
and even attacks on access to humanitarian assistance.

It is therefore necessary for the Security Council
to remain committed to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict through the promotion of full respect for
international law, in particular respect for international
humanitarian law, international human rights and
refugee law, as well as the fight against impunity. In
this context, it is imperative to recall the obligations
arising from the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
their 1977 Additional Protocols, the Hague Conventions
of 1899 and 1907, human rights and refugee law and
customary international law.

It is also necessary to continue to include and
strengthen civil protection activities in the mandates
of United Nations field missions. In that regard and
in line with the recommendation of the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446), which was also recognized in the reports
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
we understand that the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations is an integrated effort across
the mission which requires, as a first essential measure,
close cooperation between military, police and civilian
components, in coordination with local Governments
and communities and humanitarian organizations in
the field.

With regard to humanitarian assistance, parties to
a conflict must make every effort to ensure effective
and timely access to humanitarian action, including
cargo and materials. Such assistance enjoys special
protection under international humanitarian law, and it
is therefore a matter of concern that, in many situations,
there are obstacles to access to humanitarian assistance
or in some cases access is even denied.

Under international humanitarian law and the
Security Council's resolutions, attacks of any kind
on civilians, schools, cultural property and places of
worship, as well as obstructing access to humanitarian
assistance, constitute a violation of international law.
We regret that, one year after the adoption of resolution
2286 (2016), we must reiterate that medical and
hospital personnel cannot be targeted, and we condemn
the numerous cases in which this has occurred.
We also express our gratitude and support for the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to accede
to the Safe Schools Declaration, in support of which
my country had the honour of organizing the second
international conference in March in Buenos Aires.

The Security Council must remain committed to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including
by considering particular situations, as it has done for
children, women or journalists; continue to promote
respect for international law; and put an end to impunity
for perpetrators of grave violations against civilians. In
this regard, Argentina believes that there is a preventive
role for accountability mechanisms. Impartial
mechanisms are essential to investigating violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights.
In this connection, I would highlight the work of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
provided for in Protocol I of the Geneva Conventions
of 1949.

Also, with regard to the need to strengthen
accountability for perpetrators of heinous crimes,
Argentina wishes to emphasize the role of the
International Criminal Court. In particular, we recall
that, according to its Statute, the Court has jurisdiction
over attacks on medical personnel, hospitals and
places where the sick and injured are assembled, and
on medical buildings, equipment, units and means
of transport. States parties to the Rome Statute need
to adopt appropriate standards to that end, and the
cooperation of all States with the Court is essential.

The existing legal framework for the protection of
civilians should be translated into concrete results on
the ground. The Council should strengthen its efforts to
explore how best to do so.

