Mr. Sharma (India): We commend your taking
the time out during the period of the general debate,
Madam President, to preside over this important
meeting, which has not come a day too soon. We would
also like to express our deep appreciation for your
delegation's contribution to the Council's work during
the last two years.

Since its birth, the Taliban regime has tortured
and tormented Afghanistan. This obscurantist, bigoted,
blinkered and sadistic regime, foisted by its foreign
sponsor on the Afghan people to subserve its self-
serving agenda, has taken Afghanistan to a dark age
scarcely to be credited in the world today. The Taliban,
shunned by the international community, have
destroyed Afghanistan's multi-ethnic culture, tradition
of tolerance and historical legacy, uprooting millions of
Afghans and driving them from their homes. They
spared neither their people nor their priceless cultural
heritage. On our collective memory will remain etched
forever the picture of a woman being shot dead in a
stadium and the blasting of the incomparable Bamiyan
Buddhas.
The sinister nature of the Taliban was not
unknown to the world, and certainly not to this
Council. By its resolution 1267 (1999) of October
1999, it recognized that Taliban-held Afghanistan was
an incubator and haven of international terrorism. By
resolution 1333 (2000) of December 2000, it
recognized the inadequacy of its efforts to reign in this
regime's unremitting export of terrorism, imposed
some additional sanctions and decided to set up a
monitoring mechanism to ensure compliance, a clear
recognition that the sanctions were being undermined
and violated. But until 11 September there was no
mechanism in place.

I leave it to this Council's collective conscience
to consider whether it responded adequately to the
challenge posed to international peace and security by
the international terrorism emanating from Taliban-
held Afghanistan and those who supported it. The
world has paid a heavy price for its failures in
Afghanistan, in instalments big and small. This has to
come to an end. And for this, as a first step, the Taliban
should go, lock, stock and barrel. We should not delude
ourselves into believing that there is such a thing as
"moderate Taliban": there is not, just as there is no
good terrorist. The phrase itself is an oxymoron.

The phenomenon of the Taliban is like cancer.
Any good doctor would attest that if you do not
extirpate it fully and to the last cell, it comes back,
working its malign influence. The unequivocal and
clear message that should come from this Council
should be that the Taliban have to go, quickly and
forever. They have no place in any future dispensation
in Afghanistan, in any guise whatsoever. India supports
the current campaign to eradicate the terrorist networks
in Afghanistan. We hope that it reaches an early and
successful conclusion.

After years, there is a window of opportunity to
bring peace back to Afghanistan. We should not let this
slip out of our hands. The international community
should work towards this even while the military
campaign continues, so that we avoid a political
vacuum at the end of the campaign. In restoring
Afghanistan to political health, a new paradigm and
idiom is required. No more Great Games, or any
games. An Afghanistan at peace with itself is in the
best interests of all.

The new Government in Afghanistan should be
broad-based and multi-ethnic, with equitable
representation of all ethnicities and religious groups,
which would reflect the composite mosaic that
Afghanistan has historically been. It should reflect the
will of the Afghan people and should be the outcome of
an intra-Afghan process. If not, it is unlikely to prove
acceptable, stable, secure or enduring. It should restore
internal peace and harmony and should set the stage for
economic and social development, so desperately
required in Afghanistan after years of untold
devastation.

The constitutional and legal structure that
emerges, expressing a balance between the centre and
the regions, should fully protect human rights,
including the rights of women, children and minorities,
reversing the treatment and the discrimination faced by
them under the Taliban, healing the grave injustices
and wounds inflicted on them and restoring their
rightful place in society. Afghanistan's troubled history
of internal frictions and struggles of the last few
decades, exacerbated by destructive external
interference, argues that there may be advantages in
establishing a neutral political structure, with
guarantees and protection from outside for its
neutrality.

A secure Government capable of protecting its
people will require a credible and effective security
force. In creating this force, it would be useful to
integrate different non-Taliban armed groups into an
effective national military and police force. However,
neither the new Afghanistan Government nor its
nascent security force would be in a position to deal
effectively with the thousands of "Arab-Afghans" or
other foreign nationals fighting on the side of the
Taliban. These rogue elements, fully capable of
destabilizing any new Government, cannot be wished
away. Many of these are unwanted in their own
countries and have no place to go. Many others are in
Afghanistan at the encouragement of their authorities,
who should be obliged to take them back.

These armed elements and mercenaries would
threaten to unravel any new dispensation, a risk which
neither the people of Afghanistan nor the international
community can afford to run. These elements,
therefore, would have to be conclusively and
effectively neutralized to enable the intra-Afghan force
to discharge its functions of assuring peace and
security within the new framework.

In the name of protecting national interests, never
spelled out, attempts are being made in some quarters
to retain a veto over the architecture of the future
Afghan polity. To accept this would be wrong in
principle as well as in practice; in principle because it
is for a country and its people to determine its own
Government, and not outsiders. Would those who
would claim a veto over the new Government in
Afghanistan give the same right over their own
Government to the Afghan people or its Government, if
they were to claim this right? In practice, what if there
is no agreement on the composition of the new Afghan
Government, because of this claimed right of
interference? Should there be no Government in
Afghanistan? The absurdity of this right to veto is
patent. The new Afghan Government should be a
Government of the Afghans, by the Afghans and for
the Afghans, and should be seen by the Afghans as
such. Anything short of this would make it suspect and
contrived in the eyes of its own people, undermining its
credibility and acceptance.

But countries in the neighbourhood of
Afghanistan as well as the international community
have legitimate concerns to which the new Afghanistan
Government would need to be responsive. Afghanistan
can no longer be a nursery and epicentre of
international terrorism fuelled by religious extremism.
It should purge itself of this menace. It should show
resolve to defeat the problem of drug-trafficking. It
should not be a centre for destabilizing other
Governments. For its part, the new Afghanistan
Government should have assurances that there would
be no interference in its own internal affairs. This is the
key to the future of Afghanistan. Those who harbour
the desire to control or dominate Afghanistan should
shed it, now and forever, for their own good, for the
good of Afghanistan and for the good of the
international community.

At this critical juncture, the international
community has a crucial role to play in encouraging,
supporting and assisting the intra-Afghan process to
replace the Taliban with a broad-based Government.
We believe that the United Nations should be at the
centre of international efforts, and we therefore support
the role of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi. We
have listened with great interest to the proposals he has
made as to the way forward and thank him for his
untiring engagement and thoughts. In his difficult and
challenging assignment, Ambassador Brahimi would
require, and should receive, all assistance from the
international community.

To facilitate and channel this assistance, clearly,
the "six plus two" group, which has not been effective
in the past, cannot be relied upon. This would be a
triumph of hope over experience. India would like to
add its voice to others from the international
community that emphasize the urgency of establishing
a new international framework which would include
countries that have a legitimate and benign interest in,
and influence on, developments in Afghanistan and a
willingness to engage constructively and with goodwill
in its recovery and rehabilitation. We see no reason
why this new framework should not be supported, as
those who backed and sustained the Taliban until
recently, but now find it expedient to disown it, also
affirm that they have changed their spots and subscribe
to the need for a broad-based, multi-ethnic and
representative Government in Afghanistan. This would
be a litmus test of their sincerity.

As a country in Afghanistan's immediate
neighbourhood and having an intimate association with
that country reaching back into the mists of history,
India has a deep interest in the political, economic,
social and cultural welfare and development of
Afghanistan. It is willing, and ready, to contribute to
the process of bringing lasting peace, stability and
development to Afghanistan.

After ensuring peace and security, the first
priority in post-conflict Afghanistan would be the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of the country with
massive external assistance. The developmental needs
of the Afghan people have to be adequately addressed,
and a conducive climate created for the return of the
millions of refugees who have recently left the country.

India has already announced economic assistance
in the form of medicine, medical services and 1 million
tonnes of wheat for the needy in Afghanistan and those
displaced from that country. We have also declared our
intention of extending a line of credit of $100 million
for post-conflict reconstruction and rehabilitation work.
We are prepared to do more.

We do not have the luxury of time. The Council
must act with dispatch and purpose, in a transparent
manner, to bring peace, political stability, health, truly
participatory governance and economic well-being
back to Afghanistan. In its endeavours, it can count on
our full support and cooperation.

