Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, my delegation would like to express its deep
appreciation for the tireless efforts you have been
making in chairing the Committee established pursuant

to resolution 1267 (1999) with a view to waging an
effective and efficient fight against the threat posed by
the Al Qaeda network and the Taliban.

In spite of the difficulties encountered, the
progress achieved is clear evidence of the political will
of States to combat terrorism with the necessary
resolve, given the fact that this is one of the major
challenges facing the international community at the
beginning of this millennium.

Terrorism is so deeply shocking to people, to
human relations and to relations among States that no
country can remain indifferent to it, because it can
strike anywhere, indiscriminately.

For that reason, the fight against terrorism, given
its transnational character, requires increased
international cooperation. It is also important to study
the approaches to be taken and the means to be used in
the process of involving all States more effectively in
the long-term fight against the threat posed by the
members of Al Qaeda and the Taliban.

In order to be effective, this struggle must be a
balanced one that should take into account the social
realities of each country and its technical and human
capacities.

Your report, Sir, has shown, in a relevant manner,
the difficulties that States have encountered. Your
visits and those of the Monitoring Group are therefore
important in enhancing and promoting dialogue with
States, because terrorism is a progressive process. In
this regard, we support the work done by the
Committee.

We also encourage joint efforts and coordination
between the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), so that the threat posed by Al Qaeda and the
Taliban as well as their associates might be better
matched with national measures to combat terrorism.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
commend you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.

