Mr. Garcia (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish):
Allow me first of all on behalf of my delegation to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of April. We are certain that
your experience and professional skills will ensure the
success of the work of the Council this month. We also
wish through you to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Botswana on the way in which he
conducted the affairs of the Council during the month of
March.

What the international community fervently wishes to
see in the Middle East is a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace that will guarantee security and stability for all the
peoples of the region. To achieve this, it is essential for the
agreements that have been concluded and the provisions of
United Nations resolutions, including Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 465 (1980) and 478
(1980), to be fully and scrupulously implemented.

We are convinced that, as the Heads of State or
Government of the non-aligned countries stated in the final
document of the Cartagena summit, the United Nations
responsibility in this respect should continue until the
Palestinian people can exercise its inalienable right to self-
determination, until an independent and sovereign State is
established on its national territory and until the refugee
problem is resolved in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

My country has followed with the greatest interest the
evolution of the process initiated in Madrid in 1991 with a
View to a peaceful and negotiated solution to the conflict in
the Middle East.

As we have stated on other occasions, we are
convinced that the Declaration of Principles signed in
Washington on 13 September 1993, the Interim Agreement
on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip of 20 September
1995 and the establishment of the Palestinian National
Authority constitute progress in the efforts of Palestinians
and Israelis in the search for peace - progress which must
be maintained and encouraged.

There can be no question that to maintain support
for the Declaration of Principles and the Interim
Agreement, the economic and social development of the
occupied Palestinian territories must be guaranteed and
promoted. In this respect, it is appropriate to recall what
was stated by the Secretary-General in his report on the
work of the Organization, published in August 1995:

"The peace process needs broad public support and
without a visible improvement in the living
conditions of the Palestinians this support will
remain fragile. In this connection, I have to draw
attention to the damaging effects which closures of
the occupied territories by Israel have had on the
nascent Palestinian economy." (A/50/1, para. 742)

The Secretary-General added that

"In its effort to support the Arab-Israeli peace
process, the United Nations has placed special
emphasis on sustainable economic and social
development in the occupied territories." (ibid., para. 743).

The measures adopted by Israel in recent weeks
point in the opposite direction. In any case, but above all
in view of the characteristics of the Palestinian situation,
measures that affect property and restrict the movement
of persons and goods, such as the ones adopted by Israel,
have a serious impact on the population, the economy and
the peace process, and violate United Nations resolutions
and the agreements between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO).

We concur with what was stated by President Arafat
in his communication of 1 April to the Secretary-General
that:

"Peace is not the quest of the Palestinians alone
but is a pressing need and a basic quest for the
international community, for Arabs and for Israelis
equally." (5/1996/233, annex)

That is why we join with other delegations that have
called for an end to the measures imposed by Israel and
for full compliance with the agreements signed between
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.

