Mr. Alimov (spoke in Russian): I would first
like to thank the Russian presidency of the Security
Council for taking this important initiative and for
inviting the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
to take part in today's debate in the Security Council,
a forum that has so much bearing on the fate of the
international community.

This year, SCO is celebrating its fifteenth
anniversary. During that time, the founding member
States of SCO have tested and successfully put into
practice a model of intergovernmental cooperation
based on the principles of the spirit of Shanghai, whose
key elements are equality, mutual respect, mutually
beneficial cooperation and joint development.SCO
member States proceed from the assumption that
the United Nations remains the leading universal
international organization for the maintenance of global
security and affirm their commitment to the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and to strengthening
its central coordinating role in international affairs.

The relationship between SCO and the United
Nations has been actively evolving since 2004, as
they have significantly strengthened it until it has
become an example of effective cooperation between a
global, universal organization and a regional one. That
cooperation focuses particularly on complementing
United Nations and Security Council efforts in the
maintenance of international peace and security. SCO's
main priorities include ensuring regional security and
stability, fighting terrorism, separatism and extremism,
and combating illegal drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime. Within our organization, we have
developed a package of international regulations
that now include 31 documents on issues relating
to cooperation in the areas of policy and security
and constitute the legal basis essential to effective
cooperation in that very important field.

SCO supports coordinating the fight against the
threat of terrorism under the auspices of the United
Nations. We are involved in the continued expansion of
cooperation with the United Nations in takingjoint action
aimed at implementing the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. In this regard, the activities of SCO regional
anti-terrorist structure are particularly important. It
forms the base for a successfully tested mechanism for
effective multilateral counter-terrorism cooperation, as
well as regular interaction and information exchanges
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

Between 2011 and 2015, the relevant authorities
of SCO member States, through the coordinating role
of the SCO regional anti-terrorist structure, prevented
20 terrorist attacks at the preparatory stage and about
650 terrorist and extremist crimes; eliminated 440
terrorist training bases and about 1,700 members of
international terrorist organizations; detained more
than 2,700 members of illegal armed groups and their
accomplices and persons suspected of criminal activity;
and extradited 213 people involved in activities of
terrorist and extremist organizations, with many of
them being sentenced to long prison terms. Much work
has been done to curb illicit trafficking in arms and
explosives and to counter the use of Internet networks
for terrorist, separatist and extremist purposes. SCO's
regional anti-terrorist structure has also developed
and implemented joint measures to detect channels
used to transport people to regions with heightened
terrorist activity in order to enable them to fight for
international terrorist organizations in internal armed
conflicts, and has created a list of terrorist, separatist
and extremist organizations. The structure intends to
explore opportunities for practical cooperation with the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.

Achieving peace and stability in Afghanistan as
soon as possible is an important factor in maintaining
and strengthening security in the entire region. The
Tashkent Declaration, adopted on 24 June by the Heads
of SCO member States, emphasizes our involvement in
and support for settling the intra-Afghan conflict by
promoting an inclusive national reconciliation process
under Afghan leadership and conducted by Afghans
themselves, with the United Nations playing a central
coordinating role. We consider a key SCO policy to be
ramping up its efforts in the area of combating the illicit
drug production and trafficking out of Afghanistan
that poses a threat to international peace and
stability, as outlined in Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions. Implementing the SCO 2011-
2016 anti-narcotic strategy and programme of action
continues to be particularly important in that regard.

Thanks to the operations of the national drug
control authorities, as well as improved cooperation
between the relevant SCO member State authorities, in
the period from 2010 to 2015 alone we seized about 25
tons of heroin, more than 11 tons of raw opium and more
than 352 tons of marijuana. Operation Myshelovka,
conducted in 2015, enabled us to seize more than 75
tons of precursors. We are currently conducting a joint
effort to develop a strategy for combating the drug threat
over the next five years. In that connection, we consider
continuing and strengthening the close cooperation
between SCO and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime to be particularly important.

We note the very productive dialogue between SCO
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia. Considering the recent
breakthrough decisions by the Security Council and
General Assembly on peacebuilding and sustainable
peace, there are good prospects for expanding SCO
contact with the United Nations system, including the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization and
the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
the Pacific.

SCO is working consistently and purposefully to
develop and expand cooperation in the humanitarian
aspects of regional security. SCO member States'
commitment to the spirit of Shanghai, the most
important principle of its activities, is enabling us to
construct a productive intercultural, interreligious and
inter-civilization dialogue based on the parties' mutual
trust, respect and equality. We intend to continue to
further develop our policy of multifaceted cooperation
with the United Nations and the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

