Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Sweden welcomes the
Council's adoption this morning of resolution 2385
(2017), although we regret that we were unable to reach
consensus on it. We supported it because we believe
that it is important to continue backing the wider effort
to bring peace, stability and prosperity to the Horn of
Africa, as well as to address challenges and disputes in
the region.

With regard to Somalia, the sanctions regime
continues to play a critical role in supporting the
international effort to defeat Al-Shabaab by blocking
flows of illicit arms and preventing it from raising
funds. Our continued strong support to the Somali
peace- and State-building process is crucial if we are
not to imperil the political and security gains already
made. There is still a long road ahead for Somalia, with
many important tasks remaining. The international
community and the Somali people must stay the course
in maintaining their momentum and building on what
has been achieved.

With regard to Eritrea, it is the Council's job to
continually assess whether its measures are achieving
its objectives. Sanctions are not an end in themselves,
but a means to an end. We welcome the fact that in
the resolution, the Council clearly states its readiness
to regularly review the measures on Eritrea, as that
country takes steps to deepen its cooperation with the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and with the
international community as a whole. We take due note
of the fact that the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea, in consecutive reports, has found no evidence
of Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab. It is essential to
ensure that Eritrea cooperates with the Committee
and the Monitoring Group so that this encouraging
assessment can be verified once and for all. Based
on that, the Council can initiate a review of the
sanctions regime.

The current situation concerning several border
issues continues to jeopardize regional stability and
obstruct regional cooperation and development. As the
resolution makes clear, all Member States in the region
have a responsibility to refrain from destabilizing acts
and to work towards peace and prosperity in the Horn
of Africa.

