Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-
General Voronkov and Executive Director Coninsx for
their briefings. We welcome the Secretary-General's
latest report on countering the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to international
peace and security (S/2019/103). Afghanistan, the
Philippines, Kenya and Mali have recently been hit by a
spate of terrorist attacks, resulting in enormous damage
in the affected countries.

As the Secretary-General's report points out,
international counter-terrorism efforts have registered
major progress. However, the threat posed by terrorism
persists, and the challenges in addressing that scourge
remain daunting. Terrorism is the common enemy of
humankind and no country can cope with it alone. The
international community should embrace the concept
of a shared future for humankind, enhance results-
oriented cooperation, maintain unity and respond
collectively to terrorist threats.
First, we must seek further international consensus
and form synergies. In order to combat terrorism, all
countries should uphold a single standard and adopt a
zero-tolerance policy. International counter-terrorism
efforts should abide by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, respect the sovereignty
of the States concerned and the ownership of Member
States, give full play to the leading role of the United
Nations and its Security Council and fully implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

Secondly, we must strive to eliminate the sources
that give rise to terrorism and address both its symptoms
and root causes. The international community should
help Member States to achieve socioeconomic
development and promote the settlement of hotspot
issues by political means. We must commit to building
a new kind of international relations and to promoting
equitable dialogue and harmonious coexistence among
different civilizations and religions. Terrorism should
not be associated with any specific country, ethnicity or
religion. The international community should provide
assistance to developing countries and strengthen
Member States' capacity-building in the area of
counter-terrorism.

Thirdly, we must take the threat posed by foreign
terroristfightersseriouslyandstopterroristorganizations
from misusing the Internet and telecommunications
technologies. We should support Member States in
fully implementing the Madrid Guiding Principles
and their 2018 addendum (S/2018/ll77, annex), and
strengthen border management and cooperation in
areas such as law enforcement, intelligence-sharing
and mutual legal assistance. In response to terrorism's
emerging trends and characteristics, we should focus
on enhancing international cooperation in combating
cyberterrorism, terrorist financing and the spread of
extremist ideologies.

Fourthly, we must leverage the various advantages
of specialized mechanisms such as the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism, and the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities. We should give full play to those entities'
roles in capacity-building, assessing terrorist threats
and enhancing sanctions measures. All counter-
terrorism mechanisms should continue to enhance their
communication with Member States, carry out their
work in strict compliance with the relevant resolutions
and rules ofprocedure, and maintain sanctions regimes'
authority and effectiveness in order to continue to
improve their contributions to the cause of international
counter-terrorism.

China categorically rejects terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. Over the past few years, the violent
terrorist elements of the so-called East Turkestan
Islamic Movement (ETIM) have planned and carried
out a number of terrorist attacks on Chinese territory,
and have also posed a serious threat to countries in the
Middle East and Central Asia. Fighting the ETIM's
violent terrorist forces should be part of international
counter-terrorism efforts and should be met with
resolute measures.

As a crucial member of the international fight
against terrorism, China has been deeply involved in
international cooperation through mechanisms and
platforms such as the United Nations and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. We have also supported
Member States' capacity-building in that area through
the United Nations-China Peace and Development
Trust Fund, thereby making an important contribution
to international counter-terrorism efforts. China stands
ready to work together with all countries to respond
to the threat of terrorism and maintain world peace
and tranquillity.

