Mr. Bhatia (Mauritania) (spoke in French): At the
outset, on behalf of the people of Mauritania and its
President Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, I would like to
thank the Security Council and express our gratitude
for its ongoing interest in the security and development
challenges of the Sahel region.

Mauritania is absolutely determined to fight
robustly alongside its brother countries to combat
terrorism because we ourselves have been fiercely
attacked by these forces of evil. It has cost us enormous
effort and sacrifice to fight them and to have achieved
a more or less stable situation today, despite the fact
that we know that in our region we are never safe
from this network. We are therefore pleased to be here
and very grateful to the Council for the invitation to
participate in today's meeting. As all the speakers have
said, the Sahel region, and West Africa as a whole, is
currently the focus of several threats, which, if not
firmly checked, could threaten the stability of the
entire region. Indeed, they could also threaten peace
all over the world, because our region is located on the
borders of Europe, and if it is destabilized, it in turn
could destabilize a significant part of the world.

It was to tackle this situation that the member
States of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
established and launched the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel in order to combine their efforts
to fight terrorism together. That started some time ago,
and I would like to take this opportunity to thank all
the countries, especially France, that have supported us
in our struggle to launch this Joint Force for combating
terrorism. The Joint Force is beginning to mobilize. We
are making progress in organizing it that is significant
for an organization as recently established as the
G-5 Sahel. That is why we believe that for this kind
of venture to succeed it unquestionably requires the
support of the international community. Without that
it cannot succeed, and what it particularly needs is the
support of the United Nations and the Security Council,
which is why we asked for the Council's support at a
very early stage.

We thank the Council for all its efforts so far. We
requested that support in order to establish a legal
foundation for the Joint Force. That is very important,
since we believe that the Joint Force must act on a
basis of international law. A resolution was adopted
and perhaps in the future others will be, too. In any
case, it is important to us that these resolutions be
robust, as the Secretary-General has requested, and
that they can ensure that the Joint Force enjoys the
maximum possible support from the Security Council,
the European Union, the African Union and the other
relevant organizations. It is therefore important that the
resolutions not only welcome the creation of the Joint
Force but also support, endorse and provide it with
authority to engage in this fight against terrorism on
behalf of the international community.

The second point that matters to us is that the
Security Council can provide support to enable the
Joint Force raise the resources it needs to succeed,
because this kind of effort obviously requires resources
that the countries concerned are not always in a
position to provide. That is why it is important for the
Security Council to support us in mobilizing resources
through the various financing meetings to be convened
and bilateral assistance, as has been discussed. The
Joint Force's requirements for its operations have
been evaluated and are generally reasonable. We have
various stages to get through, but despite all the various
political and other kinds of support that the Joint Force
has been offered, we believe that without the minimum
resources it needs to fulfil the mission it is tasked with,
it has no chance of succeeding. It will therefore be very
important to continue providing support to the G-5
Sahel countries in mobilizing resources.

I would like to conclude by thanking the French
presidency, especially Mr. Le Drian, for included this
item on the Council's agenda at short notice. I wish
France every success with its presidency and I thank
all the members of the Security Council.

