Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for Australia's initiative in bringing the subject
of sanctions to the Security Council's attention. We also
thank Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary General for
Political Affairs, and Jiirgen Stock, Secretary General
of INTERPOL, for their briefings.

We believe that the universal nature of the United
Nations makes it the appropriate body for establishing
and monitoring such measures. But beyond the
differences that there may be in the Council in this
regard, we see this meeting as an opportunity to
evaluate the functioning of the multilateral-sanctions
regimes enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,

especially if the idea is to discuss the elements that can
facilitate their effective implementation.

From the perspective of a developing country,
it seems reasonable to us to identify and establish
some criteria that are conducive to facilitating the
implementation of sanctions, while always bearing in
mind the different situations that exist on the ground.
It is important to establish minimum thresholds of
convergence that are applicable in different contexts.
We value the concept of targeted sanctions, something
that might seem obvious today but was not during our
previous tenure on the Council, in 2003. We note that
the sanctions have become more selective and focused,
although they are being applied to a wider range of
situations related to threats to international peace
and security. In connection with the latter point, the
intra-State nature of the majority of the current crises
is a dimension that should also be considered. It is
necessary to consider whether conflicts of that type
deserve to be subject to sanctions by the Council.

We should not ignore due process. We appreciate
the attempts to improve the listing and delisting of
individuals and entities on the sanctions lists, but
we believe that challenges remain in adjusting those
procedures. The adoption of resolution 1730 (2006)
and the establishment of the focal point for delisting
of names on the lists was a significant advance, but
still insufficient. Therefore, we hope progress can be
made in extending the mandate of the Ombudsperson
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities to other sanctions committees.

We further believe that, to the degree that the
situation allows, it is important to promote field visits
by the sanctions committees and their chairs to verify
on the ground and evaluate the implementation and
compliance. We had the experience of doing that a few
weeks ago as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004)
concerning Cote d'Ivoire, and it became clear that such
visits are necessary to maintain a good dialogue and
to bridge any gaps in perception between Headquarters
and the field.

The integration and coordination of sanctions
implementation among the various United Nations
agencies remains a central challenge. In that vein,
we support the idea of creating a body for interaction
among them.

When it comes to the groups of experts, we
appreciate the specific and objective contributions
they make. It is our duty as a Council to provide clear
guidelines for their work so that they can concentrate on
what is really important. It is the duty of the Secretariat
to prepare and provide appropriate conceptual tools to
the new experts who join in those tasks. We reiterate
our position that the members of the groups of experts
should be elected because of their professional capacity,
also taking into consideration the principle of equitable
geographical representation and gender balance.
We hope that there will soon be progress towards an
agreement to replicate the selection system for short
lists used by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).

Finally, we note that progress has been made in
this area, for example through the establishment of
a consolidated sanctions list, but there is still much
room for improvement. We must take into account
the experience of other entities, such as INTERPOL
and regional and subregional organizations, in
order to establish cooperation that will benefit the
implementation of the sanctions adopted by the Council.

