Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his report on the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We welcome you, Mr. President, as Secretary
of State of the Chancellery and Chief of the Cabinet of
the President.

The Middle East is at the heart of global politics.
The region is beset by many crises, old and new. Russia
is closely following the development of the situation,
given that we have long-standing relations with the
States of the region, based on mutual respect, mutually
beneficial cooperation and common interests.

We note with concern the ongoing tension in
the Palestinian-Israeli peace process. It is further
compounded by Israel's ongoing settlement activities
and the situation in and around the Gaza Strip.

Against that backdrop, it is clear that unilateral
actions do not bring us closer to resolving the old and
new problems in the region. The situation of some United
Nations Member States trying to put Governments of
other States beyond the reach of the law is particularly
harmful. We, like many of our partners, see clearly that
the only way out of all of that is by pooling international
and regional efforts, with a central role played by the
United Nations and its Security Council. That premise
must be the basis for all relevant efforts and initiatives.

Our memory is still fresh of the statement made in
this Chamber a month ago by the Special Representative
for International Negotiations of the United States on
the Middle East peace process, Mr. Jason Greenblatt
(see S/PV.8583). Frankly, statements on the uselessness
of seeking consensus on the Middle East peace
process within the United Nations and the futility of
the relevant Council resolutions are of great concern
to us. Choosing to destroy all that has been achieved
on creating an independent Palestinian State, living in
peace alongside Israel, is fraught with the most terrible
consequences for the entire region. It would allow only
for the further radicalization of the Arab street.

In the light of the statement of our American
colleagues on the need to review and revise old
decisions of the United Nations on the Middle East
peace process, I would like to recall that it was thanks
to General Assembly resolution 181 (II) that Israel was
established. The declaration on the establishment of the
State of Israel also mentions it. We would like to know
how far the United States is willing to go in revising old
and unnecessary decisions.

For our part, we are convinced that unilateral
actions that ignore international law will not produce
results. They are detrimental to the prospects for a
just and lasting solution to the long-standing Israeli-
Palestinian problem. We support the involvement
of the Quartet of international mediators as the only
mechanism to support the Middle East peace process
endorsed by the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Russia is doing everything in its power to promote
all of the activities in the Middle East peace process,
including by offering a potential platform for meetings
between Israel and Palestine, without preconditions. We
are also undertaking efforts to restore intra-Palestinian
unity, and we welcome the steps taken by our Egyptian
colleagues in that direction.

In that context, the Security Council's mission to the
region is long overdue, which many of our colleagues
have already mentioned. It should bolster trust, facilitate
the resumption of negotiations between the parties and
prevent the failure of the international community's
efforts to ensure conditions for the implementation of
the only viable settlement on the international legal
basis. That framework was developed by the Security
Council, and its revision should be done within the
Security Council, too. No unilateral steps can replace
the key tenets of the two-State solution, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the status of
the occupied territories, including the Syrian Golan.

We will continue to provide assistance to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. Its activities are not only
humanitarian but also political and provide an important
stabilizing effect in the Palestinian territories and the
Middle East region. All final-status issues, including
Jerusalem, basic security issues and refugees, should be
the result of direct negotiations between the Palestinians
and the Israelis. Seeking consensus on those sensitive
issues during direct negotiations is essential to their
future sustainability.

We consistently call on all interested parties to
take steps to de-escalate and settle the problems in the
Persian Gulf through political and diplomatic means.
Enhancing the military presence, including of States
outside the region, creates the risk of armed clashes.
That crisis endangers peace and security in the Middle
East as a whole, as well as international efforts to resolve
regional conflicts. It is increasingly relevant to look at
the need to develop a lasting mechanism for collective
security in the region, based on equitable dialogue and
cooperation. The relevant Russian initiative focuses
on addressing the deadlock in conflict situations and
developing confidence-building and security measures.

We should also continue our efforts to eradicate
the terrorist presence in the countries of the region. We
call on all forces of good to engage in collective efforts
in that regard, while ensuring respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant decisions of
the Security Council, as well as the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, and rejecting double
standards. We urge that those principles be respected
in all countries facing such a threat: Syria, Iraq, Libya
and Yemen.

I must also note that we are extremely concerned
about the information regarding the incident on
25 August involving two unmanned aerial vehicles
over the Lebanese capital. According to some reports,
they were Israeli reconnaissance drones. The situation
is exacerbated by Israel's simultaneous arbitrary
missile strikes on targets in neighbouring Syria, the
most recent of which was on a military facility near
Damascus last weekend.

For our part, we have repeatedly pointed out the
danger of such activities in a tense regional atmosphere,
and we warned that they could lead to a large-scale
armed conflict with unpredictable consequences. We
again call on all parties to exercise maximum restraint
and strictly comply with international law, including
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

In that context, we reiterate our commitment to
the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
stability of Lebanon. At the same time, we reaffirm the
importance of the role of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, whose mandate we are soon to extend.
The activities ofpeacekeepers have a stabilizing impact
not only on the Blue Line but also within Lebanon and
the Middle East as a whole.

Russia will actively contribute to stabilizing the
situation in the Middle East. We are ready to cooperate
with all interested players, and we call on all to
work together.

