Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): This day -
the day of the lifting of the arms embargo on Bosnia and
Herzegovina - should have come much, much sooner. If
it had, peace would also have come earlier - at a lower
cost to the international community, its principles and its
most prized institutions; at a lower cost to justice and, most
important, at a lower cost to the thousands - the
millions - of Bosnia's victimized.

But this is not just a lesson of history. We must,
today, look forward and secure the means to safeguard the
Peace Agreement reached in Dayton yesterday.

Weapons in the hands of the victim will not be used
to correct yesterday's wrongs, but rather to deter a
resumption of the aggression and crimes. Yesterday's
wrongs and crimes must be redressed by the institutions of
law and justice, in particular the International War Crimes
Tribunal.

However, the defence of tomorrow's peace will
ultimately be left to the Bosnians when all the negotiators
have turned their attention elsewhere and the foreign
peace-keepers have left our country.

By securing Bosnia's capability to defend itself, we
also lessen the qualitative, quantitative and durational
commitment for foreign peace-keepers. This is one of the
most significant objectives of equipping the Bosnian
defensive forces.

In concert, we do also place our hopes in regional
disarmament. However, assuming the highest standard of
commitment to disarmament and cooperation from our
neighbours, the Bosnians would still have to increase the
number and quality of weapons to produce the goal of
regional balance.

We are prepared to do our part for the cause of
peace and commit ourselves not only to our defence but
to those standards which will in fact increase stability in
the region.

We will be in Bonn.

The sanctions regime with respect to the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) is a
self-inflicted wound. Ours is not. None the less, we wish
them a quick recovery. We also look forward to the
improvement of mutual relations.

We should, however, make sure that it is understood
that this is only a reprieve and not an exoneration. Failure
to fully honour the peace, its implementation and our
sovereignty and territorial integrity will result in the
immediate reversal and re-imposition of sanctions.

Suspension of sanctions is only one step necessary
for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to be brought back, fully, into the family of
nations. Sanctions cannot be fully terminated until the
Peace Agreement is fully implemented.

Moreover, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia must
reverse its current course and exhibit a commitment to
respect the national and minority rights of the people of
Kosovo, Sandzak, and Vojvodina. This should go hand in
hand with the introduction of compliance with human
rights and democratic standards in all of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

 

Finally, the commitment to peace and justice - a new
page turned - can only be ascertained from the willingness
of both Belgrade and the Bosnian Serbs to comply fully
with the international war crimes Tribunal.

No sanctions can be lifted until such compliance is
committed to and exhibited. The Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia cannot be admitted as a Member of the United
Nations and other relevant international institutions until
there is such compliance. This is the minimum that we can
do to support the efforts of the Prosecutor, Judge Richard
Goldstone, the Tribunal Justices and others associated with
the war crimes Tribunal at The Hague. Less would be
betrayal.

Bosnia and Herzegovina will not betray justice and the
opportunity for real, durable peace dependent upon this
elementary piece of justice.

The last thing that we ask of the Council is that it
commit itself also to the same. After all, we and the
countless forgotten victims as well as the new generation
yearning for real peace deserve this minimum after having
been disappointed on so many other occasions.

On a more personal note, sitting here today and during
the last few critical moments of bringing the Dayton talks
to an end, I reflect on the many who are affected or who
have affected this outcome today and the Peace Agreement
reached yesterday.

I reflect upon the past and present members of the
Council from Ambassador Diego Arria, the former
Permanent Representative of Venezuela, to Ambassador
Albright, who fought nobly to free the hands of the victim
and I also note my special appreciation for the solidarity
and statement of support that we received from the victims
of genocide in Rwanda through their Permanent
Representative in the Council.

We also think of the many United Nations peace-
keepers and persons from non-governmental organizations
who sacrificed, sometimes even their lives, to minimize
injustice while more decisive measures were awaited year
after year. We think of the three martyred American
diplomats. We think of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina still in their homes and we could all see their
expressions of joy and commitment to peace as they
celebrated the news yesterday.

At the same time I worry that the thousands of
refugees and displaced persons and the victims of crime
may feel that they have in fact been abandoned as well as
forgotten.

I pledge - we must pledge ourselves - to ensure
that the right of refugees to return does in fact become a
real opportunity to return; that justice is not only evoked
but secured by supporting the War Crimes Tribunal. I
hope to God this is a real comfort to the victims lest our
souls be damned.

I note that the Jewish survivors of the holocaust
were able to look forward only by knowing that their
tormentors would be pursued by the most unforgetting
justice indefinitely in the courts and in our common
historical recollection.

And a moment of horror is now upon me. What
about the hundreds, maybe thousands, of victims, still
missing, who were recently rounded up around towns like
Banja Luka, confined to concentration camps and forced
to labour until death overtakes them? What of the two
missing French pilots? Have these living ghosts even
heard of the Peace Agreement? Will it make any
difference to them? Will they survive to rejoice?I ask all
representatives to labour for their safety and for our
mutual salvation.

And, finally, to our former enemies we offer one
word: "Peace".

