Ms. Tesfamariam (Eritrea): My delegation wishes to congratulate Viet Nam for assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of January and for convening today's timely debate entitled "Maintenance of international peace and security: upholding the United Nations Charter". I would like to take this opportunity to welcome His Excellency Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam, and thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Robinson for their statements last week (see S/PV.8699). The United Nations came about primarily to monitor and maintain international peace and security after the devastation, destruction and dire humanitarian conditions caused by the Second World War. Established in 1945, the creation of the Organization was a deliberate attempt to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. The Charter of the United Nations was the means to do just that. The Charter gave the Security Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security and provided the procedures to handle international disputes and prevent their escalation. The Charter and organizations of the United Nations are necessary for mediating relations among States, protecting common principles and promoting common values and material well-being. The Charter has been described as the world's central operating system - the motherboard of global governance - which has borne such ideas as the Millennium Development Goals and, today, the Sustainable Development Goals, which have been embraced globally. At the present time, generations around the world are living in conditions of poverty and peacelessness, where human development, dignity and _ security remain elusive. Despite the fact that Article 2 of the United Nations Charter calls on countries to refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, today, there are wars being waged in total disregard for the Charter of the United Nations and its principles, and the sovereign rights of States enshrined in the Charter are wilfully ignored. Our world has witnessed and continues to witness massive atrocities, mass destruction and slaughter. We have failed to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, and the Security Council's efficacy is being questioned by suffering people everywhere. The Security Council has been ineffective and inconsistent in securing peace in our world. In some instances, its actions have contributed to untenable situations, thereby prolonging the suffering of millions in the process. Many populations around the world are grappling with intractable conflicts beyond their capacities, and the Security Council remains impotent, constrained by geopolitical considerations, double standards and conflicting interests. And when it does act, the Council's actions tend to revolve around managing crises, rather than ending them. The Security Council's credibility, integrity and efficacy have been undermined, there are many factors contributing to this reality. For brevity's sake, Eritrea wishes to highlight three of them. The first is the less-than-strict observance of the principles of the United Nations Charter. Eritrea reiterates the importance and validity of collective security by fully adhering to the United Nations Charter in order to deter war and advance peace. One of the pillars of the United Nations Charter is for nations to live by their commitments. Treaty commitments are sacrosanct. States should not be allowed to cherry-pick, and the Security Council should also be duty bound to enforce peace accords. Secondly, in terms of invoking Chapter VII, this Chapter should be applied only when the situation warrants it. However, at times, the Security Council has acted ultra vires, leading to the imposition of unjust and illegal sanctions on States. The Council has broadly construed its powers under Chapter VII and expanded its jurisdiction from traditional matters of security to new spheres previously under the purview of other organs and non-United Nations entities. The Council has also, over time, assumed quasi-legislative and quasi-judicial functions, straining conceptions of propriety and institutional competence. Discordant Council practice has resulted in a blurring of the lines between the ordinary powers and functions allotted to the Council and those extraordinary powers reserved for situations constituting, at a minimum, threats to international peace and security, thus giving rise to the need for transparent rules and procedures for invoking Chapters VI and VII. Thirdly, with regard to Council's agenda, there is a tendency towards the entrenchment of situations in which Chapter VII has been invoked. Although the Council may have explicitly concluded its consideration of an item and removed it from the list of matters of which the Council is seized, it has done so with great infrequency, and, in some instances, matters have remained on the Council's agenda for extended periods, which leads to a lack of clarity in assessing both the purpose and the end point of Council responses to threats to peace; it also allows for the routinization of exception. Clarity and consistency are similarly essential in resolutions pertaining to mandate evolution and termination. Otherwise, overriding political considerations could lead to selective and inappropriate application of the rules. Adherence to its mandate under the United Nations Charter will enhance the Council's credibility, efficacy, integrity and reputation, as well as the confidence of Member States in its decisions. In 2020, in addition to the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, the global community will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women and the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. As we enter the decade of action in pursuit of the Sustainable Development Goals, African Union's Agenda 2063 and the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative, a renewed and concerted effort by us all towards the full achievement of peace, security and development will be required. The Council can count on Eritrea's continued support to that end.
