Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I too

wish to thank Mr. Annabi for introducing the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2004/669) and for his very
useful update on the situation in Timor-Leste. We join
others in hailing the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET).
Moreover, we congratulate the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste on the progress - in some
respects, outstanding progress - they have made over
the past few months. We note with interest the
measures towards enabling the Timor-Leste
Government to shoulder responsibilities in the security
area. We note too the progress on legislation in the
administrative and justice areas. Also, like others, we
have been following the measures taken to prepare for
the holding of elections in accordance with the planned
timetable. We welcome, for example, the beginning of
the voter registration process.

There has been significant progress in other areas
as well, including relations between Timor-Leste and
its neighbours. Here, we join others in drawing
attention to the importance of speedy agreement on the
maritime boundaries with Australia and on the land
border with Indonesia; those are matters that to some
degree will define the country's economic development.

We are pleased with the functioning of
UNMISET and support the observations made in the
report of the Secretary-General and the suggestions
that the representative of Chile offered earlier in
today's meeting.

Looking to the future, we are well aware that
much remains to be done. Here, I wish to draw the
Council's attention to two matters. The first - to
which others have already referred - is impunity, on
which I associate myself with the comments made
earlier by the representative of the United States with
respect to some recent court decisions related to serious
crimes committed in 1999. In that connection, let me
ask Mr. Annabi whether he believes that the
international community could take additional steps,
and what they might be.

The second matter relates to preparing for the
contribution that the international community will have
to continue to make after the mandate of UNMISET
expires. It is quite clear that there will be a need to
devise structures in ongoing support of the efforts of
the Timorese themselves for the development of their
country. The representative of Pakistan offered several
ideas in that regard; my delegation believes that it is
important for all of us together to think along the lines
he described.

