Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Secretary-
General Guterres for his very insightful briefing on
the stark and painful reality of the suffering caused
by the risk of famine in Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia
and north-eastern Nigeria. In line with the presidential
statement on famine adopted in early August
(S/PRST/2017/14), we commend the Secretary-General
for his bold and timely call for the world community to
respond to those threats.

At the same time, we acknowledge with deep
appreciation the unfailing efforts of United Nations
agencies and humanitarian organizations to alleviate
the large-scale catastrophes that are affecting more
than 20 million people in those countries. Yet despite
those efforts, the statistics we have heard today are
shocking and should awaken us to the realization that
what we are witnessing is now at its worst since the
end of the Second World War and the founding of the
United Nations itself.

While as Council members we express our grave
concern, we must go beyond expressions of solidarity
and immediately address the problem with workable
strategies. One of the major reasons for famine in the
countries under discussion is that they are all affected by
ongoing armed conflicts and violence, which interfere
with people's livelihoods and access to markets and
create widespread displacement, further aggravated
by climate change. It is clear that military solutions
can never be an option, because they only exacerbate
tensions, leading to more tragedies and food insecurity.
Furthermore, it is obvious that unemployment, poverty,
underdevelopment and the unsustainable use of land
and water and exploitation of natural resources will
further escalate the potential for widespread famine.

The interconnected nature of today's humanitarian
crises and the importance of strengthening the security-
development nexus were clearly visible during the
Council's visit to the Lake Chad basin region in March
and will no doubt be confirmed during its upcoming
visit to the Sahel region next week. It is clear that the
response to famine requires strength and connectivity
between political solutions and long-term development
strategies. Humanitarian crises require billions of
dollars, and there are deficits in the delivery on pledges.
Our calls for more funding to breach the shortfalls are
often futile, despite the best intentions and political
will of Member States, owing to competing claims
all over the world. It is therefore vital to harness
international assistance with the funds received in order
to boost resilience and overcome the divide between the
humanitarian and development investments.

Our target should be ensuring food security and
the protection of rural livelihoods and investments in
agriculture, livestock and indigenous means. All of
that plays a role in peacemaking - as the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations has
stated i and will help to reduce tensions, especially
where food supplies and markets are severely strained.
Food security and agriculture should therefore be
supported across conflict cycles as well as during
sustained peace.

It has also been shown that supporting livelihoods
is the best defence in the effort to protect and save lives,
foster recovery and strengthen resilience. We should
therefore think creatively about the provision of seeds,
cash payments, rapid-response kits, treatment and
vaccinations to protect livestock and prevent disease
outbreaks, and about training community-based
workers. Livelihood projects can be a good basis for
bringing people together and facilitating local peace
processes through community groups. In each of the
countries that we are focusing on, we could develop
schemes such as cash for work and nutrition and
input vouchers.

As the same time, full, rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access is essential; hence the need for
inclusive dialogue with all parties to the conflict so
as to eliminate all obstacles preventing aid from being
delivered to vulnerable populations. That is a process to
be engaged in by the entire United Nations system and its
peacekeeping missions and country teams in particular,
working alongside Governments and armed groups. We
should also seek the support of neighbouring countries
and regional organizations and their mechanisms
for timely intervention, along with donors, partners
and, above all, civil society and local populations.
Besides working to ensure the implementation of peace
agreements, we must aim to make agriculture, forestry
and fisheries more productive and sustainable so as to
reduce rural poverty and enable inclusive and efficient
food systems, thereby increasing the resilience of
human lives.

