Mr. Laher (South Africa): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his briefing on the activities
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). We also thank the representative of the
United States, Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad, for
briefing us on the activities of the multinational force
in Iraq.

We welcome the relatively positive developments
that have taken place over the last few weeks in Iraq.
They include enhanced cooperation among political
groups in Iraq and between Iraq and neighbouring
countries, as well as an extension of the authority of
the Iraqi Government. The recent adoption of the
provincial election law is also encouraging.

However, fundamental challenges remain. As the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/688) indicates,
high levels of violence continue and some important
groups remain outside the political process. The
Secretary-General also reports on the humanitarian
plight of refugees and the serious human rights
situation, particularly the violations of human rights of
civilians and detainees. That continues to be a grave
concern of my Government, and we call on all parties,
including the multinational force, to ensure that human
rights and international humanitarian law are respected.

Persistent reports of high civilian casualty rates in
military operations and of thousands of civilians being
detained without being charged or afforded legal due
process highlight the urgent need for greater
compliance with international and Iraqi law. Moreover,
the dire humanitarian situation, particularly that
experienced by refugees, continues to have a negative
impact on Iraqi and regional stability.

It should be emphasized that the multinational
force operates in Iraq under a United Nations mandate.
Consequently, its actions have a direct bearing on the
credibility and reputation of this body and its ability to
act as an honest broker in facilitating national
reconciliation and an all-inclusive political process in
Iraq, as well as constructive dialogue with its
neighbours.

My delegation remains concerns about recent
incidents in Syria and elsewhere where the national
borders of sovereign nations are violated and innocent
civilians are harmed and sometimes killed in
contravention of international law.

We are pleased that the United Nations is able to
play a positive role in assisting with national
reconciliation, internal and regional political dialogue,
resolving boundary disputes and providing
constitutional and electoral support, as well as
humanitarian, reconstruction and development
assistance. Therefore, South Africa continues to
support the presence of UNAMI in Iraq under its
current mandate, in line with our commitment to
multilateralism and conflict resolution.

South Africans, for their part, have been sharing
their experiences in conflict resolution and national
reconciliation with their Iraqi counterparts through the
Helsinki II process. We hope that our national
experience could offer hope for a better life for the
million of Iraqis during this difficult time of their
history.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that the
Security Council has the responsibility to ensure that
the powers it grants to the multinational force are
exercised in a manner consistent with the decisions of
the Council and that Iraq's natural resources and the
funds in the Development Fund for Iraq are used for
the benefit of its people.

