The Secretary-General: Today's meeting comes
at a critical juncture in the continuing tragedy of
Somalia. Ethiopia's statement to me in a letter of 25
November that it plans to withdraw its troops from
Somalia by the end of this year is consistent with the
Djibouti Agreement but could easily lead to chaos. In
response to the risk of a deterioration in the security
situation and concerns expressed by the African Union,
this body and the African Union must work closely
together to provide additional support to the African
Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) to enhance its
capacity to defend itself and to continue to hold the
strategic areas in Mogadishu, while efforts to build
Somali security structures under the Djibouti process
continue. Prime Minister Meles has reiterated to the
Ethiopian Parliament his intention to completely
withdraw the troops in two weeks.

The African Union is scheduled to discuss the
renewal of the AMISOM. mandate at the ministerial
meeting in Addis Ababa on 22 December. If they do
not renew the mandate, the AMISOM. forces are likely
to depart before the Ethiopian forces are withdrawn.
We are, however, encouraged by an indication given by
both Burundi and Rwanda that they are prepared to
deploy additional battle units to AMISOM. if the
essential resources are made available. All eyes are on
the discussion in this Chamber to gauge the
determination of the international community to
respond to this danger. Our actions today will be
critical to the African Union's decisions on Somalia
next week.

I should now like to discuss briefly the latest
political developments in Somalia. There is a credible
political process underway in Somalia called the
Djibouti process, which has been nurtured by my
Special Representative Ahmedou Ould Abdallah.
Somali parties agreed on 25 November to expand the
Transitional Federal Parliament by 275 seats. The
parties also agreed to extend the transitional period,
which ends in September 2009, by two years. The
enlarged Parliament is expected to elect new Somali
leadership. They have also agreed to set up a joint
force to form the backbone of a united security force.

The return of the leader of the Alliance for the
Re-Liberation of Somalia, Sheikh Sharif, and 39 of his
followers to Mogadishu from their two-year exile is a
promising move. Reports indicate that they were
warmly received by Somalis. This represents a first
step in importing and entrenching the Djibouti peace
process into Somalia. As we have said on numerous
occasions, the responsibility to bring peace and
stability to Somalia rests primarily with the Somalis
themselves. However, continuing feuds within the
Transitional Federal Government and the recent
division between the President and the Prime Minister
with regard to the former's duties can jeopardize the
peace process and affect the functioning and stability
of the Government. At the same time, I urge the armed
groups in Somalia that have cited Ethiopia's
withdrawal as a condition for ending the fighting now

to lay down their weapons and join the Djibouti
process.

Humanitarian access remains severely restricted
and the level of insecurity for humanitarian workers
and the local civilian population is unacceptably high.
During this year alone, an estimated 250,000 people
were displaced from Mogadishu. The overall number
of internally displaced persons stands at 1.3 million
and an average of 5,000 Somali refugees arrive every
month in the refugee camps in Kenya. The number of
people in need of assistance and livelihood support in
Somalia now stands at 3.2 million. The delivery of
such assistance remains a logistical challenge, not least
because of piracy, which has increased the cost of
transporting supplies. I am deeply concerned about the
direct targeting of aid workers and United Nations
staff, which has led to the deaths of four United
Nations staff members between September and
December. The challenges are huge, but humanitarian
agencies continue to deliver relief supplies, including
in conflict areas. If the security situation deteriorates,
access to humanitarian assistance will only get worse.

I have repeatedly stated that the most appropriate
response to the complex security challenges in Somalia
is a multinational force rather than a typical
peacekeeping operation. Such a force should have the
full military capabilities required to support the
cessation of armed confrontation, to stabilize
Mogadishu and to defend itself. I have approached
50 countries and three international organizations to
request contributions to a multinational force. The
response has not been encouraging. No Member State
has offered to play the lead nation role. In the absence
of adequate pledges for a multinational force, I intend
to propose to the Council three concrete measures that
would provide the necessary security arrangements in
support of the Djibouti peace process. If successful,
these would pave the way for the deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation, in keeping
with Security Council resolution 1814 (2008).

First, we should provide the African Union with
substantial and credible resources to reinforce
AMISOM, including the means to deploy the
additional battle units pledged by Rwanda and
Burundi. I will also suggest that all resources pledged
for a multinational force be redirected to AMISOM, if
a multinational force does not materialize. Financing
will be a major concern, and we will have to explore
with Member States creative approaches to mobilize

the funds needed. As we are liquidating the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan, we have already
identified assets that could be donated to AMISOM
with the approval of the General Assembly.

Secondly, the Security Council should consider
ways to build the capacity of the Somali parties
themselves to restore security, import the Djibouti talks
into Somalia and carry forward the peace process. This
could include the provision of training through
international partners for the joint Government-
Alliance forces established by the Djibouti agreement,
as well as capacity-building for the police, judicial and
corrections sectors. Such efforts would be conducted
under an overall security sector reform strategy, which
could be nationally owned, with the United Nations
assuming a coordinating role.

Finally, the Council could explore the possibility
of establishing a maritime task force or adding to the
current anti-piracy operations a peak reaction
component. This would have the capability to launch
operations into Somalia in support of the activities of
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia and
AMISOM. operations. Our objective is to stabilize
Somalia and find a durable solution to the crisis in that
country. I recognize that some members of the Council
have other suggestions for dealing with the security
crisis in Somalia, including putting the AMISOM
forces under a United Nations peacekeeping operation
now. That is not our preferred option. We are of the
view that strengthening AMISOM. through, inter alia,
the provision of financing, logistical support, necessary
training and equipment and other reinforcements
facilitated by the United Nations and Members States
is a more realistic option at this time.

At the same time, we are continuing contingency
planning for the deployment of a full-fledged United
Nations peacekeeping operation at the appropriate time
and under the right conditions, as requested by the
Council. I will soon provide a detailed report to the
Security Council, covering these proposals.

I share the deep concern of Member States at the
escalation of acts of piracy and armed robbery off the
coast of Somalia. I welcome the actions this Council
has just taken to deal with the issue.

I am particularly impressed by the actions of
Member States and international organizations to pool
their efforts and resources to fight piracy and armed
robbery at sea. I want to extend my thanks to the
European Union, NATO and individual Member States
that have contributed in this regard.

The need to coordinate and fortify these efforts
remains ongoing. My Special Representative for
Somalia convened an international conference on
piracy from 11 to 12 December to further discuss this
issue. My Legal Adviser stands ready to assist States in
trying to find a solution to the practical, legal and
jurisdictional issues involved.

As requested by the Security Council in its
resolution 1846 (2008) of 2 December, I will submit
recommendations on ways to ensure the long-term
security of international navigation off the coast of
Somalia. In the interim, the Secretariat has designated
a focal point in the Office of Military Affairs of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for
information-sharing on anti-piracy operations.

We must be mindful that piracy is a symptom of
the state of anarchy which has persisted in Somalia for
over 17 years. This lawlessness constitutes a serious
threat to regional stability and to international peace
and security. Our anti-piracy efforts must be appraised
in the context of a comprehensive approach which
fosters an inclusive peace process in Somalia and
assists parties to rebuild security, governance capacity,
address human rights issues and harness economic
opportunities throughout the country.

I appeal to the leaders and people of Somalia to
give peace a chance and to put the 17-year war behind
them. I am particularly disturbed by the continuing
disunity within the Government's leadership. Without
an effective and unified Government to support, there
is little that the United Nations and, indeed, the
international community, can do in Somalia. I urge the
country's leaders to put their differences aside and
place the future of the Somali people first.

As the international community, today we must
send a positive political signal to the Somali people
and the African Union that we are willing to provide
the security path that will complement the political
compromises reached through the Djibouti process.

We must act before it is too late.

