The Secretary-General: First, let me warmly
welcome the distinguished Foreign Ministers of
countries of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) who are here with us today, and to
thank ECOWAS, as well as France, for the important
role they are playing in the search for peace and
stability in Cote d'Ivoire through their support for the
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Accord. On
the military front, their peacekeeping activities have
played a key role in averting escalation in the fighting.

Secondly, let me thank the members of the
Council for the consistent attention they have given to
the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire and to the role of the United
Nations in the peace process. My Special
Representative, Mr. Albert Tevoedjre, is currently
chairing the follow-up committee established in
accordance with the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement, and
I am pleased at the progress that Prime Minister
Seydou Diarra has made in establishing the new
Government.

The presence of such a high-level ECOWAS
delegation shows today how seriously West Africa
takes the problem immediately confronting us; namely,
how to replenish the depleted financial resources of the
ECOWAS Peace Force for Cote d'Ivoire (ECOFORCE)
so that it can continue playing its essential role in
promoting peace in Cote d'Ivoire.

In this context, we must acknowledge the help
already given by those donor countries and institutions
that have been assisting ECOWAS since the beginning
of its involvement in cote d'Ivoire, and particularly for
the deployment of ECOFORCE.

At this critical time, when the various Ivorian
parties have at last begun taking important steps to
implement the Accord, ECOWAS has found it
necessary to decide on a substantial increase in the size
of ECOFORCE in order to make it more effective. I
appeal to members of the Council, and the broader
international community, to quickly provide ECOWAS
with the additional financial resources that will be
required to sustain ECOFORCE for the next six
months.

In order to complement the peacekeeping efforts
launched by ECOWAS and France, I have
recommended the establishment of a small United
Nations operation comprising military liaison
components, as well as human rights, civil affairs and
media components. I hope that Council members will
shortly authorize this mission so that the United
Nations can strengthen its role in the Ivorian peace
process.

In conclusion, let me assure the ECOWAS
ministers that the United Nations will continue to
cooperate with them as we work together to help the
Ivorian people recover the stability and prosperity for
which their country was so well known in the past.

