Mr. Queta (Guinea Bissau) (interpretation from French): The United Nations is making tireless efforts to
find a political solution to the conflict between Georgia and
Abkhazia. The Russian Federation, acting in its capacity as
facilitator, is also playing a remarkable role with a view to
the accomplishment of the complex task of bringing the
parties together and arriving at a settlement to the dispute
through peaceful means. My delegation also is pleased to
note the dedication with which the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and his Deputy, as well as the military
and civilian personnel of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), are fulfilling the mission
entrusted to them by the Security Council. We believe that
the parties, and in particular Abkhazia, should avail
themselves of the goodwill of the international community
in order to overcome their differences and lay the
foundations for a lasting peace.

My delegation profoundly regrets the absence of
progress in the peace process between Georgia and
Abkhazia. We note that the definition of the political status
of Abkhazia constitutes the crux of the problem. My
delegation believes that this question must be examined in
the framework of respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Georgia, within its internationally recognized
borders.

Furthermore, we are concerned at the fact that the
threat of mines continues to affect the Gali sector. The
laying of new mines endangers the lives of the population
and of international civilian and military personnel. It is
urgent that the parties put an end to this practice, which
prevents the United Nations Mission from fulfilling its
mandate.

My Government reiterates its concern at the slowness
of the process of the voluntary return of refugees and
displaced persons. It considers unacceptable any attempt to
place obstacles in the way of the return of refugees and
displaced persons to their homes. In this context, we
condemn ethnically motivated killings and other violations
of human rights in the region.

We support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that the mandate of UNOMIG be extended for a
further period until 31 January 1997.

My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Security Council because it is well-
balanced and reflects the current situation of the peace
process between Georgia and Abkhazia.

