Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I would like to
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing and for his
ongoing work in Afghanistan. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Tanin for so eloquently reminding
us where Afghanistan has come from over the past 13
years. We salute that progress, while remaining ever
mindful of the challenges that lie ahead.

Today's briefing and mandate renewal come at
a critical time for Afghanistan, as the national unity
Government seeks to establish itself and the country
adjusts to what might be described as post-International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) realities. Against that
background, and the significant security, development
and governance challenges that the country still faces,
the role of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) assumes even greater
significance.

Over the past decade, the support of the international
community, coupled with the sacrifice and effort of the
Afghan people, has delivered real progress in security,
health, education and infrastructure. Indeed, we have
all invested heavily in Afghanistan's success. It is
therefore important that the Security Council send a
strong signal and message of unity and of our ongoing
commitment and support as Afghanistan enters its
decade of transformation. New Zealand's commitment
to Afghanistan since 2001, referred to by the
representative of Malaysia earlier, and our continued
support through a training and development assistance
programme reflects the importance we attach to the
country's long-term success.

New Zealand commends President Ghani and
Mr. Abdullah on their formation of a Government of
national unity and on making all the compromises
necessary for that process. Unified and responsible
leadership is essential if Afghanistan is to move
successfully from transition to transformation, and
UNAMA and the international community will play
an important role in supporting all of that. We look
forward to progress on electoral reform, as the Special
Representative mentioned, and the strengthening of
Afghanistan's governance institutions. We also look
forward to an increased role for women.

However, the Council must not lose sight of the
ongoing security challenges facing Afghanistan.
Indeed, we should be concerned at the deterioration of
the security situation. Last year saw the second highest
number of reported security incidents since 2002. For the
first time, ground engagements were the leading cause
of civilian casualties, as the Special Representative
said and others have detailed. We therefore echo the
Secretary-General's call for all parties

"to respect the laws ofwar, including the distinction
between civilians and combatants, and to avoid
using heavy weapons in civilian-populated areas".

The Resolute Support Mission is a non-combat
operation. It is therefore crucial that the Afghan
National Security Forces maintain stability. For the
foreseeable future, that will require the ongoing
support of international partners. Longer-term, peace
will only come about if we meet the development
aspirations of the Afghan people. As we say so often,
in so many different situations, economic development
is key to stability and self-reliance. In the short term,
we will have to help mitigate the severe economic
impacts of ISAF's withdrawal. In that UNAMA
will again play a very critical role. It must provide
assistance, particularly through engagement on human
right. It must promote coherence and coordination of
international support. And, of course, it must work
with the Afghan Government to align all of that with
national needs and priorities.

New Zealand has often said, both before and since
joining the Council, that we must do better at conflict
prevention, and we say it again in the context of
Afghanistan. Afghanistan stands at a crucial juncture.
The risk of relapse into conflict can be avoided, but
we must all support it in remaining on the path of
peace. Economic development will be central to that
pathway. New Zealand supports and encourages the
Government of Afghanistan's pursuit of reconciliation
with moderate Taliban, but that can happen only at a
pace and in a manner acceptable to Afghanistan itself,
and if there is the alignment of circumstance of which
the Special Representative has already spoken. It is
important that the Council's implementation of the
Taliban sanctions regime also support efforts aimed at
peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan. New Zealand
chairs the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), and recognizes that it can play a positive
role in achieving results for Afghanistan.

New Zealand is pleased that today's resolution
2210 (2015) provides for the Secretary-General to begin
examining the activities, structure and role of the United
Nations system in Afghanistan in close consultation with
the Afghan Government. In this transformation decade
such constitutionalism and consultation is essential. We
commend the Council's willingness to engage directly
with Afghanistan in drafting the resolution so that
the country's views were reflected in the mandate we
have just renewed. As Ambassador Tanin emphasized,
that process has produced a very good outcome, in
line with the principle of national ownership. New
Zealand welcomes the Afghan Government's wish to
take on a greater role in the leadership and ownership
of its own security and development. We see that as
a natural and necessary step in any emergence from
conflict - certainly in any emergence that is consistent
with core peacebuilding principles. We therefore wish
the Government and people of Afghanistan well and
offer our ongoing support for their endeavours.

