Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): As this is the first time
that I take the floor during this month, I would like to
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of May. We commend you and your delegation
for the excellent manner in which you have led the
work of the Council. We are also thankful to the
Chairpersons of the counter-terrorism Committees
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
resolution 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for their
comprehensive briefings on recent activities
undertaken to fulfil the mandates of their respective
Committees.

The adoption of a global counter-terrorism strategy
by the General Assembly in September 2006 was a
significant step forward towards strengthening the resolve
of the international community in addressing the global
threat of international terrorism. In that regard, we are
pleased to note that in recent years the Security Council
has increased its vital role in achieving that objective.
Such measures have come in the form of adopting
additional Council resolutions related to international
terrorism, including resolutions 1624 (2005), 1730 (2006)
and 1735 (2006). We welcome such measures and remain
committed to working together with Member States and
the relevant organs and agencies of the United Nations to
ensure the implementation of the relevant resolutions of
both the Security Council and the General Assembly on
this issue.

Afghanistan remains a prime victim of terrorism,
as terrorist attacks committed by the enemies of peace
and stability in Afghanistan continue to disrupt the
daily lives of our people. The level of terrorism-related
violence has increased since last year. Those attacks
are targeting a wide spectrum of society: school
teachers, clerics, health workers, educational
institutions, our national army and police, as well as
personnel of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) and coalition forces. Moreover,
increasingly brutal tactics, such as the targeting of
civilian populations, suicide bombings and beheadings,
have become prevalent in recent months. Just two days
ago, a vicious suicide attack was carried out in the
southern province of Gardez, killing 14 civilians and
wounding more than 31 bystanders. That heinous act
took place subsequent to two other attacks conducted
in Kandahar and Kunduz provinces that took the lives
of 10 civilians, three German ISAF soldiers and
11 officers of the Afghan national police. The horrific
events of the past few days are a stark reminder of the
continuing campaign of the Taliban, Al-Qaida and
other extremists in their effort to destabilize the
country.

Defeating terrorism remains a precondition for
achieving a peaceful, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan. The prevailing security challenges will
not weaken our resolve to eliminate that scourge from
our society and achieve our stated goals with the
support of our international partners.
The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan condemns
international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, committed by whomever, whenever
and for whatever purpose. In its firm determination to
combat terrorism, the Government of Afghanistan has
undertaken a series of substantial measures at the
national, regional and international levels towards the
implementation of the relevant international
conventions and resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly dealing with terrorism. We
have submitted two national reports to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) and are
in the process of preparing a third report. We have also
presented a report to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).

The 1267 Committee sanctions regime remains an
essential tool of the Security Council in the combat
against terrorism. Afghanistan welcomes the
Committee's recent progress in updating its guidelines
and the adoption of Security Council resolution 1730
(2006), which calls for the creation of a focal point
within the Secretariat to receive delisting requests from
States. The adoption of resolution 1735 (2006) was
another important initiative, as it seeks to improve the
quality of the consolidated list.

Country visits by the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team of the 1267 Committee are
one of the most effective means of monitoring
implementation measures and dialogue with Member
States. We were pleased by the outcome of the visit of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
of the 1267 Committee to Kabul, Afghanistan, from
8 to 15 this month. The Monitoring Team held
constructive meetings with senior officials at the
Ministries of Defense, Justice, Foreign Affairs and
Interior. Additional meetings were held with the head
of the National Reconciliation Commission and
members of both the National Security Directorate and
the National Security Council to discuss issues related
to updating and improving the quality of the
consolidated list. We are certain that the recent visit of
the Monitoring Team will help the 1267 Committee to
update and improve the list to reflect the new
developments in Afghanistan and in the region.
We commend the Counter-Terrorism Committee
for its continued assistance to States to strengthen their
counter-terrorism legislation through its Executive
Directorate. In that regard, we are pleased to note the
intention of the Executive Directorate to conduct a

follow-up visit to Kabul, Afghanistan, in the coming
months. The visit will offer another opportunity for us
to provide a first-hand account of our counter-terrorism
measures, particularly in the areas of anti-terrorism
legislation, border control and practice, as well as
police and law enforcement. It will also be useful in
assessing and identifying areas where technical
assistance is required to strengthen existing counter-
terrorism legislation and mechanisms within the
relevant institutions and agencies.

Regional cooperation is indispensable to
eliminating terrorism from Afghanistan and the region,
given the cross-border nature of our security
challenges. Our efforts alone, no matter how robust and
effective, will not suffice without an equal effort from
regional actors. We continue to maintain constructive
cooperation within regional and bilateral mechanisms
to effectively combat terrorism in Afghanistan and the
region. Consultations continue between Afghanistan
and Pakistan within various frameworks. The Ankara
summit between the heads of State of the two
countries, Afghanistan and Pakistan, which took place
on 29 and 30 April, provided another opportunity to
strengthen regional cooperation in the combat against
terrorism. We remain confident of the summit's
successful outcome. We also welcome the initiative of
the G-8 to facilitate enhanced collaboration between
Afghanistan and Pakistan.

Furthermore, I am also pleased to inform the
Council that, subsequent to the second preparatory
meeting of the Jirgah commissions held at the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan on 3 May, it was
decided that the Peace Jirgah of tribal and community
leaders from both sides of the border will be convened
in the first week of August 2007.

In the face of ongoing threats posed by
international terrorists, a more robust effort on the part
of Member States, the United Nations and relevant
regional and subregional organizations is required to
meet the challenge of combating terrorism. My
delegation notes with satisfaction the increased
coordination between the three counter-terrorism
committees of the Council.
To conclude, I would like to express our steadfast
commitment to the combat against terrorism. We
remain resolved to achieve the full implementation of
the relevant resolutions of this Council dealing with
terrorism.
