Mr. Akram (Pakistan): At the outset, I should
like to express the condolences of the Pakistan
delegation to the Permanent Representative of China
and his delegation with regard to the tragic loss of lives
and property as a result of the recent earthquake that
afflicted the Chinese people.

I should also like to thank the Swedish State
Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Hans Dahlgren, for
his briefing on the Stockholm Process on the
Implementation of Targeted Sanctions. In addition, I
wish to express my appreciation to Assistant Secretary-
General Danilo Turk for his contribution.

Article 41 of the Charter allows for the
application of measures not involving the use of armed
force to achieve certain objectives in the maintenance
of international peace and security. Of course certain
caveats have arisen with regard to the design and
application of Security Council sanctions. Throughout
the 1990s we saw an increase in the use of sanctions as
a policy instrument by the Council. However,
comprehensive sanctions have often led to undesirable
results in countries against which such sanctions have
been imposed, not to mention the effects on third
countries.

The Secretary-General of our Organization noted
in previous reports that "humanitarian and human
rights policy goals cannot easily be reconciled with
those of a sanctions regime" (A/53/1, para. 64). In
another report he said that

"Economic sanctions are too often a blunt
instrument and may impose hardships on a
civilian population that are disproportionate to
likely political gains." (A/56/95, para. 112)

Sanctions have also, at times, proved to be
counter-productive. They have hardened the positions
of targeted regimes and caused them to behave in ways
contrary to the expectations of the international
community. In most cases, sanctioned regimes or
groups have sought to evade or circumvent the
measures imposed against them. The problem therefore
is, on the one hand, to improve the accuracy of the
sanctions instrument and to check the evasion of
sanctions, and, on the other hand, to minimize negative
consequences, especially the humanitarian effects of
sanctions.

In that regard, we welcome the recent policy
desire to shift to what is called smart sanctions, which
aim to focus on the targeted actors and to minimize
unintended consequences. We note the Interlaken
process, initiated in Switzerland, on financial
sanctions, which was followed by the Bonn-Berlin
process, which concentrated on the design and
implementation of arms embargoes and on travel and
aviation-related sanctions. The Stockholm Process is
the latest of these processes suggesting ways to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations system
and of Member States to implement targeted sanctions
while giving priority to identifying measures to
enhance planning, monitoring and coordination among
sanctions committees and monitoring bodies.

While we support all those efforts to improve the
way the Security Council designs and implements
tighter and smarter sanctions, there is a need to
undertake a more comprehensive review of the
application, design, implementation, monitoring and,
ultimately, termination of sanctions. We believe that
the Council's informal working group should undertake
such a review. The Council's approach to sanctions, in
our view, should incorporate the following principles.

First, sanctions are a coercive measure available
under Chapter VII of the Charter. They must be among
the last resorts for the Council, not the first. All other
possibilities and potentialities available under Chapter
VI must first be exhausted before a resort to sanctions.

Second, sanctions should be imposed only in
response to violations of international law and non-
compliance with Security Council resolutions and
obligations. Third, the Security Council is the only
body authorized to impose collective international
sanctions. Unilateral sanctions by individual States, no
matter how well intentioned, do not enjoy international
legitimacy and are often counter-productive and
destabilizing.

Fourth, sanctions should be based on concrete
evidence of and information on violations of
international law or Security Council obligations. They
should not be based on presumptions, media reports or
motivated allegations. Fifth, the threat of sanctions
could be more effective than the actual imposition of
sanctions. Thus, conditional or deferred sanctions
should be considered wherever possible.

Sixth, sanctions resolutions should clearly
indicate goals and establish clear criteria for the
suspension or termination of sanctions. Seventh,
sanctions regimes should be time-bound, allowing for
periodic review and amendment. Eighth, provisions
should be made to ease sanctions, short of suspension
or termination, in response to partial compliance by
targeted entities, in order to achieve full compliance.
Ninth, sanctions should be implemented in a
transparent manner.

Tenth, sanctions personnel, including United
Nations inspectors, should reflect equitable geographic
representation. Eleventh, personnel from developing
countries should, if necessary, receive the training
required to be able to participate in United Nations
sanctions monitoring regimes.

Twelfth, sanctions regimes should incorporate
humanitarian exemptions and compensation
mechanisms in case of unintended consequences.

Thirteenth, sanctions regimes should be carefully
and regularly assessed as regards their effectiveness in
achieving their objectives and monitoring unintended
humanitarian consequences. We welcome the project
proposal of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs on assessing the humanitarian
implications of sanctions. There should also be an
independent external review, including the possibility
of a judicial review of the monitoring mechanisms of
sanctions regimes, to obtain a realistic and objective
assessment based on empirical data and field studies in
targeted areas.

In conclusion, let me say that Pakistan believes
that, while the sanctions regimes should continue and
be improved, we must at the same time seek to evolve
and strengthen other means envisaged under the
Charter, including in Chapter VI, to promote the
objectives of the Security Council and the international
community. We must adopt a more comprehensive
problem-solving approach involving conflict resolution
and economic and development objectives to achieve
our aims. We should not forget that our Charter
provides the scope for all these possibilities. We must
graduate from the thinking of the old world and adopt a
more innovative approach consistent with the
philosophy of solidarity of our new millennium.

