Mr. Brattskar (Norway): I would like to thank
Mr. Oshima for his very useful briefing.

Norway commends the Government of Angola
for having taken some positive steps to meet the
humanitarian needs of the country after the signing of
the Memorandum of Understanding. However, more
needs to be done, and the Government must assume
increased responsibility and leadership in meeting the
huge humanitarian needs of its population. Above all,
the Government must take the lead in preparing for the
huge return and resettlement operation by prioritizing
the reconstruction of infrastructure such as roads,
airstrips and bridges.

As we have heard from Mr. Oshima, Angola is
facing enormous challenges in mine clearance. My
Government commends the Government of Angola for
its decision to ratify the Landmine Treaty and urges the
authorities to resolve the existing institutional
difficulties and to provide resources for mine-action
programmes throughout the country. Moreover, the
agencies operating in Angola must be urged to
integrate demining activities into the overall aid
programmes. This is, above all, an important means to
prepare for the return of the huge numbers of refugees
and internally displaced persons.

Norway is impressed by the efforts currently
being made by the United Nations, and in particular by
the role played by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in its capacity as
humanitarian coordinator. We wish to encourage
OCHA and other agencies to continue working for
improved transparency and dialogue with the
Government regarding humanitarian relief activities.

Allow me also to underline the need for urgent
funding and humanitarian assistance to address the
emergency situation affecting many quartering areas
and newly accessible locations. I would like to ask
Mr. Oshima whether we still have a problem with
locations that are not accessible for assistance.

On our part, we have responded to the
humanitarian crisis by providing supplementary
funding through UNICEF and the humanitarian
coordinators in the quartering areas. Further donations
will be made available as soon as the Coordinated
Appeal is presented.

We very much look forward to discussing the
upcoming report by the Secretary-General containing
recommendations as to the mandate of the United
Nations operation in Angola. Meanwhile we will
encourage the Government of Angola and UNITA to
continue the implementation of the peace plan in a
manner aimed at consolidating a stable and peaceful
environment, thereby establishing the conditions for
national reconciliation and long-term social and
economic development in the country.

