Mr. Schieb (Germany): I would like to thank
Venezuela for having convened today's open debate.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

What is the challenge before the Security Council?
In the light of the multiplication of conflicts and failing
States, the challenge is to reshape the Peacebuilding
Commission to adequately address not only post-
conf1ict situations, but also the prevention of conflicts
with the support of the Peacebuilding Support Office
and an adequately financed Peacebuilding Fund.

Five years ago, we failed to allow the Peacebuilding
Commission to evolve after we had discovered that
gaps existed between our collective aspirations and the
realities in practice. Instead of adopting a substantive
draft resolution, we just welcomed the report of the
experts reviewing the Peacebuilding Commission, and
we did not endorse a single one of the recommendations
contained in the report. Given the current review
prepared by the Group ofExperts headed by Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal, we now have the opportunity to finally
enact the necessary changes.

First, the mandate of the Peacebuilding
Commission needs to be enhanced to also encompass
crisis prevention, not only the aftermath of a conflict.

Secondly, the Peacebuilding Commission must
work more closely with the Security Council. However,
that can be achieved only if the Security Council
actively involves the Peacebuilding Commission in its
work on crisis prevention and peacebuilding and if the
Peacebuilding Commission has something to offer to
the Security Council. As the report of the Advisory
Group stipulates, the Security Council

"should regularly request and draw upon
the Peacebuilding Commission's advice on
the peacebuilding dimensions of mandates".
(S/2015/490, p.4)

Thirdly, we also must overcome the bureaucratic
approach to peacebuilding enshrined in the country
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Some challenges, such as Ebola, demand a regional
response, and therefore call for action beyond the
limitations of one specific country configuration. That
does not mean that we need to create new structures.
We need to use the existing ones more efficiently
through better cooperation with host countries,
enhanced coordination with other United Nations
agencies on the ground and more partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations, as well as with
international financial institutions. The Peacebuilding
Commission is a product of internal and institutional
learning within the United Nations. It draws upon the
complex and often interrelated challenges associated
with conflict resolution, peacebuilding, reconciliation
and development. We just need to improve it.

Peacebuilding does not come for free. Predictable
financing is an important prerequisite that had been
voiced even before the Rosenthal report. Germany
has been one of the main donors contributing to the
Peacebuilding Fund in the past, and it will continue to
be a predictable voluntary contributor in the future. In
2016, we will substantially increase our contribution to
the Peacebuilding Fund.

Let me reaffirm that Germany firmly supports
the ongoing negotiations on a joint draft resolution
by the General Assembly and the Security Council
designed to improve the peacebuilding architecture.
Germany also looks forward to continue working with
the Peacebuilding Commission to best respond to the
needs of countries in crisis and help solidify peace in
the aftermath of conflict.

Last but not least, Germany would like to use this
opportunity to pay tribute to former Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali. It was his 1992 "Agenda for
Peace" (S/24111) that prepared the ground for many of
the concepts and initiatives we are discussing to this
very day.

