Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Quinlan, as well as the Panel of Experts, for their
continued work in supporting the implementation of the
Security Council's resolutions on Iran.

Negotiations between the E3+3 and Iran on a
comprehensive agreement regarding Iran's nuclear
programme are reaching a decisive moment. The
E3+3 remain strongly committed to agreement of a
comprehensive settlement before 24 November, and
talks will continue here in New York over the coming
days. Some progress has ben made and we believe
that a deal is possible, but it is now imperative that
Iran show greater flexibility on the future scope of its
nuclear programme, in particular on enrichment. Iran
must also engage more actively with the International
Atomic Energy Agency to address concerns over the
possible military dimensions of its nuclear activities.

In parallel, the United States and the European
Union have continued to deliver the sanctions relief set
out in the joint plan of action. But while negotiations
continue, we should be clear. The bulk of sanctions,
including all United Nations sanctions and the
obligations on United Nations Member States that arise
from the relevant Security Council resolutions, remain
in place and must continue to be enforced in full. That
acts as an incentive for Iran to negotiate seriously
towards a comprehensive agreement. We must continue
to implement and enforce those sanctions robustly.

Turning to the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), we remain concerned
by Iran's clear breaches of its international obligations,
as well as its continued failure to respond to the
concerns of the international community represented
by the Committee. The interdiction on 31 March
of a vessel carrying a cargo of conventional arms in
the Red Sea remains a matter of concern. The Panel
of Experts, after a thorough investigation, concluded
that the shipment was "a violation of Iran's obligations
under paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007)". We urge
Iran to reply to the Committee's 9 July letter seeking
comments on the incident.

We also note Iran's continued failure to respond
to previous requests for information on the carbon
fibre interdiction, ballistic missile launches and an
intercepted arms shipment to Yemen. We call on Iran to
engage with the Committee in earnest on such incidents.
The Committee must remain active and diligent in its
work to enforce the sanctions on Iran. We therefore
welcome the Committee's provision of guidance to
Member States and international organizations on the
current sanctions regime and the outreach work carried
out by the Panel.

The United Kingdom is committed to finding
a peaceful, negotiated solution to the Iran nuclear
issue. The ongoing discussions on a comprehensive
agreement are the best opportunity in recent years to
achieve that. We will continue to make every effort to
find a comprehensive agreement, and we look to Iran
to do the same.

