Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for initiating this important
discussion of the rule of law and transitional justice.
As the Secretary-General made clear in his address to
the General Assembly last month, we are duty-bound
to protect, enhance and extend the rule of law to all
people in all places, including societies that are making
the difficult transition from conflict to peace.

In that regard, we welcome the report of the
Secretary-General as being comprehensive and realistic
in pointing the way forward. The Secretary-General's
recommendations in paragraph 64 are worthy of
serious consideration by Member States and the
Security Council. In particular, we support the
emphasis on respect for the human rights of those
groups that are most vulnerable to conflict, such as
women and children.

We wish to call attention to important
developments in the way that the Security Council has
functioned since the end of the cold war. First, we are
pleased to note that cooperation among Security
Council members has increased substantially as the
Council discharges its solemn responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. Secondly,
the conflicts addressed by the Security Council since
the early 1990s have tended to be intra-State conflicts
stemming from failing or failed States, rather than the
inter-State conflicts that have traditionally been the
Council's focus. Those conflicts within States raise a
different set of issues and require a different approach.
In that regard, we welcome and support the Security
Council's recent trend towards integrating transitional
justice and rule-of-law concerns into the mandates of
United Nations peace missions.

Indeed, the rule of law, the promotion of human
rights, the delivery of justice and the establishment of
democratic institutions can no longer be considered
luxuries, if ever they could. Rather, they are
indispensable requirements for restoring peace and
preventing conflict-ravaged societies from relapsing
into violence and chaos. Without a reasonable degree
of justice and rule of law, peace is simply not
sustainable.

Peace missions in conflict and post-conflict
societies must integrate into their operations three key
aspects of justice and the rule of law. These are re-
establishing the legal order that existed prior to the
conflict, undertaking reform of the justice system, both
substantively and procedurally, and administering
transitional justice fairly and effectively in a way that
facilitates the healing process and expedites national
reconciliation. Peace missions must also engage in
strategic planning to ensure that the justice system does
not break down once the mission is terminated, and as
such, it is imperative that peace missions work towards
establishing sustainable national capacities for justice
administration.

Those, however, are extremely daunting tasks
that can take a long time to achieve. There is no
internationally established procedure that can be
applied uniformly to all conflicts. Ensuring justice is
also a very expensive undertaking, as evidenced by the
ad hoc tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda. In that vein, the full operation of the
International Criminal Court as an independent,
effective and fair permanent criminal tribunal is a most
welcome development that will greatly enhance the
administration of justice. The Republic of Korea hopes
to see the Court attain universality at an early date.

In order to deal with the complex socio-economic
problems in conflict and post-conflict societies, we
encourage more systematic coordination among all
international and local actors on the ground, including
the Security Council, United Nations peacekeepers,
United Nations funds and programmes, civil society,
non-governmental organizations and donors.

The Security Council, with the unique authority
and power entrusted to it by the United Nations
Charter, has been the guiding force behind concerted
international efforts at post-conflict peace-building.
However, we share the concern that the Security
Council is currently overburdened, having increasingly
become involved in the broad and time-consuming task
of nation-building. Furthermore, because it can be
difficult to determine when that task is complete, or
even what would constitute completion, the Security
Council may not always be able to articulate exit
strategies where necessary.

In that context, we must examine the long-term
fitness of the Security Council for these ever-
expanding tasks. We look forward to the ideas and
recommendations of the High-Level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change regarding possible reform of
the way the Security Council interacts with other
United Nations bodies, in particular the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, and
regarding possible changes in the structure and
functions of major United Nations bodies.

In addition, the Republic of Korea deems worthy
of exploration the Finnish-German-Jordanian joint
proposal to create a central unit within the Secretariat
to coordinate the rule-of-law components of peace-
building efforts.

In conclusion, the Republic of Korea reiterates its
continued support for the Security Council, and for the
United Nations as a whole, in their steadfast efforts to
ensure that justice and the rule of law are extended to
every human being in every society.

