Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful to the Argentine delegation for organizing
this debate on a topic of such importance to our region.
We value your personal participation in the meeting,
Mr. President. We also appreciate the presence of the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti, Ambassador Sandra Honore. We wish her
every success in her endeavour and have no doubt that
she will continue the excellent performance of her
predecessors. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2013/493), which forms the basis of
today's debate. And we extend a warm welcome to our
new colleagues, namely, Ambassador Denis Regis of
Haiti and Ambassador Liu Jieyi of China.

In the current phase of evolution of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
we find encouraging indicators, as well as risks that
could destabilize the real, but fragile, progress made
in Haiti. That is why, in order to maintain the positive
momentum, Haiti must continue occupying a privileged
place on the international agenda, including that of the
Council.

More specifically, I would like to first refer to the
holding of local, municipal and legislative elections. On
28 January, the Council underscored the importance
of Haiti holding elections before the end of the year.
Meeting that commitment in a timely manner is of
fundamental importance for both the democratization
process and stabilization process, both of which are
central elements in MINUSTAH's mandate.

Although some steps have been taken towards
holding the elections, including that taken yesterday by
President Martelly by submitting a draft electoral law
to Parliament, those measures appear to be insufficient.
There is a delay of almost 18 months, and we still do not
have a precise timeline on the horizon. That is extremely
worrying, since it relates to fundamental aspects of the
Haitian constitutional system. Preserving the integrity
of the electoral process is crucial for the legitimacy of
the Government, the future stability of Haiti and the
development of Haitian society. For those reasons, we
trust that the electoral framework will promptly be
approved.

Secondly, we continue to believe that it is necessary
to define a governance pact that will foster a climate
that is conducive for transparent, democratic and
participatory management of public affairs. Without an
understanding among Haitians that puts a true national
accord into place, it is difficult to imagine that the
present political impasse can be overcome.

Thirdly, I wish to refer to the reform of the Haitian
National Police (HNP), which tends to be the main
criterion against which MINUSTAH's performance
is measured. Maintaining the operational capacities
of the HNP is certainly essential to developing the
institutions necessary for strengthening the rule of law.
However, the professionalization of the police force is
not enough by itself. The judicial system also needs to
be strengthened. We acknowledge that some promising
steps in that regard have been taken.

Fourthly, the upcoming mandate renewal is a
unique opportunity to carefully consider the priorities
and critical tasks of the Mission. We continue to
examine the consolidation plan of MINUSTAH and
reiterate that the Mission's evolution must be flexible
and adapted to the realities on the ground. From the
report of the Secretary General (S/2013/493), we gather
that the Mission has considerable work from now until
2016, including the task of fulfilling specific targets
related to the capacity of the Haitian National Police
and the preparation for presidential elections. While the
current consolidation plan remains in place and while
we have no certainty as to the logistical requirements
for the elections, we trust that any further reduction in
the capacity ofthe forces assigned to the Mission would
be based on objective criteria, and that such a reduction
would be applied in a gradual and progressive manner.
Fifthly, the level of security personnel has remained
relatively stable since 2004, now that the abrupt increase
provoked after the earthquake has drawn down.
That is an explicit acknowledgment by the Security
Council that long-term stability can be achieved
only if individual rights are protected and collective
threats to more vulnerable populations are eliminated.
Experience has shown us that the United Nations must
maintain an adequate level of presence in Haiti, both
through MINUSTAH and the United Nations country
team. Our withdrawal from the country must therefore
be responsible to ensure that, when that time comes, the
Mission will never have to return.

At the same time, it should be recalled that the
crux of the instability problems facing Haiti does not
have a military solution alone. We must seek out the
root causes of instability, poverty, unemployment
and social inequality. For that reason, we believe that
the socioeconomic dimension cannot be overlooked.
The Government of Haiti, both the executive and
the legislative branches, as well as the international
community, must all demonstrate that they have the
political will and ability to combat extreme poverty and
to improve the socioeconomic conditions prevailing in
Haiti.

As we can observe, the architecture of the
international support has changed. It now reflects the
transition from a crisis phase to that of fashioning the
institutional mechanisms that allow for the assistance
provided for development to be adapted to Haiti's
national priorities. In the humanitarian context, it is
correct to acknowledge that, after long delays, today
almost 82 per cent of the 1.5 million persons displaced
after the earthquake have returned to their homes or
have been relocated. The situation of those displaced by
the catastrophe three years ago needs to be regularized.
With the oncoming hurricane season, the situation is of
particular importance and we need to support the 2013
humanitarian action plan.

Now and in the future, we face challenges in
the maintenance of peace and security in Haiti in
order to guarantee the continuity of an irreversible
stabilization process. Guatemala is honoured to have
been part of MINUSTAH since its inception. We will
remain committed to both Haiti and to the United
Nations peacekeeping operation as long as it is deemed
necessary. We hope that by acting jointly we can give
back to Haiti the future that Haitians deserve.

