Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Gambari for their update
briefings on the crisis between Israel and Lebanon. We,
like other delegations, are alarmed by the sudden and
escalating fighting across the Blue Line involving
Hizbollah and the Israel Defense Forces, which is
spreading to other parts of Lebanon.

We condemn the attacks sparked by Hizbollah
across the Blue Line and the kidnapping of Israeli
soldiers on 12 July. That was a blatant breach of
Security Council resolutions and a violation of the line
separating the two countries. We deplore the deaths of
and injuries to civilians, which are continuing, and call
for a halt to the extensive destruction of property and
infrastructure in Lebanon.

We are gravely concerned by the intensity of the
fighting and the disproportionate use of force. Israeli
forces have targeted bridges, fired at Beirut's airport,
setting fuel tanks on fire, and struck the main Beirut-
Damascus road. Israel is continuing to strike Lebanon
by land, sea and air, and has imposed an air and naval
blockade aimed, with devastating consequences, at
civilian life which is having a destabilizing impact on
the entire region.
On the other hand, Hizbollah has fired volleys of
rockets targeting population centres in northern Israel,
including Nahariya and the port city of Haifa, which
represents a major and unprecedented escalation of the
crisis across the Blue Line.
The situation is definitely spiralling out of control
and we risk losing sight of the issues at stake as a
result of the kidnapping of the two soldiers in an
already volatile situation. The chances for their release
are much greater through negotiations than through the
use of excessive force.

We urge the parties to exercise maximum
restraint and to stop the hostilities so as to allow
mediation efforts to resolve the crisis. This is urgent;
there is a similar situation in the Gaza Strip that
remains unresolved, despite the extensive use of force
there.

The current security situation demonstrates once
again the urgency of the call for the Lebanese
Government to extend its control over all of its
territory and prevent attacks across the Blue Line. Over
the past 12 months, Lebanon has gone through one
political crisis after another. This latest development
renders the situation more volatile. There is a need for
decisive international action to help Lebanon stabilize
itself.

The parties should be encouraged to abstain from
acts that constitute a violation of international law,
international humanitarian law or relevant Security
Council resolutions. The sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon must be respected in the context
of a comprehensive solution to the Middle East
problem.

We are concerned that the cycle of violence in the
region does not seem to be abating and is causing
misery to ordinary civilians. We appeal to leaders in
the region and to the wider international community to
take immediate, concerted action to resolve the
conflict. In this regard, we commend the speedy action
of the Secretary-General in sending envoys to the
troubled region to defuse the situation and chart a
solution to the ongoing crisis. We are also encouraged
by the prompt diplomatic efforts being taken by Arab
countries such as Egypt to find a negotiated solution to
the conflict.

Finally, we would like to stress that the cessation
of hostilities as a prerequisite for political negotiations
is the key to bringing about a durable solution to the
crisis.

