Mr. Idohou (Benin) (spoke in French): I should
like to express to the Secretary-General my
delegation's great appreciation for the clarity of his
fifth report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2005/740). I should also like to welcome
the presence among us of the Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and to thank
him for his contribution to today's debate, which leads
us to reassess problems related to the human condition
and its complex nature.

Over the centuries, a set of norms and principles
has been established that has made it possible to
expand the influence of the human ideal within the
collective consciousness, to the point where, at the turn
of the century, one could speak of the continual
improvement of humanity, since the aspirations of
individuals and peoples to the rule of law was obvious.

The changes that accompanied the end of the
bipolar world and the birth of a new world order at the
end of the 19803 led to an increase in the number of
internal low-intensity armed conflicts. Those conflicts
were caused by the prolonged destabilization of some
countries, with the appearance of rebel groups and
other non-State armed groups, thanks to the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons.

The behaviour of those non-State actors resulted,
strangely, in actions that were fundamentally negative
and in complete violation of the contemporary legal,
social and moral law. In some cases, these were
formerly peaceful national or multinational
communities in which a breach of the social contract
occurred because of ethnic or religious intolerance or a
ruthless battle for control over vital space and
resources. Those phenomena are described in detail in
the Secretary-General's very instructive report, in the
section on general trends of the situation of civilians in
contemporary armed conflicts.

The heart-rending picture of the practices cited
enables us to realize not only the degree of moral
decay of the perpetrators of the acts in question, but
also the magnitude of the challenge that must be met in
order to restore the rule of law, particularly
international humanitarian law, so as to restore peace
in countries in conflict situations. The international
community, which embodies the principle of humanity,
and the United Nations are deeply frustrated by the
crimes against human dignity committed in
contemporary armed conflicts. They must resolutely
commit themselves to combat and put an end to such
crimes by using the means offered by the Charter.

We must recognize and duly appreciate the
considerable progress made in this area since the
Secretary-General's first report on the issue of civilian
protection. This time, once again, the Secretary-
General has usefully presented various aspects of
critical situations that the United Nations must address
through its competent bodies, particularly the Security
Council. In that regard, he has significantly facilitated
the Council's work by clearly identifying current
problems and by providing specific indications
concerning actions that could be undertaken at the
appropriate level.

It would be a good idea if the Council could
promptly reach a consensus concerning proposed
measures with regard to strengthening the normative
framework and operational protection and assistance
activities. In that connection, we fully support
reaffirmation of the major responsibility of the
international community, acting through the Security
Council, to ensure effective and efficient civilian
protection when public authorities are unable or
unwilling to provide it.

We do that even more easily when we recognize
that that same collective responsibility to protect is the
basis of the creation of the African Union and its
structures concerned with the maintenance of peace
and security. We also support the approach of giving
peacekeeping operations adequate mandates that enable
them to fully carry out the duty to protect threatened
civilian populations.

The role of justice in combating violations of
international humanitarian law is crucial. United
Nations action must be aimed at developing reliable
national judicial institutions as a means of preventing
armed conflicts. But it must also promote recourse to
international justice whenever national circumstances
do not permit reliable prosecution of perpetrators of
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law.

The issue of the lack of a multisectoral
monitoring and follow-up mechanism, presented as one
of the gaps in the current framework for the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, needs particular
attention. We believe that the best solution would be to
follow the model accepted for children affected by
armed conflict. However, more thorough coordination
of structures and institutions responsible for managing
problems related to civilian protection would, in our
View, permit greater comparable effectiveness,
ensuring consistency in assistance and supervision
policies and programmes by taking into account the
regional dimension and the mobilization of adequate
resources for financing crucial activities such as the
social reintegration of ex-combatants and the
rehabilitation of child soldiers and female victims of
sexual exploitation.

From that perspective, we appreciate the
systematic data-collection mechanism currently used
by the relevant structures of the United Nations system,
supported by existing sectoral monitoring and follow-
up mechanisms and by the maintenance of databases on
incidents in conflict-affected countries.

The Secretary-General has quite rightly drawn the
Council's attention to the issue of guaranteeing access
to populations requiring humanitarian assistance, as
well as to the grave attacks against the physical safety
of humanitarian assistance personnel. We believe that
the Council must not limit itself to proscribing such
attacks; it must also provide protection for such
personnel through means commensurate with the risks
that they take.

We cannot conclude without paying a well-
deserved tribute to humanitarian assistance personnel
for the courage and devotion that they have shown
working in the service of peace and human dignity.

