Mr. Cevik (Turkey): At the outset, we would like
to express our appreciation to the Jordanian presidency
for organizing this important meeting.

The Middle East is experiencing a process of drastic
change. The consequences, which range from terrorism
to devastation and displacement, are affecting the entire
region and beyond.

The Palestinian question lies at the heart of the
challenges in the region and continues to undermine
the prospects for lasting regional and global peace.
The devastating effects of last year's destruction in
Gaza persist. We continue to channel humanitarian aid,
including fuel, flour and medicine, to those in need.
The total value of our official humanitarian assistance
to Gaza since July 2014 has exceeded $19 million.
However, only long-term solutions can change the
tide in Gaza's reconstruction. The continuous illegal
blockade and other restrictions in the ability of the
people in Gaza to sustain their daily lives undermine
international efforts for reconstruction and must be
lifted in accordance with resolution 1860 (2009).
Further steps should be taken to alleviate the dire
situations, sustain the current ceasefire and support the
efforts of the Palestinian National Unity Government to
operate in Gaza.

The need to find a negotiated political settlement to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, achieving a two-State
solution and ending the longest occupation in modern
history, in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, remain urgent
priorities. The continuation of the status quo is not an
option. The historical injustice against the Palestinian
people, reinforced by the further expansion of illegal
settlements, forced displacements, house demolitions,
the excessive use of force against civilians, military
raids and incursions and attempts to change the
historical status of Haram Al-Sharif, is fuelling hatred,
alienation and radicalism in the region and beyond.

Palestinian unity is crucial to reaching a lasting
solution. In that regard, we should all support the
Palestinian National Unity Government. But first and
foremost, the Israeli side should prove its sincerity
about its commitment to a two-State solution. It is
high time for the international community to renew
its engagement in the solution of the problem. The
Palestinians should not be deprived any longer of their
basic right to live in an independent State. We need to
intensify our efforts towards the adoption of a Security
Council draft resolution that sets a time frame and
parameters for peace negotiations, based on the two-
State peace vision. The Council should not miss another
opportunity to fulfil its primary responsibility vis-a-vis
international peace and security. Turkey will continue
its support to finding ajust, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the conflict and to the establishment of a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State within the
pre-l967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The recent developments in the region demonstrate
how multiple crises are interlinked, and therefore
need to be addressed with a broader perspective, but
based on the same fundamental principles. The Syrian
crisis, which has provided fertile ground for the rise
of terrorist groups such as Daesh and caused the
deepening of sectarian fault lines in the region, has
become a source of distress for the Palestinians as
well. The humanitarian disaster, currently reaching its
climax in the Yarmouk refugee camp, has added a new
aspect to the ongoing Syrian tragedy. The suffering of
the Palestinian refugees, who had been living under the
brutal siege of the regime for years, was exacerbated
by Daesh barbarism, which is in fact a result of the real
problem.

The situation in Syria has gone from bad to worse.
Syrians from all backgrounds are together waging
a struggle for survival and for their future. Turkey is
gravely concerned by the humanitarian and security
impact of the crisis and its unprecedented devastation.
Turkey has now become the biggest refugee-hosting
country in the world. In the light of the enormity of that
challenge, I must reiterate that meaningful and genuine
burden-sharing is the collective responsibility of the
international community. The international community
still lacks a comprehensive strategy with political,
security and humanitarian pillars to re-establish
stability in Syria.

We must focus on addressing the root causes of
the problem through resolute action. The regime's
indiscriminate attacks should not be overshadowed
by the appalling actions of Daesh. It is also important
to highlight the use of barrel bombs and the increase
of chlorine gas attacks by the regime's forces. The
Security Council should remain seized of the matter.
A genuine political transition based on the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex), through the
establishment of a transitional governing body with the
authority to exercise full executive powers, remains the
only solution in Syria. We cannot afford to lose further
time in soul-searching.

While we will continue to support any endeavour
to stop the bloodshed in Syria, we would also like to
highlight our support to the Iraqi Government in its
fights against Daesh and to express our concern about
the rise of sectarian-motivated attacks against civilians.
In that regard, the implementation of inclusive politics
to end the alienation of some segments of society and
the enhancements of efforts for national reconciliation
should be key for Iraq's stability.

Last but not least, we are worried by the latest
events in Yemen. The worsening situation may
create serious regional consequences, and is a recent
illustration ofthe damage inflicted by sectarian policies
in the region. From the outset, Turkey has supported
the political transition process that began with the
Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative in 2011 and its
Implementation Mechanisms, as well as the outcomes
of the National Dialogue Conference and the Peace and
National Partnership Agreement, signed by all parties
in Yemen on 21 September 2014. However, a failure to
implement the agreement and unilateral actions derailed
the transition process and reversed its achievements.
We welcome resolution 2216 (2015), which is a clear
and firm warning to the spoilers. We hope that the
resolution will contribute to laying the groundwork for
a meaningful, comprehensive dialogue that leads to a
political solution. The only way to contain, if not end,
the turmoil in the Middle East is a collective effort and
ownership by regional actors to engage in dialogue.
Yemen and Libya are no exceptions to that.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Turkey's strong
commitment to the peace and security of the overall
region and our full and continued solidarity with the
Palestinian people.

