Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): Allow me to take
this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, and your
country on the assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month and to thank you and the
members of the Council for the opportunity to address
the Council.

At the outset, let me thank Secretary-General
Kofi Annan for his comprehensive report (S/2004/888),
which reviews the activities of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), the
progress made in key areas of governance, the
shortcomings and the challenges ahead to achieve
further progress and the consolidation of our fledgling
democracy and country. My Government concurs with
most of the analysis of the situation on the ground and
fully supports the recommendations contained in the
report.

My delegation would like to commend
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his invaluable and inspiring
leadership and for his very comprehensive briefing this
morning.

Timor-Leste is peaceful and stable. However,
despite the progress made in establishing democratic
institutions and laying the foundations for a State based
on respect for the rule of law and democratic
principles, the future is still fraught with many
challenges.

The development of capacities in sectors such as
public administration, finance and justice continues to
progress albeit at a slow pace. My delegation
encourages members of the Council, the international
community and development partners to continue to
support Timor-Leste through the provision of civilian
advisers in those key sectors in order to build
capacities of Timorese nationals and to develop
institutional capacity.

It is critical that the United Nations Development
Programme-managed assistance programme for
civilian advisers enable the recruitment of advisers as
soon as possible. As pointed out by the Secretary-
General in his report, only 50 out of 102 civilian
adviser posts have been filled. Reducing the number of
advisers at this point in time would not only be
premature but would have a negative impact on key
functions of national institutions.

Timor-Leste remains committed to the
establishment of an effective, professional and
accountable police force. The promulgation of the
Police Organic Law and the Disciplinary Code is
indicative of that commitment; however, the effective
implementation of those laws requires technical and
financial assistance from the international community.
We deeply regretted the excessive use of force by
the police during the July demonstration by some
veterans. My delegation agrees that much needs to be
done to establish a society based on respect for the rule
of law and human rights. The creation of an impartial,
accountable and responsive police service is an
important element as is the development of an
independent judiciary. However, I am sure that the
Council will appreciate the constraints we are
operating under and the resources, both human and
capital, we have at our disposal. The provision of
police technical advisers and judge mentors through a
programme of assistance to core administrative
structures and to the justice system would contribute to
the achievement of our common goals.

My Government commends the efforts made by
UNMISET in responding to the training needs of the
national police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) through the
development of the skills development plan, in
cooperation with local counterparts. Through such
initiatives we have seen continued improvement in the
skills and capacities of our police force in numerous
areas of policing. However, in order to build on the
gains made and to achieve the objectives as outlined in
the skills development plan, it is necessary that the
number of police advisers remain at the current
authorized level of up to 157.

Timor-Leste has acceded to the core international
human rights treaties, and in an effort to meet its
reporting obligations, the Government with the support
of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, UNICEF and other
United Nations agencies, held a workshop in
September to build capacities in the areas of data
collection and report writing. As a consequence, the
Government established focal points in key ministries,
secretariats of state and civil society groups to
facilitate data collection for drafting Timor-Leste's
initial report to the treaty bodies. It is envisaged that
another workshop will be held in December for civil
society groups.

The Serious Crimes Unit has worked hard to
achieve the requirements as set out in paragraph 8 of
Security Council resolution 1543 (2004); however,
despite those efforts, it may not be possible for the
serious crimes process to complete its work within the
limited time frame and available resources.

The question of justice in post-conflict societies
is complex and difficult to address. As pointed out by
the Secretary-General in his recent report on the rule of
law,

"... the consolidation of peace in the immediate
post-conflict period, as well as the maintenance
of peace in the long-term, cannot be achieved
unless the population is confident that the redress
for grievances can be obtained through legitimate
structures for the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the fair administration of justice".
(S/2004/616, para. 2).

My Government appreciates the efforts of the
Secretary-General in exploring possible ways of
addressing this issue and endeavours to cooperate with
the United Nations, as was reiterated by the Timor-
Leste Prime Minister, His Excellency Mari Alkatiri, in
his meeting with Secretary-General Kofi Annan on
4 October 2004.

Justice and reconciliation remain the cornerstone
of stable democracies; the work undertaken by the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation in
truth finding and reconciliation has contributed to the
healing of wounds from the past and has enabled
communities move forward.

Furthermore, resolving the veterans issue is of
great importance for the Government and will
contribute to the stability of the country. Efforts are
being made by the President, the Parliament and the
Government through ongoing dialogue with the
representatives of the veterans to find an appropriate
and sustainable solution. We welcome the continuing
support for the Recovery, Employment and Stability
Programme for Ex-Combatants and Communities in
Timor-Leste (RESPECT) programme which is helping
to address the concerns and plight of the veterans.

Our economy is showing signs of recovery, and
the Government is committed to creating an
environment that is attractive to investment and job
creation and to achieving the Millennium Development
Goals and the national development plan. The draft
investment law is currently before the Parliament for
its consideration. Moreover, the Petroleum Fund
Steering Committee will be holding public
consultations tomorrow on the establishment of a
petroleum fund for Timor-Leste. This will provide a
good opportunity for civil society to express its views
and opinions.

Timor-Leste, with the assistance of the United
Nations Population Fund, carried out its first national
census which represents the first total population and
housing count in Timor-Leste since the restoration of
independence in May 2002. The total population of
Timor-Leste stands at almost one million, an increase
of 17.4 per cent over previous figures. The
Government hopes that the data collected will be used
effectively by all stakeholders.

Preparations for local elections are well under
way, with elections expected in 2005. Civic education
concerning the elections is being carried out by the
President and the Government throughout the districts,
the aim of which to encourage participation and
promote the positive engagement of civil society. The
conduct of local elections will further consolidate the
democratic process and institutions at the village level.

Relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia
continue to strengthen and are characterized by
commitment at the highest levels. Both Timor-Leste
and Indonesia continue to work towards finalizing the
agreement on our common land border as well as other
residual issues. Finalization of the land border will
facilitate cross-border links between residents in border
areas and build mutual trust and confidence. At a
recent meeting of the Technical Subcommittee on
Border Demarcation, in Indonesia, we were able to
reach agreement on a number of segments along the
border, and at this point only 5 per cent of the border
remains in dispute.

Negotiations with Australia on the maritime
boundary were held in September and October this
year. We believe that a just and fair resolution of the
issue is essential to ensuring Timor-Leste's future
economic viability and stability. In general, our
relations with our neighbours and our region are
excellent and we are looking forward to participating
in the meetings of the Association of South-East Asian
Nations Regional Forum.

In conclusion, Timor-Leste supports a six-month
renewal of UNMISET's mandate with its current parts,
configuration and size until 20 May 2005.
Furthermore, we support the establishment by Special
Representative Hasegawa of eight working groups
tasked with identifying activities to ensure a smooth
transition from peacekeeping and peace-building to
sustainable development. That timely initiative will
contribute to finding the most appropriate exit strategy.

Finally, allow me once again to express our deep
appreciation to members of the Council, the United
Nations Secretariat, UNMISET, the Bretton Woods
Institutions, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
United Nations Development Fund for Women and
other United Nations agencies for their continued and
unrelenting interest in support of the people of East
Timor, without which the progress made to date would
not have been possible. To those members of the
Council whose terms will expire on 31 December, we
express our deep appreciation for their invaluable work
and their contribution towards peace during one of the
most critical times in the history of the United Nations.

