At the outset, I would like to congratulate the delegation of Germany on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and on convening this open debate on the implications of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Azerbaijan welcomes the long-awaited adoption by the Security Council yesterday of resolution 2532 (2020), in connection with the agenda item "Maintenance of international peace and security". It is important that a resolution on a matter of such gravity and urgency enjoyed the consensus of the members of the Security Council. Azerbaijan also highly appreciates the leadership and efforts of the Secretary- General to respond to the crisis. The current situation demands common action to address effectively and in a timely manner the challenges the international community is facing amid the pandemic and its socioeconomic impacts. This objective can be achieved only through concerted, joint efforts aimed at overcoming fragmentation, strengthening cooperation and highlighting the central role of the United Nations in providing guidance for efficient international and national efforts. Azerbaijan spares no effort to contribute to enhancing international solidarity, promoting multilateralism and mobilizing support and resources. The Government of Azerbaijan has made two donations to the World Health Organization and has also provided urgent humanitarian aid to 29 countries affected by the pandemic. On the initiative of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, H.E. Mr. Ilham Aliyev, the Extraordinary Summit of the Cooperation Council of Turkic Speaking States was held via videoconference on 10 April 2020 on the theme "Solidarity and Cooperation in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic". The Summit has become one of the first high-level meetings calling for expanded cooperation and urgent joint measures to prevent the spread of and eliminate the pandemic. Another initiative of the President of Azerbaijan, put forward in his capacity as Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement, culminated in the holding, on 4 May, of an online summit-level meeting of the Contact Group of the Movement in response to COVID-19, under the theme "United against the COVID-19 pandemic", with a view to assessing the impacts of the disease and identifying needs and requirements for possible remedies and action-oriented follow-up measures. Inhis statement at the meeting, the President of Azerbaijan proposed requesting, on behalf of the States members of the Non-Aligned Movement, the convening of a special session of the General Assembly on the COVID-19 pandemic, via video- teleconference, at the level of Heads of State and Government. Following the further steps taken, in accordance with the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, a majority of members States from all regions and political groups expressed their support for the initiative. The thirty-first special session of the General Assembly shall be convened on 10 July. Resolution 2532 (2020), adopted yesterday, considers that the unprecedented extent of the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, demands in particular a general and immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on its agenda, and calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to engage immediately in a durable humanitarian pause. Being an important tool for the cessation of hostilities and humanitarian action, ceasefire accords must be implemented in good faith in order to achieve a speedy political settlement. Unfortunately, in some situations of armed conflict, spurious peacefulness and a declared commitment to truce and ceasefire, along with misinterpretation of the objectives of humanitarian principles, are among the means that aggressors frequently employ in attempts to freeze military gains achieved as a result of the unlawful use of force and other actions in contravention of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. Thus, over the years since the establishment of the ceasefire between Armenia and Azerbaijan in 1994, the armed forces of Armenia have regularly violated the ceasefire, targeting towns and villages in Azerbaijan situated along the front line and the border between the two States to direct and indiscriminate attacks. Such attacks continue notwithstanding the appeal of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire. Furthermore, Armenia has pursued the deliberate policy of consolidating the status quo of the occupation, including by strengthening its military build-up in the seized territories and changing their demographic, cultural and physical character, in clear violation of international law. Neither the ongoing peace process nor a global public health emergency has convinced the aggressor to halt illegal activities. On the contrary, on 31 March and 14 April, illegal so-called elections were staged by Armenia in the occupied Nagorno Karabakh region of Azerbaijan, thereby once again vividly demonstrating that Armenia subordinates the well-being and safety of people to political expediency, in total disregard of public morality and in violation of international humanitarian law. Therefore, Armenia's statement on its alleged support for, and adherence to, the appeal of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire is nothing other than an utter falsehood. No doubt, Armenia's objective is not to save lives and alleviate the suffering of people in need, but to prevent more than 700,000 forcibly displaced Azerbaijanis from returning to their homes and to colonize the territories it has ethnically cleansed and occupied. Over the 75 years since the establishment of the United Nations, much has been done with regard to settling international disputes, resolving conflicts, eradicating colonialism and restoring hope to those affected by war, violence and instability. However, serious challenges remain, with the continued resurgence of conflict, increased levels of displacement and hate-driven violence. Peoples throughout the world continue to suffer from prolonged foreign occupation, ethnic cleansing and the lack of accountability for serious violations of international humanitarian law. Protracted conflicts and their political, military and humanitarian consequences must not be forgotten. Respect for the Charter of the United Nations and international law must be part and parcel of any efforts to address conflict situations and their adverse humanitarian impact.
