Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria): I should like to extend to
you, Sir, Bulgaria's heartfelt congratulations on
China's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month of November, which looks to be
replete with challenges. I would like to assure you of
the full cooperation of my delegation during the
Chinese presidency.

I should like also to thank Ambassador Belinga-
Eboutou and the delegation of Cameroon for their
outstanding presidency in October. Ambassador
Belinga-Eboutou was able successfully to carry out a
very difficult task, and we are grateful to him.

I thank you also, Sir, for having convened this
public meeting of the Security Council on the final
report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has led to a very important debate, enhanced by
the presence of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Uganda, who made an important
statement this morning. I would like to thank him for
being so kind as to take part in our work.

Bulgaria welcomes the final report of the Panel of
Experts, which offers a detailed and systematic
analysis of a great deal of information and data on the
illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Panel's
experts, guided by Ambassador Kassem, must be
commended for their courage and determination and
for the rigorous methodology with which they carried
out their work.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria fully associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Denmark on behalf of the
European Union. I should like to add a few comments
in my national capacity.

My country is deeply concerned at the relentless
exploitation of the natural resources and other forms of
wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and at
the fact that this exploitation remains one of the key
reasons for the conflict and for the insecurity that
continues to prevail in the eastern part of the country.

It is true that the combat against illegal
exploitation is not an easy task. In order to be effective,
efforts to reduce and put an end to illegal trafficking
should be undertaken in a concerted manner by the
international community and by the countries of the
Great Lakes region and other areas. We should note
that the recommendations and conclusions contained in
the final report are well founded, as we see it, and
should be taken into account in future efforts of the
Security Council to put an end to this practice.

My delegation supports the report's appeal to
Governments that harbour individuals, companies and
financial institutions that are actively involved in the
exploitation to shoulder their responsibility by making
detailed internal inquiries into the cases referred to in
the final report and taking the necessary steps to ensure
that such illegal practices are brought to an end.

My country agrees with the analysis of the
European Union to the effect that it is important for
Governments of countries members of the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
to encourage private enterprises to abide by OECD
Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises.

Regional and subregional institutions, in
particular the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Southern
African Development Community should use their
influence to persuade the parties concerned to put an
end to the illegal exploitation of the Congolese
resources.

Bulgaria shares the View that the complete
withdrawal of all foreign forces, pursuant to the
agreements signed, is an essential step in the process of
ending the illegal exploitation of the natural resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Bulgaria
remains fully committed to the principle of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Other key steps include the
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement of all rebel groups, as
well as the conclusion of a more comprehensive and
all-inclusive agreement among the Congolese with
regard to political transition. In that respect, we
welcome the progress achieved in the framework of the
discussions in Pretoria. My country hopes that the
Congolese parties will continue to pursue that
promising approach with a view to reaching an
inclusive final agreement on political transition in the
near future.

My delegation believes that in order to
consolidate peace and security in the Great Lakes
region in the long term, an international conference
must be convened on peace, security, democracy and
sustainable development in the region. In that
connection, Bulgaria supports the recommendation of
the Panel of Experts to convene such a conference. In-
depth preparations should be undertaken in this respect,
with the participation of the countries of the region and
international actors, in particular the United Nations,
the European Union, the African Union and the Bretton
Woods institutions. The goal of such a conference
should be to set out the steps that need to be taken to
promote the economic recovery of that part of Africa
and ensure a return to peace.

Bulgaria believes that it is essential to continue to
follow closely the situation with regard to the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the link that exists between
such exploitation and the continuation of the conflict,
so as to put an end to such illegal exploitation. It must
be said that the work of the Panel of Experts has
proved useful, not only in shedding light on illegal
practices, but also in helping to advance the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
believe that the Security Council must preserve the
monitoring capacity of the Panel so as to ensure that
the illegal exploitation of Congolese resources is
considerably reduced. In that regard, my delegation
supports the recommendation of the Panel of Experts
that a monitoring body be set up for the Great Lakes
region. Other similar avenues could be explored, such
as extending the mandate of the Panel of Experts.

The report of the Panel of Experts contains
findings on individuals and companies referred to in
earlier reports that have been implicated in other
African conflicts. That is a further illustration of the
fact that sometimes the same individuals and
companies are involved in several trafficking activities
on the African continent. This morning, Ambassador
Levitte and others made some very interesting
comments in this regard, and my delegation fully
agrees with those analyses. Bulgaria believes that we
should continue to consider this issue in the Council
with a view to finding the best way to tackle these
deplorable phenomena. The idea of creating an
autonomous mechanism has been suggested, and
Bulgaria agrees with that proposal.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize my
country's commitment to working tirelessly as a non-
permanent member of the Security Council to put an
end to the illegal exploitation of the resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo so that the people
of that country, who have suffered so greatly in recent
years, might finally be able fully to benefit from the
wealth of their country.

