Mr. Hajihosseini (Organization of the Islamic Conference): At the outset, I would like to express to
you, Mr. President, our profound thanks for convening
this important meeting at the request of the Arab
Group, supported by the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC).

As this is the first time this month that we have
addressed the Council, we congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of its presidency for the current
month, and wish you every success in your stewardship
of this body. We also extend our thanks and
appreciation to Sir Emyr Jones Parry, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, for his
leadership in steering the work of the Council so well
last month.

While the illegal construction of Israeli
settlements on Palestinian lands remains a clear
manifestation of Israel's colonial policies, in 2003 the
processes of territorial expansion have taken a different
form. Israel's so-called security fence in the West Bank
is its most recent - and one of the most blatant -
manifestations of its policy of continuing its territorial
expansion.

The construction of the wall itself constitutes a
flagrant violation of international law and international
humanitarian law, as it seeks to effectively alter the
territorial integrity of the West Bank and accomplish
the de facto annexation of the occupied Palestinian
territory. The wall furthers the "bantustanization" of
the West Bank into hundreds of small, dependent
entities that cannot sustain themselves and that are
more akin to small, disconnected open-air prisons
surrounded by Israeli military checkpoints and
settlements. The form of apartheid Israel practises
against Palestinians meets all the criteria of the crime
of apartheid as defined in the 1976 International
Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the
Crime of Apartheid.

In a position paper dated April 2003, the Israeli
Information Centre for Human Rights in the Occupied
Territories, B'Tselem, stated that past experience
indicated that Israel took advantage of its ability to
restrict Palestinian movement in the occupied
territories to accomplish forbidden objectives and was
driven by considerations unrelated to its security. It
went on:

"It is reasonable to assume that, as in the
case of the settlements, the separation barrier will
become a permanent fact to support Israel's
future claim to annex territories."

The heads of Christian churches in Jerusalem on
26 August 2003 issued a statement affirming their
belief that the consequences of the proposed separation
wall around Bethlehem, the birthplace of Jesus Christ,

"will be devastating to the Christian
community; not least because of the
psychological impact on daily life. The
community will be isolated following the
deprivation of access to land and the freedom of
movement. Visits of pilgrims will be further
discouraged."

They also said: "the separation wall constitutes a grave
obstacle For both nations the Wall will result in a
feeling of isolation."

In their final communique issued at their annual
coordination meeting held in New York on 30
September, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
OIC member States condemned the building of the
expansion wall, involving the confiscation of thousands
more dunums of Palestinian land, the isolation of
dozens of Palestinian villages, towns and cities and the
destruction of property and the livelihood of thousands
of Palestinians.

Clearly, Israel, as the occupying Power, has
unequivocally and consistently failed to adhere to its
obligations vis-a-vis the Palestinian civilian population
in accordance with international law and international
humanitarian law. This situation has prevailed for the
last 36 years, but has become particularly acute since
September 2000.

The impunity being granted to Israel also serves
to encourage further violations, including grave
breaches, of the Geneva Conventions and the Hague
Regulations.

We have consistently called for an international
protection force as an enforcement mechanism and first
step towards the withdrawal of the Israeli occupation
forces from the occupied Palestinian territories, and the
dismantlement of the occupation. We reiterate that
demand. In the light of the escalating violence
perpetrated against Palestinian civilians by the Israeli
military throughout the occupied Palestinian territories,
such a protection measure has become ever more
necessary.

In history, the Council will bear the responsibility
for further immeasurable bloodshed and destruction if
it fails to act, thus allowing Israel to continue its
construction of the wall, its settlement policies and the
perpetuation of its illegal occupation of Palestinian and
Arab territories.

We reiterate that the root cause of the present
conflict in the region is the continuing illegal Israeli
military occupation of the Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem, and of Arab territories since 1967.

The only way out is for the Council to compel
Israel to stop its brutal and bloody military campaign
against the Palestinian people, to stop its colonial
settlement policies and to return to the conference
table, as envisaged in the peace process in order to end
Israel's occupation of the Palestinian and Arab
territories and to ensure that the process is pursued and
concluded in ajudicious and constructive manner.

