Mr. IliicheV (Russian Federation): We would like
to thank you personally, Sir, and the delegation of
Malaysia for effectively presiding over the Security
Council in August. That always demands intensive
efforts. Your presidency was characterized by a very
busy agenda. We note the timeliness of holding a
meeting (see S/PV.775 8) on the issue of non-proliferation
and resolution 1540 (2004) . As we all know, the
global non-proliferation architecture is based on three
components - the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention. The
Russian Federation takes an active part in all of them.

Resolution 1540 (2004) provides another basis for
non-proliferation efforts. It is a reliable shield against
the eventuality of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the hands of non-State actors. We are sure that the
implementation of the resolution by all countries and in
full is an urgent task facing the international community.
Information that non-State actors have gained access to
chemical weapons requires detailed investigation and
a response from the Council. It is unacceptable that
non-State actors be given any form of support allowing
them access to weapons of mass destruction.

As always, the African cluster was at the centre of
the Council's attention. On several occasions this past
month, the Security Council discussed the situation
in the Sudan and South Sudan. We abstained in the
voting on resolution 2304 (2016). As is often the case
in dealing with South Sudan, during the drafting stage
the American sponsors of the resolution ignored the
legitimate concerns of our and many other delegations
on important issues affecting the sovereignty of the
host country, including the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force and a possible arms embargo. The fact
that the modalities of those forces require substantive
fine-tuning is shown by the fact that there are ongoing
discussions on that issue by delegations of South
Sudan and key regional players. We welcome those
discussions and hope that there will be a constructive
exchange of information on a whole range of issues
relating to the settlement of the South Sudan issue
during the meeting scheduled for 5 September in Addis
Ababa. That will be a meeting between members of the
Security Council, representatives of the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
plus format.

It must be noted, unfortunately, that some
delegations periodically use their status as members of
the Security Council to politicize issues for propaganda
purposes in order to shed light on certain subjects,
rather than make quiet, painstaking efforts to maintain
international peace and security in the framework
of the statutory powers of the Security Council. An
illustration of that trend was the holding of an Arria
Formula on 8 August on the situation in Aleppo. The
holding of that event was announced just the day
before, and the meeting itself was another propaganda
show presenting tried and tested political standard fare.
Its organizers were not guided by the goal of settling
the Syrian problem, but rather sought to advance their
own personal agendas, which was far more important
to them.

We were also surprised at the Secretariat's
organization of that meeting. There was a live broadcast
of the meeting, although earlier - for example, with
regard to the organization of the Arria Formula meeting
on Palestine - representatives of the Secretariat
made reference to established practice and said that
a broadcast of such events was not possible. We were
therefore very puzzled by the change in approach. We
expect the Secretariat to provide a detailed explanation
of the issues raised. We believe that the Security
Council Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions should consider
that problem when it prepares the updated version of
presidential note S/2010/507. I would like to remind
colleagues in the Council that Arria Formula meetings
were conceived as informal, confidential meetings for
frank exchanges of private views on issues covered by
the Security Council's mandate. We cannot agree with
the practice followed by members of the Council to
abuse that format and use it for advertising their own
private initiatives.

Turning to Syria, we must refer to the inhumane
actions on the part of the Syrian radical opposition,
which interrupted the United Nations humanitarian
operation in Aleppo, which had already been prepared.
After agreeing to allow convoys of trucks with
humanitarian aid for the civilian population to go
through, at the last minute those jihadist-oppositionists
began to set obviously unacceptable and unrealistic
preconditions. Such a clearly defiant step obviously
reveals the true face of those pseudo-fighters for the
Syrian people. They are not ashamed to exploit the
difficult humanitarian situation so as to achieve their
own destructive goals.

For our part, we will continue to work in a
constructive manner and in cooperation with the United
Nations in preparing the humanitarian operation in
Aleppo along the lines of what we are already doing
in that area. We also confirm our readiness to hold the
48-hour humanitarian pause so as to deliver aid to those
areas that can be reached. However, we would like once
again to remind Council members that the Russian side
has responded promptly to the appropriate proposal from
the United Nations and joined in the work to address
the issues relating to the secure passage of convoys
along the Castello Road and reach an agreement with
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic regarding
the modalities for humanitarian operations.

In conclusion, I would like to wish every success
to the delegation of New Zealand, which will lead
the Council in September. The month of September
is usually a very busy one, and we want to assure our
colleagues of our full support.

