Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I can be brief, not
least because the representative of Spain has just made
a statement on behalf of the members of the European
Union.

Like everyone who has spoken today, the United
Kingdom remains very concerned about the situation in
the region. It is imperative that we break the cycle of
violence. Both sides have their contribution to make to
that end. Both parties must implement recent United
Nations Security Council resolutions, including the
provisions for ceasefire and withdrawal, and resume
the negotiations based on the Council's vision of a two-
State solution set out in Security Council resolution
1397 (2002).

The international focus now should be on renewal
of a political process leading to a comprehensive
settlement. We support the idea of an international
conference covering security, economic and political
issues in parallel.

The United Kingdom remains actively engaged.
In recent days, Prime Minister Blair has met President
Mubarak, United States Defense Secretary Rumsfeld
and Prime Minister Sharon and he has spoken with
King Abdullah. Mr. Blair will meet Prime Minister
Hariri next week.

Both parties have responsibilities. The Palestinian
Authority must do more to prevent terrorist attacks.
Reforms of the Palestinian Authority's security,
economic and administrative sectors are essential. We
welcome the Palestinian Authority Cabinet reshuffle on
10 June as the beginning of this process. We hope the
new Cabinet will be able to get down to work quickly.

But, progress on reform and security cannot be
sustained without giving Palestinians real hope for a
political process leading to a settlement that addresses
their legitimate aspirations, both political and
economic. Israeli cantonization of the West Bank feeds
despair, poverty and extremism, and undermines the
Palestinian Authority's security infrastructure.
Settlement growth, for example, new construction in
Jebel Mukabar and the expansion of Ma'ale Adumim
strengthens the hand of those who argue that the Israeli
Government is not seriously committed to land for
peace. We welcome yesterday's Israeli withdrawal
from Ramallah, but such incursions are
counterproductive and must end.

There is broad consensus in the Council on the
shape of a final settlement. Currently, many diplomatic
efforts, including tomorrow's "quartet" meeting in
Washington, are under way with the aim of achieving
such an outcome. A key priority now must be to
preserve Council unity so that the Council can play an
effective role in helping to make a settlement happen.

