Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Thank
you for being with us again, Mr. Minister. My thanks
go also to my colleagues for allowing
Ambassador Kumalo and me to act as co-leaders. I
would like to say what a pleasure it was to do that.

I would like to situate my comments, first, in the
context of Africa, a continent which has really been
neglected, in part, by the international community, and
which takes up 60 per cent of our time in the Council.
For the United Nations as a whole, it is a major
opportunity and a major challenge. Our remit, of
course, is specifically security and the maintenance of
international peace and security.

To start with, I should like to present two
impressions of the role of the Council. The first is that,
increasingly, the Council will have to look to regional
actors - as it already does - to help us actually
maintain international peace and security. It follows, as
night follows day, that if the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union (AU) is delivering better
peace and security in Africa, it helps us in terms of our
remit. I believe that the African Union accepts that it is
we who have the overall responsibility, but working
together on shared objectives is absolutely vital. And
3
that is not just with the African Union; it is with every
regional body or other body which might have a role to

play.

There is also a need to have coherence across all
the matters which are relevant to peace and security.
And that is not just within a narrow focus -
peacekeeping - it is conflict prevention, stopping
conflict, trying to build peace, looking after DDR -
demobilization, demilitarization and reinsertion into
society - and security sector reform. All those are
basic to how you achieve security. And, of course,
there are key interests of the Council, but there are key
interests of other bodies too, and rightly so. However, I
believe that the need to try to achieve greater
coherence across those interventions, by the actors who
are working there, was reaffirmed to me on this
mission.

With specific regard to the African Union, as
Ambassador Kumalo said, the sheer number of issues
in which we have a commonality of interests and a
common purpose in what we are trying to do
demonstrates why the joint declaration of the African
Union Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council was so important. I hope that it will not be
treated as just another piece of paper. Without going
into detail, I will say that what Ambassador Kumalo
and I will do is write to the President of the Security
Council asking that it become a formal document of
the Council. It must then be a document that is acted
upon day by day by our Secretariat, by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and by the Council as a
whole.

The document contains some important points,
including that before either body decides to take action
in the African theatre, it should try to be cognizant of
what the other thinks. That has to be an improvement.
And the whole question of financing and maintaining
financing for AU operations - which we have seen in
the African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) in
Darfur - is so sensitive but so necessary. Actually, all
of us are going to have to try to see how we can better
maintain the financing of African Union operations.

In the discussion of individual countries and
areas of concern, Darfur, of course, took up a major
part of the time. I thought that the discussions we had
with President Konare, with Commissioner Djinnit and
with the Peace and Security Council were very helpful.
We all agreed on the need for rapid deployment of the
hybrid operation and the details pertaining to its
operation. But we also stressed the importance of
revitalizing the political process in Darfur and ensuring
that humanitarian relief is delivered. The fact that the
AMIS mandate has been renewed just means that we
must also concentrate on the question of how that
mission should be financed for the duration of its time,
until it makes the transition to the hybrid operation.

With regard to Somalia, there was lots of
discussion and, obviously, a keen wish to see political
reconciliation in the country and an end to the present
state of affairs. And that simply means, I think, three
things: first, that the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) needs to be strengthened and security
delivered in Somalia; secondly, that humanitarian relief
has to be delivered; and thirdly, that in the very small
window available, the Transitional Federal
Government has to reach out to parties in Somalia and
try to achieve a broader agreement so that there can be
a political track to accompany the security track. That
is essential if the Security Council is then going to
move on to what the United Kingdom would like: to
discuss seriously whether we can create, or have
created, the conditions for a United Nations
peacekeeping mission in Somalia and how we should
do that. But those are very difficult issues.

As the Security Council, we also briefed the AU
Peace and Security Council on our approach to the
Ethiopia-Eritrea border dispute and to the issue of the
Lord's Resistance Army. In turn, we heard how the
Peace and Security Council sees the African Union's
efforts to resolve the political crisis in the Comoros.

We then moved on, as Ambassador Kumalo said,
to the Sudan, where it was encouraging that, with all
the questions put to them, both the Foreign Minister
and the President implicitly confirmed total
unconditional acceptance of the hybrid operation. That
is very welcome. And I have to say that the tone of the
discussions in Khartoum was so much better than on
our mission last year: so far, so good.

I cannot stress too much, however, that we have
arrived at where we are through sustained pressure and
argument for what we need to do in Darfur and that, in
my View, the Government of the Sudan has come to the
present cooperation only because of all the
international pressure that has been put upon it.
Experience suggests that the Security Council, and
individual countries on the Council, will have to be
07-39489
vigilant not only in working together cooperatively, but
also in maintaining that wish and that pressure so that
the Government of the Sudan now does what it needs
to do. At the same time, we are, quite rightly, chastised
by that Government because we do not put enough
pressure on the rebels, who at this stage bear as heavy,
if not heavier, responsibility. The need to put pressure
on them and criticize them is all too obvious. That
means that bringing both sides to an accord in the
shortest possible time scale is the best way of
providing long-term security and peace in Darfur.

Accra was what we expected: tremendous
development compared with where we were three years
ago. The whole city vibrates with the progress that
Ghana is making. Both the President and the Foreign
Minister were very generous with their time. I thought
they were very close to the Council in terms of
commonality of purpose, that they had a political
determination to deliver the same set of objectives and
that their aspirations for Africa were very positive
indeed.

I, too, should like to conclude by thanking my
colleagues for their participation and their
contributions during the mission. My thanks go also to
the Secretariat for all its support and, indeed, to our
host Governments and all those who made it possible
for the mission to function as well as it did.

