Mr. Eitel (Germany): Today's debate on Croatia
reflects the sad fact that once again the logic of
confrontation and war has triumphed in the former
Yugoslavia. Despite enormous and sustained efforts by the
international community, the search for an overall
negotiated settlement which would bring back peace and
peaceful coexistence to the former Yugoslavia has not
yielded the desired results. Instead, we see pictures of
human suffering, burning houses and tens of thousands of
refugees on the move. Thus, with a deep sense of
frustration, we again must observe that mutual distrust,
tensions and hatred, unleashed in 1991 by an outbreak of
excessive nationalism, continue to haunt the former
Yugoslavia.

Germany strongly deplores the decision of the
Croatian Government to use military means to regain those
Croatian territories previously known as Sector South and
Sector North. Chancellor Kohl and Foreign Minister Kinkel
urged the Croatian Government, up to the last minute, to
refrain from using force and to fully exhaust the means of
dialogue and negotiations for a peaceful reintegration of the
territories in question.

The cost of the Croatian offensive in terms of human
lives and suffering is high. Croatia has taken a heavy
responsibility upon itself. It must now face the
consequences. One consequence is that Croatian behaviour
with regard to the treatment and human rights of the Serb
population and the refugees will be observed most
attentively by the international community.

We strongly condemn the shelling of civilian targets
and attacks by Croatian Government forces against
personnel of the United Nations peace-keeping forces, in
particular those which resulted in the death of a Danish
member and two Czech members of those forces. We
express our condolences to the Danish and Czech
Governments and to the families of the deceased. There are
other reports of attacks against and abuses of United
Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia
(UNCRO) personnel and Serbian civilians. We expect the
Croatian side to examine these allegations in the most
serious manner and to bring to justice those members of its
armed forces whose misdeeds can be established. We
welcome the relevant promises we have just heard from the
representative of Croatia.

The German commitment to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Croatia continues to
be firm. In response to what has just been said by the
representative of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro), I want to point out that the
insurrection in the mainly Serb-inhabited areas of Krajina
and the establishment of Serb control over a large part of
the territory of Croatia by Croatian Serbs, which took
place in 1991 with the decisive assistance of the former
Yugoslav army, must not be forgotten. It is something
which no country could have accepted.

While we deeply regret the recent Croatian action,
we are ready to acknowledge that Croatia's patience has
been tested severely over a long time by the intransigence
of the Croatian Serb leadership and by the great number
of cease-fire violations committed by Croatian Serb forces
and their pattern of cross-border attacks - in particular,
in the area of Bihac.

In the German view, there are now three priorities.
First, the urgent humanitarian needs must be addressed,
and full respect for human rights must be ensured.
Secondly, the situation in and around Croatia must be
stabilized. T hirdly, the conflicting parties must be brought
back to the negotiating table.

We strongly urge all parties to exercise the
maximum restraint in and around Sector East. This
demand applies also to the Government in Belgrade -
we remember the siege and fall of Vukovar.

Croatia must ensure that the human rights and
minority rights of the Serbs of the former Sector East and
Sector North are fully respected. We are deeply
concerned about the fate of the Croatian Serb refugees.
We consider it crucial that Croatia guarantee the right of
these refugees to return and that the Croatian authorities
do everything in their power to create circumstances and
a climate conducive to such a return.

We welcome the commitments made by the Croatian
leaders in this respect, to which the representative of
Croatia has just referred, in the agreement with the United
Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia
(UNCRO) of 6 August 1995 and call upon the Croatian
authorities to strictly adhere to these commitments.
Croatia must create a situation in which Croatian Serbs,
including those currently fleeing Croatia, have a clear
perspective that they will be able to live in peace, safety
and dignity, and without discrimination, in their
homeland. This is what Europe expects from Croatia.

 

Germany, despite the more than 400,000 refugees
from the former Yugoslavia already in Germany, reaffirms
its readiness to help to alleviate the humanitarian plight. We
would like to appeal to all States, and especially our
European partners, to do likewise.

Germany reaffirms its commitment to the efforts for
a political settlement. We call on the Government of
Croatia and the leadership of the Croatian Serbs to
cooperate fully with international efforts for such a
negotiated settlement. The day must come when Croats and
Serbs can again shake hands and live together in peace.

It is in this hope that we shall vote in favour of the
draft resolution.

