Mr. Melki (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his
enlightening briefing and precise commentary on the
latest developments.

More than 20 years after a murderous conflict
and the Dayton Peace Agreement, signed in Paris,
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at a turning point in its
history. Indeed, we are awaiting the announcement
of parliamentary elections for October. The elected
authorities will have the task of paving the way towards
European integration in the years to come. I would
like to underscore three points that merit our special
attention before that crucial election deadline.

First, unity in the country is most essential. The
comments by political leaders on the division of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the glorification of war criminals and
anything that contributes to a resurgence of Violence are
irresponsible behaviours. We urge all political actors to
refrain from stoking hatred and stirring up the ghosts
of the past. Priority must be given to strengthening
the country's central institutions as a prerequisite for
building up the rule of law. We therefore call for respect
for the decisions of the institutions mentioned in the
General Framework Agreement for Peace, in particular
the Constitutional Court. Res judicata decisions must
be implemented as soon as possible in a spirit of
compromise, including on electoral matters.

Secondly, I would like to address reforms. Given that
resolution 2384 (2017) was adopted in November 2017,
France calls on the political parties to agree on a reform
of the electoral law, which is a necessary precursor to
the implementation of the election results. Bosnia and
Herzegovina's political stability is at stake. In addition
to electoral reform, we regret the slowdown of reforms
during 2017. The citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
are calling more than ever for the implementation of
social and economic reforms that will contribute to
the country's development and regional integration.
Judicial reforms are also expected, at a time when
Europe is attaching the utmost importance to fighting
corruption and organized crime. The enlargement
package published by the European Commission on
17 April focuses precisely on the reforms that are
needed in the socioeconomic and rule-of-law areas.

Thirdly, despite a fragile situation and the numerous
challenges, Bosnia and Herzegovina has a horizon
towards which to move: European integration. France
associates itself with the statement to be delivered on
behalf of the European Union. We are pleased to see
that Bosnia and Herzegovina is unanimous on European
integration. It is not only the institutions - from
the Presidency to the cantons and entities - that are
calling for an integration process into the European
Union, but, above all, the women and men of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. They are the ones who want to join
the Europe of the peoples that we are building, day after
day. The European Union will continue to support the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that respect,
the European Union military Operation Althea will
continue its work by adapting, as closely as possible,
to the developments in the security situation on the
ground in order to enable the Bosnian security forces
to act autonomously.

I mentioned at the outset that we are at a turning
point in the history of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Such
a moment requires political courage - the courage
to face situations that some say are unsolvable and
challenges that are perceived as insurmountable.
As at every turning point in its history, Bosnia and
Herzegovina can count on the support of France.

