Mr. Tarar: (Pakistan): Thank you, Madame
President, for convening today's debate. We also
extend our compliments to the delegation of Nigeria
for its able leadership of the Security Council.

We express our deepest condolences and
sympathies to Turkey on the human and material toll
exacted by the earthquake.

We mourn the passing of His Royal Highness
Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, Crown Prince, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defence of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

We align ourselves with the statements delivered
by the Permanent Representatives of Egypt and
Kazakhstan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
respectively.

Precisely one month after the general debate,
during which our top leaders reiterated their collective
objective of finding a lasting solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, today's meeting of the Council
comes amidst renewed hope for lasting peace in the
region. The impressive march of the Palestinian people
towards statehood has reached an important milestone
with the application for United Nations membership.
We hope that the Security Council will conclude
favourably its deliberations on Palestine's application.
Affirmative action by the Security Council and by the
General Assembly will set the foundation for a lasting

ll-56143
solution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It will be a
step towards rectifying the historical injustices suffered
by the Palestinian people.

The agreement reached between the Israeli and
Palestinian authorities on prisoners also bodes well for
prospects for peace. We felicitate the families of all
prisoners released as a result of that agreement, which
proves the all disputes and differences can be resolved
amicably through negotiations. It is our sincere hope
that the agreement will not only lead to the release of
more Palestinian prisoners but that it will also
reinforce the value of finding mutually acceptable
compromises.

For lasting peace in the region, it is incumbent
upon the Security Council and the Middle East Quartet
to honour their longstanding commitments to a final
settlement and to work in tandem to achieve that goal.
The Quartet's statement of 23 September was positive
in intent. However, the Quartet's initiative was
neutralized by the Israeli decision to build new
settlements in the occupied territories. This is cause for
serious concern. Settlement activity is a clear violation
of international law and a manifestation of Israel's
expansionist policy. Settlement activity and the peace
process are mutually exclusive. We call upon the
Israeli authorities to cease new settlement activity
unconditionally to help resume peace negotiations. We
also call for an easement in the blockade of Gaza.

I conclude by reiterating our support for the full
membership of Palestine in the United Nations. Only a
strong State of Palestine as a responsible member of
the international community can guarantee peace for
itself and for its neighbours.

