Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we welcome the presence
of President Michel Kafando and thank him for the
comprehensive and enlightening briefing that he has
just delivered, which was an eloquent presentation of
the positive developments that have been observed
in Burundi.

Following the holding of the constitutional
referendum on 17 May, the current situation in
Burundi is generally stable, with broad participation
and almost three-quarters of the population voting in
favour as solid proof of the maturity and capacity of
the Government and people of Burundi to resolutely
address issues of concern to the country. President
Pierre Nkurunziza's statement in June that he will
not present his candidature for the 2020 presidential
elections, when he could run, illustrates his goodwill
and demonstrates his commitment to his country. We
understand that the Burundian Government is actively
working to preserve national peace and stability and to
promote economic and social development.

In that regard, the international community should
consider the situation in Burundi in a comprehensive
and objective manner, respect the independence of the
country in the management of its affairs and provide
constructive assistance with a view to preserving peace
and development in the region, given the importance of
that brotherly country to the entire region. Burundi's
stability and development have a major impact
throughout the Great Lakes region. Burundi, let us
remember, is a troop-contributor to both United Nations
and African Union peacekeeping operations, which is
another sign that it is a peace-loving country.

Equatorial Guinea, as always, understands that a
situation such as that in Burundi is an internal affair and
must be resolved internally through a frank and inclusive
political process of negotiations among Burundians.
Political dialogue is the only way out of the situation
in Burundi, but we warmly welcome initiatives such
as the inter-Burundian dialogue under the auspices of
the East African Community, the conclusions of which
should undoubtedly help to restore the situation.

We believe that it is important for dialogue to
resume among the Government, opposition parties and
civil society on Burundian soil. That would consolidate
confidence-building measures and strengthen the
inter-Burundian dialogue, with the necessary presence
of the facilitator, former President of Tanzania
Mkapa; the official mediator, President of Uganda
Yoweri Museveni; the East African Community;
the African Union; and other actors that can offer
positive contributions.

Equatorial Guinea has always believed in and
supported the mediation work of all international,
regional and subregional organizations, which in this
situation are truly important to making progress in the
process. We encourage the Burundian authorities to
continue to work together towards achieving the goal
of normalizing the situation in the country and thereby
improve its relations with the international community.

In conclusion, any negotiation process must lead to
fair elections in 2020, which must undoubtedly help to
bring about a definitive normalization of the situation
in the country.

