Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Please accept
my heartfelt thanks, Mr. President, for Germany's
successful leadership on the work of the Security
Council during the month of April. We join other
delegations in thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the other
briefers for their comprehensive briefings this morning.
I also join other speakers in condemning the recent
attack at a synagogue in San Diego in the United States
of America.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the United Arab Emirates on
behalf of the Organization oflslamic Cooperation.

We congratulate the formation of new Palestinian
Government this month, with Mr. Mohammad Shtayyeh
as its Prime Minister.

I would like to speak today on three specific areas
of concern. First, with regard to political and human
rights situation, for a long time the international
community has been overburdened with the recurring
violations of international human rights law and
humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. The persistence ofpatterns of
violations cannot be viewed in isolation from measures,
statements and provocations by Israel, the occupying
Power, or other parties, aimed at further destabilizing
the region and beyond and delaying the prospects for a
successful outcome of the peace process.

For nearly 5 million Palestinians living under
occupation, the degradation of their water supply, the
exploitation of their natural resources, the destruction of
their environment and denial of right to their health are
symptomatic of the lack of any meaningful control they
have over their daily lives. The 2018 report (A/73/53)
of the Human Rights Council also addressed concerns
regarding arbitrary detention, ill-treatment and torture,
increasing restrictions on the rights to the freedoms
of expression, association and peaceful assembly,
the tightening of restrictions on movement, and
continued and across-the-board lack of accountability.
Such violations weaken the international system and
contribute to further deepening the current political
impasse and jeopardizing opportunities for making
the two-State solution a reality. People living in the
occupied Palestinian territory need to be able to stand
up for their rights without being punished for their
courageous advocacy and calls for action. The Council
must take immediate action to ensure that Israel ceases
its violations of international law when responding to
any just demonstration by the innocent and unarmed
people of Palestine. We must ensure legal accountability
and end impunity for the excessive use of force against
largely peaceful Palestinian demonstrators.

The second point that I wish to highlight is related to
humanitarian concerns. No doubt this volatile situation
is exacerbating the humanitarian crisis facing the
Palestinian people, particularly in the Gaza Strip. Under
the pretext of a security threat to Jewish settlers in the
occupied territory, thousands of Palestinian civilians
have been rendered homeless and forced to live under
tragic circumstances owing to Israeli offensives on the
Gaza Strip, which has been tightly closed for almost 11
years now. The dire situation on the ground has grown
steadily more dangerous as a result of the illegal Israeli
blockade and escalation of military aggression and raids
carried out in the occupied territory, including East
Jerusalem. This aggression has resulted in the tragic
loss of civilian lives and a high number of casualties
among Palestinian civilians, including children. The
extent of the vulnerability of the Palestinian people and
their deepening poverty is responsible for the increase
in the number of Palestinian refugees. Programmes
undertaken by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) are also facing serious shortfalls. For our
part, pursuant to the directive of our Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina, we contributed $50,000 to UNRWA's
programme budget last year. I hope other countries that
have championed humanity will also come forward to
keep UNRWA going with their voluntary contributions.

My final point relates to the necessity of promoting
socioeconomic development for the people of Palestine.
We are advocating here at the United Nations under the
slogan of leaving no one behin. However, according to
the United Nations country team, the Israeli occupation
has contributed directly to poverty, unemployment
and a prolonged humanitarian crisis. The mere fact
of living under occupation for five decades has left
Palestinians from all walks of life disadvantaged or
vulnerable in some way. An end to the occupation is
therefore a must. We cannot be "one people" if we do
not help our Palestinian brothers and sisters overcome

their political, social, economic and cultural hardships
and pave the way for them to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.

We believe all barriers to streamlining internal
revenue collection should be eliminated. Financial
support to Palestine is also required. We strongly
suggest that prompt intervention is needed to compel
the Israeli authorities to lift the closure that obstructs
the freedom ofmovement of goods and ofthe 1.8 million
civilians of the Gaza Strip.

The international community, with the Security
Council at the forefront, must continue to act to ensure
accountability for all Israeli violations and provide
protection for the Palestinian people as long as Israel's
illegal foreign occupation persists and the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people are denied. As the
Israeli colonial settlement policy constitutes blatant
contempt and systematic violations of numerous United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
we once again call upon the international community
to respect that resolution and ensure that Israel respects
it as well, in particular its paragraph 5, which obliges
Israel not to deal with settlements.

We reiterate our call upon the Security Council to
recommend and positively consider the admission of
State of Palestine as full Member ofthe United Nations.

We urge international actors to engage
constructively and effectively to sponsor a multilateral
political peace effort to achieve a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East based on relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. It
is now our - the international community's - moral
responsibility to strive to have an impact with a view to
enabling the Palestinian people to live in freedom and
dignity in their Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

