Mr. Pashovski (Bulgaria): I, too, would like to join
the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in congratulating
you, Sir, on assuming your important post at a time when
we all intend to find a solution to the painful conflict which
is ravaging the Balkans.

My delegation asked to participate in the current
Security Council discussion on the report of the
Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia in order to state once
again the unwavering support of the Government of the
Republic of Bulgaria for all endeavours by the international
community aimed at a just, comprehensive and mutually
acceptable peaceful settlement of the conflict in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia, as well as the initiative
of the United States in the framework of the international
Contact Group. In this respect, we highly appreciate the
important work of the Co-Chairmen of the Steering
Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia.

In a statement issued today by my Government in
Sofia, Bulgaria welcomes the current peace developments
under way in the Balkans and supports the Security
Council presidential statement of 8 September 1995. We
share the belief that all parties to the conflict should
refrain from hostilities and the use of armed force. Such
responsible conduct will beyond all doubt enhance the the
advancement of the emerging peace process.
Bulgaria finds particularly encouraging the outcome
of the meeting held under the auspices of the international
Contact Group in Geneva on 8 September 1995 between
the Foreign Ministers of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, of the Republic of Croatia and of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).
The joint statement and the agreement by the parties on
the Declaration of Principles for a negotiated overall
peace settlement of the Yugoslav crisis are the first good
signs on the road to lasting peace throughout the Balkan
region.

Another recent development - the Interim Accord
between the neighbouring States of Greece and
Macedonia signed only two days ago in New York - is
conducive to the further strengthening of the concepts of
international law and the practices of peaceful, friendly
relations in the Balkans.

The practical implementation of the decision by the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to maintain effective closure of the
international border with the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with respect to all goods except those for
humanitarian needs, as well as to cooperate fully with the
mission of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia in that regard, could be assessed as another
encouraging sign of positive action.

Bulgaria welcomes the positive shift in the regional
political thinking and action, demonstrated by these
neighbouring countries in the region, which not only
proclaim their adherence to the principles of peaceful
resolution of conflicting interests in the Balkans, but also,

 

like my country, refrain from the use of force and direct
involvement in any form in the conflicts in the territory of
the former Yugoslavia, even under the auspices of the
United Nations, so as not to invoke age-old hostilities and
controversies.

In the context of the latest peace efforts coordinated
within the Contact Group, I would like to reiterate some
basic elements of my country's position on the
comprehensive peaceful settlement of the Yugoslav crisis.

Bulgaria's position against the lifting of the arms
embargo as mandated by the Security Council is
unchanged. A possible additional inflow of arms would lead
to a further escalation and expansion of the conflict, thus
undermining all current peace endeavours.

We feel that any resumption of hostilities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, under any pretext, could jeopardize the
positive effect of the tripartite meeting held under the
auspices of the international Contact Group in Geneva on
8 September 1995.

We reaffirm our support for the peace-keeping and
humanitarian presence of the United Nations in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia, as mandated by the relevant
Security Council resolutions, as long as it remains an
important stabilizing factor and guarantees the success of
the peace process.

We regard as positive the manifestation of encouraging
elements in the position of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) on the conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. As my country has repeatedly
underscored, this represents a constructive prerequisite for
the success of the peace efforts of the international
community.

In the context of the advancement of the peace process
in the Balkans, the question of sanctions is of paramount
political and economic importance to Bulgaria. As a
Member of the United Nations that is strictly observing the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions
imposing sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), regardless of their
devastating effect on our national economy, the Republic of
Bulgaria is of the view, as already stated on numerous
occasions, that the peace process can lead to the beginning
of a discussion about the suspension and gradual lifting of
sanctions.

The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Bulgaria,
Greece, the Republic of Moldova, Romania and Ukraine
expressed their concern about the overall situation in the
region, which is aggravated by the sanctions, in their joint
letter of 18 May 1995 addressed to the Secretary-General
and circulated as a document of the Security Council
(S/1995/412) and the General Assembly (A/SO/ 189). The
Government of Bulgaria would like to reiterate its support
for the concrete proposals outlined therein to mitigate the
sanctions' impact and to emphasize the expressed
common belief that one of the challenges facing the
United Nations today is related to the extent to which it
would prove able to resolve the special economic
problems of the non-target countries affected by the
implementation of sanctions imposed by the Security
Council.

Bulgaria has already declared its readiness to
participate in an international plan for regional economic
reconstruction and stability after the end of the conflict in
the former Yugoslavia. This could be our input to the
post-conflict peace-building activities in the region. We
would like to reiterate our strong belief that undertaking
infrastructure projects and active regional economic
cooperation will enhance security and stability in the
Balkans.

With all of this in mind, my Government supports
the draft resolution now before the Council.

