Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania):
Tanzania regrets that the situation in Darfur compelled
us to adopt today's resolution, after months of waiting
for the Abuja peace process to resume. To date, the
peace process remains stalled, and there is no
significant improvement on the ground with regard to
the humanitarian situation. The N'djamena Ceasefire
Agreement is, at best, fragile. We have reason to
believe that, if there had been more time to consider
the draft resolution, we would have found more
accommodating and consensual language to take into
account a number of realities in the Sudan in general,
and in Darfur in particular. Those realities include the
following.
First, through the Naivasha peace process and the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement signed on 9 January
2005, the current Government of the Sudan is
committed to and capable of pursuing a peaceful
solution to the Darfur crisis. The installation of a new
Government in two months' time in Khartoum, born of
the north-south peace process, will bring added
commitment and experience to the search for a
peaceful settlement in Darfur.

Secondly, the African Union Mission is on the
ground in the Sudan to monitor and supervise the
ceasefire and, by its presence, to provide security to
civilians. It has proved to be very effective on both
counts where it is deployed. We hope that following
the recent joint assessment mission of the African
Union, the United Nations and the European Union, the
bottlenecks with regard to more rapid deployment will
be overcome, so as to enable the African Union to
deploy additional troops expeditiously. The increased
numbers will make the ceasefire more durable so as to
permit the political and diplomatic initiative to revive
the stalled peace process negotiations in Abuja.

It should be noted that the Sudanese Government
must remain able to provide the required cooperation
and support to the African Union mission in Darfur.
We hope that it will be possible for the peace process
to begin before the measures outlined in today's
resolution become operational.

Thirdly, the new transitional Government in the
Sudan should not be subjected to a sanctions regime
less than three months from now. It should be given a
chance to start in a positive atmosphere and an
unfettered environment. The Council should consider
reviewing these measures as soon as the new
Government is in place. These measures should not in
any way prejudice assistance to the Government of the
Sudan for reconstruction at the forthcoming donors
conference to be held in Oslo next month.

We appeal to all the parties in the Sudan to
respond to the concerns of this Council and the
international community with regard to the situation in
the Sudan by making a bold and decisive move towards
peace in Darfur before the measures adopted here
today become effective.

