Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council. You may rest assured of the support of the
State of Kuwait for you and your team.

I also want to congratulate Ambassador Nicolas
de Riviere of France on his appointment as Permanent
Representative of his country. I wish him every success
in his new tasks. I further wish every success to our
colleague Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu of China and thank
him for his valuable contributions to the work of the
Security Council. I commend him for representing his
country in the way he has.

I thank you, Mr. President, for today's open debate
and the concept note (S/2019/537, annex). I also thank
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC);
Ms. Michele Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate;
and Ms. Tamara Makarenko for their valuable briefings.

I would like to focus in my statement on the
following points.

First of all, with respect to the links between
international terrorism and organized crime, despite
the international community's success in combating
terrorism and terrorist groups throughout the world this
phenomenon remains a threat to international peace and
security. The working methods of the terrorist groups
are evolving and their area of operations is expanding
and becoming more diversified. Terrorist groups
are financing their operations through transnational
organized crime in certain regions, including by
trafficking in drugs, arms, humans and migrants,
illegal trafficking in natural resources and kidnapping
for ransom. They use the proceeds of such activities to
fund their terrorist activities.

The phenomenon of terrorism is linked to
transnational organized crime regardless of the
differences in methodologies and goals. They both
constitute a threat to international peace and security
and represent a major challenge to affected States,
which might lead to conflict aggravation in affected
regions. Terrorist groups which benefit from organized
crime might contribute to complicating efforts of
preventing and settling conflicts. In its resolutions 1373
(2001), 2195 (2014), 2322 (2016), 2368 (2017) and 2462
(2019), the Security Council has emphasized the link
between terrorism and organized crime.

Consequently, it is impossible to counter
the linkage between international terrorism and
organized crime or to disrupt the activities of those
terrorist groups without international cooperation and
concerted efforts at the regional and international
levels, while combating corruption, money-laundering
and illegal financial flows and establishing regional
and international strategies. In that regard, Member
States must join the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the protocols
thereto, the 2003 United Nations Convention against
Corruption, the relevant international conventions and
protocols on combating terrorism and all other relevant
international instruments. We call on Member States to
do the following.

First, they must strengthen national, subregional,
regional and international efforts to counter the links
between international terrorism and transnational
organized crime at the global level.

Secondly, they must promote cooperation and
strategies to prevent terrorists from reaping the benefits
of organized crime. It is necessary to strengthen the
capacities of States to ensure border security against
terrorists and their collaborators, while also making
them accountable.

Thirdly, we must strengthen national and
regional legislation so as to be able to collect, analyse
and exchange information, in particular on the
implementation of laws and intelligence-gathering.

F ourthly, it is also important to foster the role played
by the private sector as well as to enhance cooperation
between the private and public sectors to prevent
terrorists from benefiting from organized crime.

On the efforts of the United Nations, the Security
Council has recognized that there is a close link between
terrorism and transnational organized crime, as has been
expressed in many of its resolutions underscoring the
importance of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols, as well
as strengthening international cooperation, securing
borders, exchanging information and continuous
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and other relevant United Nations
bodies, as well as the INTERPOL, especially in terms
of providing technical support and capacity-building of
Member States to address the link between terrorism
and transnational organized crime. In that regard, we
stress the importance of implementing the relevant
Council resolutions. We also welcome Peru's initiative
on presenting a draft resolution pertaining to the link
between terrorism and organized crime.

Kuwait has recognized the serious dangers to
international peace and security flowing from the
link between international terrorism and organized
crime. We have adopted a law on combating money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism that includes
a number of preventive measures. Kuwait has also
acceded to a number of international conventions on
combating organized crime and on anti-terrorism.
During 2017, the State of Kuwait presided over the
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task
Force. We aim to adopt and implement the Task Force's
40 recommendations and promote joint efforts to
identify the issues of money-laundering and terrorism
financing at the regional level, as well exchanging
experiences and promoting solutions in that regard.

In conclusion, we emphasize that organized crime
can be eradicated only if we follow a persistent and
inclusive approach based on the effective participation of
all States and regional and international organizations.
We also commend the role played by UNODC in
capacity-building on behalf of Member States.

