Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you, Madam
Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Mexico, for organizing
and presiding over this important debate on children
and armed conflict. I also thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Hilde Frafjord Johnson, Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF, and Assistant Secretary-General
Atul Khare for their statements. I welcome Ms. Manju
Gurung and salute her for her courage and for sharing
her experiences in a compelling account of the story of
her life in conflict.

The issue of children in armed conflict has been
an important subject on the agenda of the Security
Council for 11 years now. Member States have
consistently articulated the plight of children in armed
conflict; they have reiterated their commitments to the
well-being of children and pledged support for their
protection, especially in situations of armed conflict.

It is essential that children in conflict situations
be protected by the international community. We note
with concern that in the annexes to the ninth annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2010/181), several armed groups associated
with children are named. A number of these are in
Africa. Not only do these groups recruit or abduct
children, but in some cases, such as that of the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA), they also maim them, commit
sexual violence against them or even kill them. They
rob them of their freedom as well as their innocence.

Uganda calls upon all parties in situations of
armed conflict to adhere to international normative
instruments protecting educational facilities from
attack. We strongly condemn wilful attacks against
schools and other educational facilities, as well as the
deliberate targeting of girls by armed groups. Uganda
has had first-hand experience of attacks against
schools, as well as of the abduction of students. In June
1998, 12 years ago, an armed group calling itself the
Allied Democratic Front raided a technical college in
western Uganda and burned 80 students alive in three
dormitories. That armed group also abducted more than
100 students.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Optional Protocols to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. Uganda is a party to both
Optional Protocols, and we encourage Member States
that have not yet done so to consider acceding to,
ratifying and domesticating them. It is important that
the reports on implementation be prepared and
submitted in a timely manner.

We note the call by the Secretary-General to
parties listed in the annexes of the report to prepare and
implement concrete and time-bound action plans to halt
those violations. It is necessary for the Security Council
to consider taking measures against any parties that fail
to comply. We commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Coomaraswamy, on the
achievements she has made in finalizing action plans
with parties to conflicts in four countries and encourage
her to maintain the momentum.

We also note the Secretary-General's
recommendation to allow contact between the United
Nations and non-State actors to ensure the broad and
effective protection of children. We regard that as a
positive recommendation. The spirit of that
recommendation is positive, but it is important to take
into account the specific conditions that may prevail on
the ground.
Uganda notes the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that stronger measures be taken
against persistent violators who have been listed for
grave violations against children in his annual reports
for at least five years. It is also clear that the United
Nations is at different stages of engagement with the
various parties on the lists, including the negotiation of
action plans. Notwithstanding the five-year timeline,
Uganda encourages a broader set of conditions that
would necessitate action by the Council against
persistent perpetrators.

Uganda emphasizes the importance of urging
relevant actors in peace processes to ensure that the
concerns and needs of children in armed conflict are
consistently taken into account. Given the regional
dimensions of some conflicts, it is essential that
relevant Member States, United Nations peacekeeping
missions and country teams accelerate the development
of appropriate strategies and coordination mechanisms.
That is necessary for information exchange and
cooperation on cross-border child protection concerns.

Uganda is convinced that this debate should
further galvanize our collective efforts to protect
children in situations of armed conflict. Children
everywhere have the right to live in conditions that
provide an opportunity for a bright and successful
future. We therefore highly commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, and her staff on the work that
they are doing in that direction.

