Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this briefing. I thank
Ambassador Olof Skoog, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and Ambassador Antonio de
Aguiar Patriota for their very insightful perspectives.
We are greatly indebted to all the Chairs ofthe country-
specific configurations and the Peacebuilding Support
Office for their commitment to advancing the work of
the PBC.

Today's briefing underlines the critical importance
of the PBC as an invaluable intergovernmental
mechanism for organizing and promoting international
support to countries emerging from conflict. It
highlights the several challenges that continue not only
to reduce the effectiveness ofthe PBC but also to hinder
peacebuilding efforts in countries on its agenda.

The Security Council has a role and indeed a
responsibility to support the PBC in implementing its
mandate. To contribute to that effort, there must be a
clear perception ofthe gaps and challenges in the PBC's
support for the countries on its agenda. There are several
gaps in institution-building efforts, especially in such
areas as reforming the security sector, strengthening
the rule of law, supporting national dialogue, promoting
community reconciliation, encouraging disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, enhancing women's
empowerment and tackling unemployment.

The common thread that runs through these areas
is a lack of adequate, predictable and assured financing
for peacebuilding. That underscores the compelling
need for the PBC to continue to explore and develop
robust strategies for resource mobilization in order to
implement its very important mandate. This is why we
believe that the Commission's second annual session,
held only two days ago, was critical for highlighting
measures at our disposal for mobilizing financing for
peacebuilding.

It is our View that domestic sources of financing for
peacebuilding can be improved by strengthening States'
capacities to effectively manage natural resources,
design and implement appropriate tax regimes and tax
collection, promote transparency and accountability
in the management of public resources and curb illicit
financial flows. While all of those measures imply
more responsibility for Governments, they would also
enhance their legitimacy. We encourage wider support
for domestic resource generation efforts through the
provision of the relevant technical training for experts
from those countries.

We believe it is unrealistic to expect that the
burden of financing peacebuilding should rest on
internally generated revenues from countries emerging
from conflict. They will clearly continue to count on
financial support from the international community
as a demonstration of its commitment to post-conflict
recovery.
Making financial contributions to pooled financing
mechanisms for peacebuilding is perhaps one way of
demonstrating that commitment. Nigeria reaffirms its
support for the Peacebuilding Fund as one such pooled
financing mechanism. We understand how critically
important it is to enhance the application of pooled
financing mechanisms, because they encourage aid
alignment behind Government priorities, foster greater
coherence of international responses to complex
situations, reduce transaction costs, share risks and
strengthen mutual accountability.

Experience demonstrates that national leadership,
ownership and inclusiVity are central to post-conflict
peacebuilding and must be reinforced by the promotion
of the inclusive policies so essential to genuine national
ownership. We believe that where peacebuilding efforts
are rooted in inclusive consultative processes, the State
and its institutions have greater legitimacy and are more
trusted. On the other hand, the absence of inclusive
policies in the wake of conflict all too often results
in control of a State being contested and can lead to a
violent relapse into conflict.

There is no doubt that State legitimacy and the
rebuilding of State institutions in the aftermath of
conflict are vital and critical to the attainment of
sustainable peace. That is why, in our View, the security
sector and justice institutions must be accorded special
attention as organs for the protection of the population
and the defence of the State. We call on all partners
to support capacity-building for the police, improving
prison conditions and strengthening justice institutions
in States that are emerging from conflict in order to
ensure some measure of sustainable peace.

Nigeria welcomes the priority that the United
Nations gives to advancing women's participation in
post-conflict, political and development processes. It
is significant that more women have been appointed
as mediators and special envoys by the Secretary-
General over the past five years. Since women are
disproportionately affected by conflicts and in
conflicts, it is appropriate that women mediators, who
can relate better to other women, are involved in the
search for peace.

As a keen contributor to global, regional and
subregional peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding
efforts, Nigeria is encouraged by the focus of the
ongoing 2015 review of the peacebuilding architecture.
We welcome the emphasis on strengthening
relationships with the African Union and other
subregional organizations. I listened intently to the
statement of the Ambassador of Spain, who has so
eloquently highlighted this. I believe that enhanced
synergy between the PBC and regional and subregional
organizations would bolster our collective efforts.

It is our hope that the five case studies, all of
them on the African continent, will yield valuable
peacebuilding lessons derived from the experiences of
the countries concerned.

We want to affirm and reaffirm our strong support
for the PBC, and we remain fully committed to its
objectives. We urge Member States and all stakeholders
to strengthen their engagement with the Commission,
since doing so would greatly improve its capacity to
contribute to the building of a safer, more secure and
peaceful world.

