Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): Let me begin by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her
briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria.

South Africa remains gravely concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation in Syria. We, as Council
members, have had many discussions on the plight
of the Syrian people and how best to improve their
circumstances. In that regard, South Africa welcomes
the efforts of the United Nations and its implementing
agencies in providing life-saving aid to millions
of Syrians through the cross-border humanitarian
assistance operations. We fully support the need for the
programme and hopes that its mandate will be renewed
in due course.

My delegation has noted the reports of an escalation
in hostilities in north-western Syria with concern. The
destruction of civilian infrastructure, particularly
health and education facilities, is particularly alarming,
as it has a disproportionate effect on the most vulnerable
groups of society, that is, women, children, the elderly
and people with disabilities. South Africa reiterates its
call to all the parties to comply with their obligations
under international law, particularly with regard to the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. It is
also important that the parties to the various ceasefire
agreements abide by their obligations under them. With
regard to Rukban, we note the fact that approximately
4,000 people want to leave the camp and urge all
parties to provide the assistance needed to support
their departure in a safe and dignified manner. My
delegation also recognizes the importance of providing
the assistance needed for those remaining in Rukban
and call on the relevant parties to ensure that.

In conclusion, South Africa urges all the parties
to exercise the utmost restraint and to work to
de-escalate the hostilities and ensure respect for
Syria's territorial integrity and sovereignty. As we
have said many times before, the situation in Syria
cannot be solved through military means. The only
way for long-term peace, stability and prosperity for
Syria and her people is through dialogue, negotiation
and the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
We look forward to Special Envoy Pedersen's briefing
tomorrow, particularly with regard to the work of the
Constitutional Committee. And like others, I want to
welcome the Deputy Minister of Kuwait, who is here
with us today.

