Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): While congratulating
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of September and
thanking you for giving my delegation an opportunity
to contribute to today's briefing on the situation in
Sierra Leone, I should like, on behalf of His Excellency
President Ernest Bai Koroma, the Government and
the people of Sierra Leone, to convey our profound
appreciation for the continued support and unfailing
interest of the Security Council, the wider membership
of the United Nations and our international partners in
consolidating our hard-won peace and security.

We wish to express our sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his ninth report (S/2012/679)
on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL),
which covers the period 1 March to 31 August. The
report meticulously highlights the progress made
and the remaining challenges in our efforts at peace
consolidation and transition to a more development-
oriented phase. We note with profound appreciation
the instructive review provodied courtesy of Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General Jens Toyberg-
Frandzen, which critically focused on the upcoming
elections and issues of interest and concern in the post-
election phase in Sierra Leone.
We also express our sincere thanks and appreciation
to the members of the Sierra Leone configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) through its
Chair, Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski of Canada,
for the unremitting commitment and strong support
they continue to demonstrate in the pursuit of peace
and security in Sierra Leone. We note with particular
interest Mr. Rishchynski's rundown on the preparations
for the conduct of the elections on 17 November and
the necessary support required of UNIPSIL and the
agencies and programmes before and during the post-
election transition, as well as his views on future support
to Sierra Leone's political and economic priorities. We
are quite in agreement with the facts set forth in his
briefing.

The end of the conflict in 2002 marked the
collective resolve of the people of Sierra Leone to bring
an end to 11 years of nightmare, and their preference for
peace, security and development. Since then, with the
support of the Security Council, the United Nations in
general and international partners, remarkable progress
has been made in charting a path for a peaceful, secure,
democratic Sierra Leone and its future prosperity. As
we commend all of us and relevant stakeholders for the
gains made, some of which are quite irreversible, it is
crucial that together we continue to tackle the remaining
challenges in order to further advance and consolidate
comprehensively our peacebuilding priorities.

Key among them is the increasing need to address
the economic, social and governance challenges to
match the growing expectations of Sierra Leoneans.
As already stated by the Chair of the configuration,
several of those challenges are long-term in nature and
will require sustained effort over a substantial period
of time, since much depends on the global economic
situation and the overall subregional security climate.

As we continue to make steady progress in
addressing the three risks areas of youth unemployment,
corruption and illicit drug trafficking and organized
crime identified in our Agenda for Change and endorsed
by the Sierra Leone PBC configuration, we are equally
committed to making progress in strengthening our
health care, energy, education, agriculture and transport
infrastructure. Those areas, when fully developed,
will catalyse prospects for job creation, address key
peacebuilding priorities and put Sierra Leone on the path
to sustainability and resilience. Fostering partnership
with the international community to achieve the highly
interlinked and desirable goals of peace, security
and development remains a primary concern of the
Government and the people of Sierra Leone.
The Government will continue to demonstrate
strong political leadership in dealing with issues
of political violence in whatever shape or form and
irrespective of party affiliation, and, through due
process, will continue to ensure that perpetrators of
violence are brought to justice, as was evident in the
conviction of those involved in the political violence in
Freetown in Janurary. In that regard, the Government
released a white paper on the report of the Shears-
Moses Commission of Inquiry on the political violence
of March 2009 and continues to make progress in
addressing its recommendations, including working
with all national stakeholders and international
partners to establish an independent police complaints
committee and strengthening the Independent Media
Commission to improve its monitoring procedures over
media matters and actors.

President Koroma continues to constantly engage
all stakeholders, with a view to encouraging and
promoting political dialogue towards the attainment
of a collective commitment to peaceful, free, fair,
transparent and credible elections. In that regard, we call
to the Council's attention the signing by all 10 registered
political parties and other relevant stakeholders of the
"Declaration on the 2012 elections", on 18 May - a
code of conduct for the elections aimed at ensuring
peaceful and violence-free elections. That is ample
demonstration of the commitment of the Government
and the people of Sierra Leone to peaceful, free, fair
and credible elections with the hope that the results will
be accepted by all.

We therefore continue to urge the Security Council
and the United Nations in general, as well as our
international partners, to maintain their full support
for the ongoing electoral process. The presidential,
parliamentary and local council elections scheduled
for 17 November 2012, as has been noted, remain a
crucial test for the consolidation of peace, security and
democracy in Sierra Leone. Continued commitment
and support from international partners to assist the
Government in strengthening key national democratic
institutions such as the Political Parties Registration
Commission, the Independent Media Commission,
the National Commission for Democracy, the National
Electoral Commission, the Human Rights Commission
of Sierra Leone and the Sierra Leone Broadcasting
Corporation, remains of primary significance.

I am confident in reporting to the Council that
preparations for the presidential, parliamentary and
local elections are on course and at an advanced stage,
with the National Electoral Commission continuing to
demonstrate transparency and credibility throughout
the process. At the invitation of the Sierra Leone
Configuration, the Chair of the National Electoral
Commission gave a comprehensive briefing to
members of the Configuration in New York in June on
the preparations for the elections.

Recent activities aimed at improving the electoral
climate have included the presidential assent by His
Excellency Mr. Ernest Bai Koroma to the Public
Elections Law, which consolidates all existing electoral
legislation into a single document; the appointment
of a new Chair of the Political Parties Registration
Commission after the death of the incumbent, in order
to enhance the Commission's capacity to be actively
functional in the discharge of its mandate; and the
inauguration of the electoral courts to deal with electoral
offences and related matters in order to ensure due
process, as well as support for the machinery ofjustice
through UNIPSIL's collaboration with Government in
the training ofjudges, prosecutors, police investigators
and paralegal staff. To provide equal access to air time
and programmes of the Sierra Leone Broadcasting
Corporation, an elections guideline prepared by the
Corporation was adopted by all political parties on
9 August and followed by the establishment of an
elections unit to focus specifically on elections matters.

In line with the recommendations of the Truth and

Reconciliation Commission aimed at addressing the root
causes of conflict in Sierra Leone, the Government is
continuing to collaborate with all national stakeholders
and the United Nations in promoting the drafting and
enactment of the gender equality bill, so as to enhance
women's participation in the decision-making process.
The Government is also continuing to strengthen its
efforts to make progress towards the education of the girl
child and the provision of free health care to pregnant
women, lactating mothers and children under 5 years of
age. Furthermore, with support from the Peacebuilding
Fund and the International Organization for Migration,
the National Commission for Social Action commenced
a new round of payments of reparations to the remaining
victims of the 11-year conflict.

The Agenda for Change and the United Nations
Joint Vision aligned with it continue to provide a
strong partnership link between Sierra Leone and
the United Nations, as well as the donor community.
Its implementation has so far had a great impact
on peacebuilding. Sierra Leone today is considered
a best practice in donor coordination as well as a
peacebuilding success story. In that regard, we stress
the need for the international community to continue to
invest in success, in the spirit of the New Deal arrived
at in Busan on aid effectiveness, and to recognize
the need for special attention to be paid to countries
emerging from conflict - Sierra Leone being one of
the pilot countries. The preparation of the successor
development framework to the Agenda for Change,
anchored in the New Deal and entitled Agenda for
Prosperity, is well under way, and some of its key
elements will be highlighted during the presentation
of the second joint progress report on the Agenda for
Change at the Sierra Leone Configuration meeting to
be held soon.

The Chair of the Sierra Leone Configuration,
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski, visited Sierra
Leone in January. His report and the briefing by
the Configuration underscored the progress made
in addressing key peacebuilding priorities and the
need for enduring support, particularly in the area of
youth unemployment and empowerment, building the
capacity of the police, and the need for strong private-
sector growth, which could translate into more tangible
peace dividends and sustainable peace consolidation.
At an open briefing by the Security Council team after
its visit to Sierra Leone in May, similar sentiments were
also expressed on the progress made and the need for
support to address the present challenges.
We commend the support of the United Nations and
international partners for the work of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone and hail the judgement passed against
Mr. Charles Taylor by the Court for crimes against
humanity and violations of international humanitarian
law committed in Sierra Leone during the course of
the conflict. We therefore urge the United Nations and
international partners to continue to support the Court
towards the completion of its work.

Let me conclude by welcoming the new
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jens Toyberg-Frandzen, and assuring him of
the Government's interest and of its readiness and
willingness to cooperate with him in order to ensure
a successful outcome of his mission in Sierra Leone. I
am sure that by now he must be convinced that Sierra
Leoneans are very friendly, hospitable and ordinarily
peaceful. We also express thanks and appreciation to
the staff of UNIPSIL, United Nations agencies and
programmes in Sierra Leone, and all our international
partners for their unreserved commitment to achieving
Sierra Leone's peacebuilding objectives along with our
development transformation goals.

As in the previous general elections held in 2002
and 2007, we look forward once again to peaceful, free,
fair and credible elections acceptable to all.

Before closing, I should like to make some
comments on the issue of nomination fees, as raised
in the briefing by the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General. I should like to put on record the
fact that first, the decision was taken by an independent
body - the National Electoral Commission - and
that secondly, due process was ensured, as it was
discussed and debated in Parliament, and the ayes had
it. Thirdly, it should perhaps be brought to the attention
of the Council that it is a known factor that some of the
political parties had to levy nearly 50 million leones for
an aspirant to be a presidential candidate for the next
elections - that is asking for hundreds of millions for
the national presidential elections for each candidate.

Furthermore, it is a known factor that some other
parties have tried to introduce mechanisms aimed at
more or less spreading out the burden of that fee by
ensuring that they get it out of the fees contributed to
the parties by aspirants, out ofwhich proceeds they will
bond the nomination fee for the successful aspirant who
becomes the candidate. So mechanisms are to be put in
place by the parties themselves to make sure that the
burden is spread out and that no one member bears it
alone.

