Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on taking up the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also express my thanks and esteem to
the outgoing President, the Permanent Representative
of New Zealand, for his able guidance of the Council's
work in September. I further thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2016/812), and Mr. Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing.

The situation in Darfur in the reporting period
reflects great improvement on the security front. The
Sudan Armed Forces have succeeded in pushing back
against rebel groups in all of the states and subregions
of Darfur, with the exception of certain pockets of
Jebel Marra, a subregion of Central Darfur, which is
one of the five administrative units of Greater Darfur.
I am just explaining the geography of the area we are
looking at today. It is the subregion of the Jebel Marra
that is being used by the/Abdul Wahid rebels.

The five Federal states of Darfur and the
Government in Khartoum have spared no effort in
restoring security and to prevent tribal conflicts.
The number of conflicts has declined and their
consequences are now almost non-existent. According
to humanitarian statistics, after the security situation
improved, the number of voluntary returned internally
displaced persons (IDPs) increased. More than 150,000
IDPs have returned to their villages and enjoy security
and basic services in those villages, provided, most
notably, by the brotherly State of Qatar and the Arab
League under the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
The Sudanese Government is also doing its utmost to
address the needs of displaced persons and those who
wish to stay in camps by integrating such camps into
villages and providing the necessary services.

At the beginning of September, with His Excellency
the President of the Republic of the Sudan and the
participation and support of His Highness Sheikh
Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani of Qatar, the President
of Chad and the President of the Central African
Republic, Darfur marked the end of the Darfur Regional
Authority, which had been established pursuant to the
2011 Doha Document for Peace in Darfur to supervise
the implementation of the Agreement's provisions.
That Agreement, and in particular the administrative
referendum, was fully implemented, in which the people
of Darfur decided to keep the current system with the
five states. There was broad participation, which means
that the region's residents are now enjoying security and
their rights and freedoms. That was also demonstrated
by their participation in the administrative referendum
and other activities, including construction, in order to
change the face of a region that we hold very clearly.

The Sudanese Government is sparing no effort to
ensure sound and comprehensive peace in the country,
while pushing back the spectre of violence and war. The
President of the Republic launchedthe National Dialogue
initiative, with a special oversight committee that began
deliberations so as to submit recommendations during
to the National Dialogue Conference on 10 October. The
door is open and everyone has been invited - those
who hope to join these efforts for peace, stability and
rejection of violence. We would like to build a country
on a foundation of unanimity and consensus.

I therefore appeal to the international community
and the Council to bring pressure to bear on all those
who do not wish to join in the efforts of national
dialogue. I would remiss were I not to mention the
signing by some armed groups and political parties of
the road map in Addis Ababa, under the auspices of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel. On the
other hand, Abdul Wahid and his rebels have rejected
all initiatives and appeals for peace and negotiation
and are counting on support offered by some countries.
From this forum, I would like to call upon all of those
providing protection and support to put an end to it and
to put pressure on the movement to ensure that it joins
efforts in Darfur.

I would like to reiterate that it is high time to begin
implementing the exit strategy for African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur to draw down
on troop levels in a mission where there is really no
more need for such troops, in particular in the west,
north and south of Darfur. Once again, the Sudanese
Government would like to see that drawdown carried
out in a gradual manner, in several stages, to ensure
that the Mission is handed over to the United Nations
country team to work to rebuild peace and security in
the country within the framework of development.

The report of the Secretary-General highlights
several positive aspects in Darfur, notably the rebuilding
of peace and a reduction in crime and banditism. The
report also mentions the reduction in the number of
tribal conflicts during the reporting period. There was
also reference to the activities of armed groups. The
Government's efforts to ensure peace and security
in Darfur are also stressed in the report. Once again,
I would like to reaffirm that our Government is
determined to cooperate and coordinate efforts with
the Mission to ensure that it is able to fully carry out
its mandate, including the exit strategy, according to
resolution 1769 (2007). Our Government has made a
firm commitment to the Mission since its deployment
to date and until the very last soldier leaves. I would
also like to share the comments made by the Head of
the Mission, who said that the issuance of visas is no
longer a problem for the Mission and that the Sudanese
Government has taken the necessary action in order to
allow containers of rations to be shipped through.

(spoke in English)

Finally, 13 years ago, in 2003, conflict erupted
in Darfur. At that time, it was considered to be the
worst conflict in the world. In 2004, the N'Djamena
Agreement was signed and followed up by the Abuja
Agreement in 2006, but to no avail. Spoilers from within
and outside of the Sudan effectively joined hands. In
2011, thanks to the joint efforts by the Government of
the Sudan, the United Nations, the African Union and
the Arab League, the Doha Agreement was concluded
and eventually implemented up to September this year,
when we officially celebrated the end of the conflict.

During his meeting with the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Sudan last week, the Secretary-General
thoughtfully and earnestly stated that, together, we had
charted troubled waters and come a long way. Images
of Darfur and its war were everywhere, and now we are
talking about reconstruction, development and an exit
strategy. Now is not the time to allow spoilers wearing
various disguises and masks to prolong the conflict in
the Sudan and destabilize the country. They will not
budge but, together, with the Security Council, we are
now more confident that that will not be allowed to
happen.

