The Secretary-General: It is my great pleasure to
welcome you today to this ministerial meeting of the
Security Council of the United Nations. It is also an honour
for me, Madam President, to greet you on this historic
occasion - historic for two reasons: First, it coincides with
the fiftieth anniversary of this Organization. Secondly, this
is the first time that, at the ministerial level, a woman has
presided over this body. This is an affirmation of the
essential role that women must play at the highest level of
international diplomacy. It is gratifying that this takes place
so soon after the Conference on Women in Beijing, which
was itself a landmark.

This gathering of Ministers responsible for the conduct
of the foreign affairs of States in every region of the world
is significant. To have so many distinguished individuals
here is a welcome and impressive event. I express my
gratitude to all of you for your presence.

Given the complex world in which we live, meetings
at this level are necessary. They help strengthen this
organ, which today more than ever is playing the role
envisaged for it by the Charter.

Every great conflict of history has been followed by
a time of reconstruction and transformation. New ways of
solving problems need to be found. Here in this Chamber
lie the responsibility and the privilege of seeking to shape
the future under vastly changed international conditions.

Experience over the past few years assures us that
this task will not be easy. Patience and determination will
be required. Cooperation is essential. Concepts must be
re-examined. Institutions will have to be reformed. New
approaches will have to be adopted even as fundamental
principles of international relations are maintained.

The Security Council is itself an impressive example
of the fact that the structures and mechanisms available to
us can adapt and evolve to meet new challenges. In crisis
after crisis over the past few years, the distinguished
representatives who sit in the chairs you now occupy have
been part of a transforming and positive process of
change.

The Security Council has been functioning more
flexibly, continuously and creatively than ever before. Its
work ranges across a far wider spectrum than in the past.
Along with its more traditional responses in resolving
conflicts, the Council has taken pioneering positions on
sanctions, preventive deployment, international war-crimes
tribunals, confidence building, and through the many
stages of democratization.

The work has often been frustrating. There have
been setbacks and there have been successes. But, overall,
the example of the Security Council's performance should
be an inspiration to all who must face the frequently
agonizing decisions of this age of ambiguity and change.

The ever-increasing and varied agenda of the
Council has placed new demands on the Secretariat,
which itself is adapting to the realities of today's world.
As I have repeatedly stated, I am determined that the
Secretariat should become more effective in carrying out
the tasks assigned to it by the Council. To this end, the
process of reform which I launched at the outset of my
term in office is under way and will continue. If we are

 

to meet the challenges ahead, it is essential that the Security
Council and the Secretariat should work closely together.
For several years now the Council has succeeded in
achieving consensus on most of its decisions. A spirit of
cooperation prevails. So, too, the relationship between the
Secretariat and the Council has become more interactive
and dynamic, and we have to continue to work together in
order to improve our methods and our actions.

(spoke in French)

It is in this framework that I wish to say once again
that the implementation of peace-keeping operations is for
me a subject of genuine concern, particularly because at
present Member States owe the United Nations more than
$3.4 billion.

The operations in the former Yugoslavia alone cost
approximately $4.7 million per day. The current situation
compels us to limit our action and to take drastic measures
for the future. This, in my view, has two consequences, the
importance of which must not be underestimated.

The first is a financial consequence. It is leading the
United Nations to reject for purely monetary reasons
actions that would none the less be politically desirable. In
a way, each of our peace-keeping operations is carried out
at the expense of others. Hence, we risk allowing financial
constraints to overtake political necessities.

This brings with it a second consequence that is no
less serious, because it is an ethical one. The United
Nations runs the risk of being constrained in its choice of
operations on the basis of criteria and reasons that run
counter to the principles of universality and equality
contained in the Charter. Some conflicts are in danger of
being forgotten for reasons that have nothing to do with the
suffering they cause but, rather, because they take place in
regions to which the world pays less attention. The United
Nations thus runs the risk of being accused of following
two sets of criteria, of using a double standard in choosing
its actions in the service of peace.

I am sure that all of you here are well aware of all
that. Your presence here today demonstrates in striking
fashion the importance that you all attach to the multilateral
diplomacy of the world Organization. This is for me a
source of encouragement, and it must be for every people
and every nation a real reason for hope.

