Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation of Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeic', in this meeting, and we share
the assessments he has made here today.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for
his briefing on the situation of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
which paints a worrisome picture of the situation in the
province. That is no surprise. No matter how convincing
Ms. Vlora Citaku's interesting interpretation of history
and contemporary realities may be, the situation in
Kosovo is characterized by ongoing crisis and disorder.
Clashes with the opposition regularly spill out into the
street and mass confrontations erupt against the police.
We hope that the international presence will manage to
keep the situation under control.

The situation of the Kosovar Serbs remains
very serious. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/99) notes instances of physical violence used
against them, including the stoning of a bus with
internally displaced persons and gunfire against
Serbian homes. After UNESCO rejected Kosovo's
application for membership, further flagrant evidence
was received of threats against Orthodox holy sites in
Kosovo. In January, participants in anti-Government
demonstrations in Pristina desecrated the unfinished
basilica of the Church of Christ the Saviour in that city
without intervention by the Kosovar police.

The main channel for communication between
Belgrade and Pristina is the dialogue mediated by
the European Union (EU). Despite the important
agreements reached in August 2015, there has been
little real progress in that area. First of all, for the
time being the key idea of creating an association of
Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo exists only on
paper. That project was intended to contribute to the
improvement of inter-ethnic relations in the province
by granting genuine rights to the Serbian community.
The parties agreed to that in April 2013 - almost three
years ago.

The situation is hardly satisfactory, and the reason
for that is simple. It is due to the continuing neglect by
the Kosovar side of its commitments, and to attempts to
unilaterally revise its commitments under the pretext
of the rulings of the so-called Constitutional Court of
Kosovo. European Union mediators remain silent and
appear to lack the strength - or possibly the will - to
force Pristina to play by the rules. Nor has their been
much headway after the latest round of high-level
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on 26 January.
It appears that the meeting was a simple observation
of formalities.

There is a major situation around which dialogue
has been taking place. As we know, in December
2015 membership discussions were launched between
Serbia and the European Union under chapter 35,
"Other matters", in which the issues of Kosovo are
to be addressed. The Brussels negotiating platform
has a number of provisions that are cause for serious
concern for the Serbian side. It is difficult not to shake
the impression that the majority of the EU, which has
been seeking to legitimize Kosovo statehood, is trying
to push Belgrade to surrender its positions one step at
a time and to blackmail it with the suspension of its
membership in the European Union. How else can we
interpret the demand to stop Belgrade's financing of
Serbian municipalities or the forcing of Serbs to adopt
Kosovar insignia? How can we interpret the sending
of statements concerning pension payments by Serbia
to Kosovar agencies, or the right for citizens of third
countries to enter Serbia? On what basis are these
demands being made? Resolution 1244 (1999), which
remains the framework for the peace settlement, does
not mention any of that. The EU approach to mediation
raises, at the very least, serious questions about
its impartiality.

Steady progress in repairing the legacy of the
conflict, including investigating the crimes of the
Kosovo Liberation Army, without which it will be
impossible to achieve inter-ethnic reconciliation.
The readiness of the Netherlands to host the main
infrastructure of the specialist court is a step forward.
At the same time, more than five years have passed
since Dick Marty, Deputy of the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe, submitted a report
that launched real work in that area. The time for the
international community to at least partially atone for
its moral responsibility to the victims it was unable to
protect is slowly passing. Unfortunately, we see that the
launching of the tribunal mechanism is being delayed
due to the domestic situation in Kosovo, where the idea
is causing acute protest, especially from the opposition.
We hope that this year there will be progress on the
matter. Crimes need to be investigated, and criminals,
no matter what position they currently occupy, need to
be punished.

At the same time, against the backdrop of the
ongoing lack ofjustice in relation to the fighters of the
Kosovo Liberation Army, we are puzzled by the guilty
verdict handed down by the Court of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo against the
Kosovo Serb leader Oliver Ivanovie, who received the
severe punishment of nine years of prison. Ivanovie
was found guilty of killing Albanians, based on flimsy
arguments and without concrete testimony that he
personally took part or ordered those killings. We hope
that within the framework of the upcoming appeals
process, the international judges will rectify what has
emerged as a politicized verdict.

On more than one occasion, we have drawn attention
to the danger of disregarding the fact that the lack of
proper law and order in Kosovo leads to the use of
territory by Islamic terrorist groups for recruiting and
training of militants. A recent and alarming indication
of that was the arrest of an armed group of Islamists
near the monastery of Visoki Deeani in late January.
According to several reports, the members of that
group were carrying the insignia of the Islamic State.
We hope that that case will be thoroughly investigated
and that the channels used by the extremists to
penetrate Kosovo and acquire supplies will be shut
down. It is still incomprehensible why the international
institutions lack any information concerning the
circumstances surrounding the Kumanovo incident,
involving incursions by a group of militants from
Kosovo in Macedonia in May 2015.

In conclusion, we wish to confirm that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
remains a key element of the international presence
and control over the situation, making it possible to
maintain relative stability in the province. In such
conditions, we believe it extremely important to ensure
that the Mission's human and financial resources
remain unchanged. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains
fully in force as the international legal basis for a
settlement in Kosovo. We consider Pristina's ongoing
attempts to infiltrate international organizations to
be unacceptable, especially in the light of how the
modalities of Kosovo's participation in supranational
structures are defined in the First Agreement on
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations of
2013 between Belgrade and Pristina.

