Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank Special Representative Zerrougui for her briefing today. As the Security Council takes stock of the past year and prepares to renew the mandate of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the United States is impressed by the progress that the Congolese Government has made, including the end of two Ebola outbreaks, the conviction of a former Nduma defense du Congo warlord and judicial reform, with the appointment of more women to senior positions in the Congolese judiciary. Looking forward, the United States is focused on three key areas of the Council's work in the Democratic Republic of the Congo: first, the need for more progress on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and security sector reform (SSR); secondly, the full implementation of reforms to improve peacekeeping performance; and, thirdly, strategic planning for MONUSCO's responsible drawdown and transition. As we just heard from our Vietnamese counterpart, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sector reform are essential for lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We support President Tshilombo Tshisekedi's commitment to community reintegration for former combatants, but we have not yet seen a national DDR framework. Those responsible for abuses and violations of human rights must be held accountable, including at the commander level. The consequences of these delays are felt, for example, in South Kivu, when stalled DDR efforts resulted in armed group leaders returning to fighting, and in Ituri, where the Force de resistance patriotique de l'Ituri poses an increasing risk. We also hope to see progress in the development of a national security sector reform strategy and a significant decrease in human rights violations committed by Congolese security services. This is especially important as the United Nations reports a worrisome deterioration of the security situation in North and South Kivu. The United Nations is deeply concerned by the recent increase in attacks by the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF). Thirty ADF attacks killed more than 170 civilians in the last three months alone. We urge the United Nations to move forward with a nearly year- long delay in implementing the Force Intervention Brigade (FIB) enhancements that were mandated in last year's MONUSCO resolution (resolution 2502 (2019)). Congolese civilians have suffered the most from these delays. We expect FIB enhancements to be implemented immediately, and we welcome the United Nations commitment to the United Nations Peacekeeping Capabilities Readiness System for strategic force generation, including the prioritization of units at the rapid-deployment levels of readiness. Progress on these two priorities, we believe, is essential to achieve lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as for MONUSCO's responsible drawdown and transition. With that in mind, the United States welcomes the joint strategy between the United Nations and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its timeline for MONUSCO's exit from the Kasais and Tanganyika. We are encouraged to see the integrated transition task force for the Kasais and the joint United Nations justice reform support programme. But at the same time, we were disappointed not to see more progress towards the objectives detailed in last year's MONUSCO resolution, or more specific benchmarks in this year's recommendations. We hope to see the future development of more specific and measurable indicators and timelines for lasting peace and security in the Kivus and Ituri. We also urge MONUSCO to begin transitioning programmatic tasks to the United Nations country team and the Congolese Government, which would allow the Mission to focus on the difficult tasks of stabilization, DDR and SSR that will pave the way to sustainable peace. Finally, given the important role the region has to play in reaching sustainable peace in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we welcome last week's sharing of the United Nations strategy for the Great Lakes subregion. Although my delegation is still digesting the content, we welcome the focus on the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region and the high-level shuttle diplomacy by the United Nations Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region of Africa to engage in the search for political solutions to resolve the conflict. We also encourage giving more attention to responsible and conflict-free mineral supply chains as part of a holistic approach to addressing and preventing violence.
