Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from Arabic):
I am pleased at the outset to extend to you, Sir, my
warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month - all the
more because you represent a country that has long-
standing friendly relations with Tunisia. Your talents and
experience are the best guarantee for us that the Council's
work will be successful this month.

I wish also to pay a tribute to your predecessor as
President, Ambassador Karel Kovenka of the Czech
Republic, for the wisdom with which he guided the
Council's work last month.

 

The Council is holding an emergency meeting today
to discuss once again the Israeli practices in the occupied
Palestinian territories and, in particular, the risks faced by
Jerusalem as a result of the recent Israeli Cabinet decision
to expropriate Palestinian land and establish settlements on
it.

Since it occupied Jerusalem in 1967, Israel has
adopted a policy of Judaizing the city, changing its
characteristics, expropriating Palestinian land, forcing the
Arabs to leave their land and their property, preventing
them from engaging in any construction, imposing high
taxes on them and not allowing them to enter the city. At
the same time, the settlers are being encouraged to live in
East Jerusalem on land given to them free and in housing
sold to them at token prices.

Moreover, Israel has carried out some excavations
under the Al-Aqsa mosque under the pretext of looking for
the Temple of Solomon. These excavactions endanger the
structure of this holy mosque.

An Israeli Cabinet Minister has admitted that the
Israeli Government has expropriated since 1967 no fewer
than 2,300 hectares of land in East Jerusalem, on which
some 35,000 housing units have been built for settlers.

These Israeli policies and practices confirm Israel's
intentions to carry out its plan for "Greater Jerusalem" -
which means the total Judaization of the city. The latest
decision to expropriate more Palestinian land is just another
phase of that plan, designed to eliminate the Palestinian
entity, usurp Palestinian Arab rights in this Holy City and
separate Jerusalem completely from the rest of the West
Bank.

Here I should like to affirm the following points.

Firstly, the Israeli decision is in total contradiction
with the principles and foundations of international law. It
is also a blatant violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War.

Secondly, this decision is a grave threat to the peace
process that was launched in Madrid on the basis of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and
the principle of land for peace.

T hirdly, this decision is in contradiction with the
understanding reached at Oslo, specifically, with the
commitment not to undertake any change in Jerusalem's
status until there is a final agreement on that status under
the agreed agenda. Any decision on the future of
Jerusalem before these negotiations are concluded is
essentially invalid.

Fourthly, the question of Jerusalem is a serious
matter of concern not only to the Palestinian people and
the parties to the peace process; rather, it surpasses them
to include the Middle East and the Islamic nation as a
whole, because Jerusalem has a very special place in
Islamic hagiology. God Himself made it the first kiblah
and third holiest shrine, and anything that brings hurt to
Jerusalem cannot but cause outrage and anger.
The Tunisian Government, in a statement adopted on
7 May 1995, expressed its grave concern at the Israeli
decision to expropriate yet more Palestinian, Arab
territory in East Jerusalem. It deplored this action, which
is in total contradiction with United Nations resolutions
on occupied Jerusalem and with the Declaration of
Principles between Palestine and Israel, not to mention
Israel's own commitments in this respect. Members of
the Council will remember well the commitments made
by the Israeli Foreign Minister here in the United Nations
just a few weeks ago to the effect that Israel would stop,
finally and completely, expropriating Arab territories. In
just a few weeks, we have seen the reverse of that pledge
come true, and now the Israeli Cabinet, before the general
outcry from international public opinion, is yet again
making yet another commitment that will just be forgotten
as soon as the storm is past.

Tunisia, which has given the peace process its
blessing ever since the Madrid Conference and is
committed to contributing to it in such a way as to
guarantee legitimate Palestinian and Arab rights, calls
upon the international community to adopt a firm stance
on this issue in order to avoid a collapse of the peace
process. We should like to direct attention to the dangers
inherent in Israel's continued defiance of General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, and repeat
once again that there will be no success in establishing
the foundations for a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East if the peace process does not
include as principal objectives the recognition of all
legitimate Palestinian rights, the withdrawal by Israel
from all Palestinian Arab occupied territories, including
Jerusalem, and creation of a climate of confidence and
good faith.

 

We therefore call upon the international community in
general and the Security Council in particular to demand
that Israel show proof of a real desire to make the peace
process succeed. The peace process needs Israel to act more
responsibly and abandon mulish intransigence.

The Security Council must reaffirm its resolutions on
Jerusalem and not recognize the changes made by Israel in
its de jare situation and demographic structure. It must call
upon the Israeli Government to rescind its latest
expropriation decision. The United States and the Russian
Federation, the sponsors of the Peace Conference, should
assume special responsibility by taking a firm stance and
bringing pressure to bear so as to prevail upon Israel to
rescind its decision so that the peace process can succeed
and have as its outcome a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
