Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): I want to
first express my profound gratitude to you, Sir, and my
colleague from Spain and your delegations for taking
the initiative of organizing this very important meeting.
Our exchange today on the topic of peace and security
in Africa and challenges in the Sahel region are in
line with the briefing that the Department of Political
Affairs provided us on 22 March.

The Sahel region is the focal point of the
cumulative negative impact of several scourges, as
evidenced by the diverse perspectives of the briefers
whom we have just heard, and whom I would like to
warmly thank in the name of the Senegalese delegation
for having shed a raw light on our discussion. The
Sahel region could and should serve as a model for
experimentation and integrated implementation of
the major recommendations of the global processes
that the international community conducted from
2015 and 2016: the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
of the Third International Conference on Financing
for Development, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), the
Paris Agreement on climate change - which has been
referred to - the World Humanitarian Summit that was
just held in Istanbul, and preparations for third United
Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban
Development, or Habitat III, which will take place in
Quito in October.

In recent years, the types and number of criminal
activities perpetrated in the Sahel region have continued
to increase with the regular change of locations and
targets, demonstrating once again the level of flexibility
and capacity of adaptability of the terrorist groups
operating in the region, including Boko Haram, Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, the Mouvement pour l'unicite
et le jihad en Afrique de l'Ouest and Ansar el-Dine,
among others. The humanitarian consequences of those
terrorist attacks are tragic, including approximately
2.8 million displaced persons, 20 million affected,
and 4.5 million experiencing humanitarian insecurity,
including children, and insecurity in general.

As Mr. Laborde eloquently demonstrated, there is
undoubtedly an inextricable link between the scourges
of terrorism, transnational organized crime and
trafficking of all kinds that fundamentally undermines
the security and stability of the region. The nature of that
link therefore demands a holistic approach that takes
into consideration the political, security, ideological
and humanitarian aspects of that fight. In other words,
we can win this fight only through a multisectoral,
multidimensional and interregional approach that
incorporates West Africa, the Sahel, Central Africa
and the entire Sahelo-Saharan region and addresses
the three dimensions of prevention, repression and
protection. In this fight, the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel, which is now in operation,
needs to assume a full role. We have just hear from its
Head, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ibn Chambas. We also believe it important to ensure
better cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union, particularly through the African Peace
and Security Architecture.

It is also important to speed up the operationalization
ofthe Multinational Joint Task Force for the fight against
Boko Haram. That group undoubtedly poses one of the
greatest challenges to peace and security in the region,
where it acts with terrible cruelty. In order to curb the
terrorist threat, the second session of the Regional
Security Summit was held on 14 May in Abuja, with
the aim of taking stock of the strategies and actions
undertaken by the countries of the region and their
partners to fight terrorism in the Sahel. In a nutshell,
we sought to define an action plan to eradicate the root
causes of terrorism by focusing on investments for
development in the affected regions and delivery of the
social needs of the most vulnerable, in particular young
people, but also women, as Ms. Ibrahim mentioned,
through employment, training and education.

When he spoke at that meeting in Abuja, President
Macky Sall of Senegal said that "the fight against
terrorism may be in vain if the funding sources of
this scourge are not cut off". He called for a focus on
education, training and employment, as well as on the
creation ofincome-generating activities in order to push
back ignorance and provide young people the reasons and
the means to hope. President Macky Sall added:

"It is in ignorance, poverty and social exclusion that
terrorism finds fertile ground for its development
by the indoctrination of some and the exploitation
of others".

He concluded that otherwise we would simply be
treating the symptoms and not the malady.

The challenges to peace and security in the
Sahel region are multiple, but they are not unknown;
numerous studies have identified them. As a country
of the region, Senegal naturally faces such challenges
and constraints, some of which I would wish to recall.
Over and beyond the threats I noted earlier, I would
point to such phenomena as climate change, with its
corollaries drought, desertification, soil degradation,
soil salinization and, of course, the increasing scarcity
of and problems in maintaining water resources. These
diverse factors seriously hinder the development and
well-being of communities, making them vulnerable to
various scammers who exploit their misery to satisfy
their vile purposes.

To those elements, we can also add the issue ofaccess
to property and the endemic problems of locusts and
grain-eating birds, all of which have a negative impact
on crops, food security and already modest incomes.
Cornered by persistent poverty, desperate young people
in these localities have no alternative than to change
their way of life, generating the phenomenon of rural
exodus that increases pressure on towns confronted
with overcrowding and poverty.

For others, there is a an even more perilous
adventure of clandestine migration towards an El
Dorado that does not exist. This exercise often consists
of facing the sea aboard vessels of dubious reliability or
leaving home for the great desert, abandoning in both
cases their fates to the hands of smugglers who have
few qualms about exploiting their vulnerability.

On a slightly different note, conflicts and tensions
require entire families to leave their homes to crowd
into camps for refugee camps or internally displaced
persons. The challenges to peace and security in the
Sahel region are numerous, but we have a good part of the
solution, notably through the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, which contains solutions to the
well-defined problems that the region still faces. For
example, I would cite the promotion of programmes to
mitigate and adapt to climate change and the focus on
building long-term resilience in the region.

A German research organization, the Planck
Institute for Meteorology, has stated that by the year
2050, at the current pace of climate change, if nothing
is done, all the northern region of the African continent
will become uninhabitable for human beings. We can
all imagine all the consequences if that were to happen
for both the North and the South of Africa. The German
research Max Planck Institute predicts that if nothing
is done, at the current pace of climate change, by
2050 the entire northern part of the African continent
will be inhabitable for the human species. We can
all imagine the many consequences for northern and
southern Africa.

