Mr. Laher (South Africa): My delegation would
like to express its appreciation to Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing to the Council.
My delegation would also like to associate itself with
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

As we gather here today to consider the situation
in the Middle East, we cannot ignore the uprisings that
have engulfed the region and the Arab world in
general. These developments have so far resulted in the
fall of long-standing regimes in Tunisia and Egypt. The
authorities in other countries in the region are being
challenged by their populations. The international
community will certainly gather some important
lessons from this historic chapter. What is clear is that
the status quo in which the rights of people have gone
unfulfilled for decades cannot continue. In that light,
the long-standing Israeli-Palestinian conflict must be
resolved. The two peoples deserve to live in peace and
security.

The September deadline by which we hope to
achieve a viable, independent and contiguous
Palestinian State is almost upon us. Yet, the parties do
not seem any nearer to returning to the negotiating
table to achieve that goal. A return to negotiations by
both sides is critical. However, Israel's continued
disrespect for the decisions of the Security Council,
and the United Nations in general, by continuing to
build illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, remains an
obstacle. These actions change facts on the ground and
make agreement on final status issues much more
difficult to achieve. The inability of the Council to
adopt a resolution condemning such action despite the
overwhelming support for it is unfortunate. We
nonetheless call on Israel to respect the myriad
resolutions adopted by the Council and immediately
cease the construction of illegal settlements.

We had hoped that today's debate would have
taken place after a meeting of the Quartet, whose
outcome we had hoped would have been critical to the
resumption of direct negotiations. We had expected the
Quartet to take up its responsibility and draw parameters
within which the parties could constructively engage.
Those parameters essentially include an agreement on
the borders of the two States based on the 4 June 1967
lines, security arrangements, a just, fair and agreed
solution to the refugee question and the fulfilment of the
aspirations of both parties for Jerusalem. We urge the
Quartet, of which we as the United Nations are an
essential part, to convene soon to proceed on that basis.

Intra-Palestinian unity is essential to move the
peace process forward. We encourage all efforts to
achieve that important objective. In that regard, we
welcome the ongoing negotiations between Fatah and
Hamas and hope that they will yield a positive result.
We also welcome the Palestinian announcement to hold
elections before September.

South Africa welcomes the Palestinian institution-
building efforts under the leadership of Prime Minister
Fayyad. We urge the international community to
continue to support those initiatives.

With regard to Gaza, we remain deeply concerned
about Israel's continued blockade. The international
community's demand that Israel end the illegal
blockade that has exacerbated the suffering of ordinary
civilians must be adhered to. The blockade and the
restrictions being imposed are in violation of
international humanitarian law, including article 23 of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, as well as contrary to
the will of the international community as expressed in
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1515 (2003) and
1860 (2009).

We reiterate the call for accountability for crimes
committed during the 2008-2009 Gaza conflict. In that
regard, in order to ensure justice, it is vital for the
parties to implement the recommendations of the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48).

South Africa also stresses the urgency of
reconstruction in Gaza. We call upon the international
community to exert serious efforts to compel Israel to
allow for the entry of all necessary construction
materials for at least the repair of destroyed and
damaged humanitarian infrastructure and United
Nations facilities, including schools of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, in order that dignity can be
restored to the people of Gaza. We also stress the
necessity of sustained commercial activity, including
both imports and exports, to promote the economic
recovery of livelihoods, businesses and industry in
Gaza.

We condemn the recent attacks from both Gaza
and southern Israel, which resulted in the deaths of
civilians, including school children. We urge the
parties to exercise restrain and to refrain from using
indiscriminate missile and other forms of air attacks,
which further exacerbate tensions in the area and bring
further untold suffering to ordinary civilians.

Israeli military attacks earlier this month on
Gaza, which led to civilian deaths, should be
condemned. We urge Israel to exercise restraint in
defending itself, to ensure that its actions do not harm
innocent civilians.

South Africa also joins those calling for the
release of the Israeli Staff Sergeant, as well as the
many Palestinian political prisoners held in Israeli
jails.

In conclusion, we believe that the current
developments in the Arab world will undoubtedly have
a bearing on the future of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and the broader Arab-Israeli conflict. In our
search for a solution to the Palestinian question, it is
now clearer than ever that we must not lose sight of the
broader regional question to which Palestine is
inextricably linked. We therefore call on the Council
and other stakeholders to accelerate efforts towards the
holistic resolution of the Middle East crisis, including
the Lebanese and Syrian tracks.

