Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Force Commanders of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL), the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) - General Ngondi, General
Dos Santos Cruz and General Iqbal Asi - for their
briefings to the Council. The operational and logistical
details shared by them today give us a glimpse into
the realities on the ground and the challenges faced
by peacekeepers. We pay tribute to the 111,000 brave
men and women in various peacekeeping missions
for their dedication and courage, as well as for their
professionalism and service.

Today, we also remember all military, police and
civilian peacekeepers who have laid down their lives in
United Nations peacekeeping. The safety and security
of peacekeepers and strengthened field security
coverage are of paramount importance. Safety and
security are the shared responsibility of this Council,
the Secretariat, host countries, troop-contributing
countries, police-contributing countries and the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping.

For the past 53 years, Pakistan has been one of
the largest troop contributors. Pakistan's participation
in diverse peacekeeping missions is an affirmation of
our abiding faith in the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

The briefings by the three Generals today
demonstrate that United Nations-led peacekeeping
controls violent conflicts, stabilizes post-conflict
fragility, catalyses internal political processes and
engages in peacebuilding. Peacekeeping has evolved
with the changing nature of conflicts. Professionalism
in peacekeeping ensures excellence in service
delivery, as well as safety and security. In that
context, pre-deployment training, including common
and standardized training, is vital for all mission
components. Different operational imperatives require
scenario-based training and exercises during the course
of active deployment. Such exercises are supplementary
to pre-deployment training. The case for the in-mission
assessment of pre-deployment training is therefore
compelling.

In Pakistan, we have developed peacekeeping
training modules that form part of the curriculums
for mandatory courses required in career progression.
We are willing to share our training programmes and
experiences with the Secretariat and the United Nations
membership.

In the recent past, two momentous decisions have
been taken in peacekeeping. First, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Security Council has
authorized "targeted offensive operations...in a robust,
highly mobile and versatile manner" (resolution 2098 (2013), 12 (b)) with the aim of neutralizing armed
groups. Secondly, the use of unarmed, non-offensive,
unmanned aerial vehicles has been authorized to
support peacekeepers operating under the MONUSCO
mandate. Both of those arrangements need to be
monitored closely to ascertain their effectiveness.
Positive and negative feedback, especially from Force
Commanders, will help us with the refinement of the
mandates and course correction. It will also enable
us to address in inclusive inter-governmental settings
some residual legal, operational, technical and financial
questions.

In MONUSCO, we would particularly appreciate
it the rules of engagement and concept of operation
conformed to tasks identified in resolution 2098 (2013)
for framework brigades and force intervention brigades.
I request the Force Commander of MONUSCO to
give us feedback about this arrangement and how it is
working on the ground.

As current Chair of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, we plan to hold a meeting on
the use of modern technology in peacekeeping missions
next month. Today's briefing by General Dos Santos
Cruz has provided useful input for our meeting.

We support the sharing of human and material
resources between neighbouring missions on a case-by-
case basis. In 2010, when the situation in cote d'Ivoire
deteriorated, Pakistani troops from UNMIL proceeded
to assist UNOCI. Our internal processes for authorizing
this movement were completed expeditiously. We
did not delay the transfer of Pakistani troops despite
serious logistical and operational constraints. Later
events proved that reinforcement from UNMIL was
critical to the success of UNOCI operations during the
crisis of 2010-2011.

Building on the insightful comments made by
General Iqbal Assi, I will make three points on
inter-mission cooperation.

First, inter-mission cooperation is an ad hoc
arrangement to make up for deficiencies in the wake of
a crisis. It is not a long-term solution.

Secondly, the question of the operational and
administrative control of assets being transferred
should be addressed up front. Each mission has its own
dynamics that undergird the calculation of the costs of
contingent-owned equipment. Moving to a different
mission entails change in dynamics, thus warranting
application of different financial modalities.

Thirdly, inter-mission cooperation is a contingency-
based exercise, ideally restricted to infantry units and
some enabling assets such as helicopters. Caution is
therefore necessary in the transfer of engineering units
and hospitals, which require more permanent measures.

I have a question for General Iqbal Asi. What are
the most difficult and in fact intractable challenges and
difficulties in the area of inter-mission cooperation?

I conclude my remarks by reiterating Pakistan's
support to United Nations peacekeeping and to the
noble cause upheld by the Blue Helmets all over the
world.

