Mr. Trautwein (Germany): At the outset, I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting, which is taking place at a
crucial point for the people of Afghanistan.

My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of the United
Kingdom as the presidency of the European Union.

I would like to express condolences to our
Spanish friends and partners, who lost 17 of their brave
peacekeepers in a terrible accident.

Since the conclusion of the Bonn Agreement in
December 2001, my country has constantly contributed
to the international community's efforts towards the
stabilization and reconstruction of Afghanistan as a
country ruled by democratic principles.

Today, we note with great satisfaction the
achievements of the Bonn process, in particular the
successful transition to elected political institutions, as
stated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2005/525). This process will be completed in mid-
September with the holding of parliamentary and local
elections. We appreciate that progress, and in view of
experiences in others regions, we must not take it for
granted.

Germany also acknowledges the prominent role
played by the United Nations since 2001 and its
outstanding work and that of its mission in
Afghanistan. The United Nations commitment in that
regard has been and will remain a key element on the
road to a democratic and stable Afghanistan.

We are nevertheless aware of the challenges lying
ahead for the post-Bonn process. They include the
security sector, institution-building and the rule of law
and the suppression of drug production and trafficking.
These challenges will require further commitment on
the part of the international community, working in
close cooperation with the Afghan Government. We
therefore welcome talks between the Afghan
Government and the United Nations on the post-Bonn
agenda.

As to our own national contributions, I should
like to point out that Germany has committed another
320 million euros for economic reconstruction from
2005 to 2008. Today, we provide the largest military
contingent to the International Security Assistance
Force - currently, 2,200 soldiers - and have recently
taken over the task of the Force's Regional Area
Coordinator in the north of Afghanistan. We continue
to run two provincial reconstruction teams in Kundus
and Faisabad. Germany is the lead nation for the
Afghan police force as part of the security sector
reform.

The suppression of the cultivation of and trade in
drugs - which has a heavy impact on the economy,
the security sector and institution-building - will
remain a major cross-sector challenge. We are seeking
ways and means to address this issue, together with the
United Kingdom lead and other partners.

