Ms. Rice (United States of America): First, I
should like to thank the presidency of the Security
Council for arranging this very important meeting on
the initiative of the Arab League. Thank you very much
for being here, Minister. I should also like to welcome
the presence of President Abbas in this Chamber. I
believe that this is a very important discussion, and the
United States is very pleased to participate.

On Tuesday, in the General Assembly, President
Bush affirmed the United States commitment to the
vision of two States - Israel and a viable, independent
Palestine - living side by side in peace and security.
The President believes strongly that both Israelis and
Palestinians deserve to live in dignity and with the
ability to pursue their aspirations. To this end, the
President directed me to work with moderate regional
leaders to help Palestinians reform their security
services and to support leaders from both sides as they
work together to resolve their differences.

President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert are

committed to peace. I look forward to working with

them, with our Quartet partners and with our regional

friends to bring about the conditions that will allow us
to accelerate progress on the road map.

This progress depends on many obligations that
both sides must fulfil. It depends, of course, on a true
Palestinian partner committed to peace. The United
States has unequivocally declared our intention to
support the re-emergence of such a partner, and,
together with other members of the Quartet, we have
called upon the Palestinian Authority to commit to the
three principles of the Quartet: renouncing terror and
violence, recognizing the right of Israel to exist and
accepting previous agreements and obligations,
including the road map. We welcome President Abbas's
efforts to achieve a unity government that reflects the
Quartet principles and that can facilitate engagement
on a range of political, security and economic
concerns.

We also welcome the meeting in New York, on
Monday, of Israeli Foreign Minister Livni and
President Abbas, and we are encouraged by statements
by Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas
indicating a willingness to resume direct talks. We
continue to urge all parties to foster a positive and
hopeful atmosphere in which those talks might take
place. And to this end we call again for the
unconditional release of Israel Defense Forces
Corporal Shalit, We also call for the immediate and
unconditional release of the other two Israeli soldiers,
who are being held by Hizbollah: Ehud Goldwasser
and Eldad Regev.

The United States is, of course, mindful of the
humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people, and we
have substantially increased our direct assistance to the
Palestinians to $468 million, in a package that includes
$275 million in humanitarian aid. Yesterday, we and
other members of the Quartet agreed to extend and
expand the temporary international mechanism to
ensure that Palestinian citizens can receive necessary
assistance. We have called for an increase in donor
support, and we have asked both parties to fully
implement their responsibilities under the Agreement
on Movement and Access, so that economic life can be
reborn in the Palestinian territory.

The Quartet has declared the urgent need to make
progress. I ask the members of the Council to support

the Quartet's efforts as we seek to help Israelis and
Palestinians achieve the conditions necessary to move
forward and to build the foundation for a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The
United States, I want to assure the Council, is fully
committed to this goal and to working actively and
urgently to achieve it.

In closing, let me just note that the last time we
were in this Chamber it was to adopt resolution 1701
(2006), which brought an end to the fighting in
Lebanon. That resolution is being implemented, but
there is much work to do. I look forward to the
continued engagement of this body to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) so that the
people of Lebanon might also live in peace and so that
the Government of Lebanon might fully extend its
authority throughout its territory.

