Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to join you, Sir, and
those who spoke earlier in expressing our profound
sympathy and heartfelt condolences to the Government and
the people of Bahrain on the untimely passing of His
Highness the Amir of Bahrain.

My delegation is deeply concerned about the
precarious situation in Sierra Leone. We welcome President
Kabbah's readiness to release rebel leader Foday Sankoh to
meet with other Revolutionary United Front (RUF) leaders.
This gesture by President Kabbah, we hope, will be the
beginning of a true dialogue.

The people of Sierra Leone had been subjected to
unspeakable human rights abuses for too long and, unless
reason prevails, this human tragedy is bound to continue or
even escalate. The recent escalation of hostilities resulted in
many disappearances, abductions, the recruitment of child
soldiers and violations of human rights and humanitarian
law on a great scale. What we have seen in Sierra Leone
could be a dangerous precedent in which rebels can
overthrow legitimate Governments in Africa. This must not
be allowed to happen.

My delegation therefore hails the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) and its determination and courage to
fight RUF rebels and their mercenary backers. Member
countries of ECOMOG have and are making human
sacrifices for Sierra Leone. The least the rest of us can do
is to support and sustain ECOMOG financially and
logistically.

We appeal to the international community to stand
by the democratically elected Government of President
Kabbah. It is of the utmost importance that the
international community contribute to ECOMOG's two-
pronged approach of military operations to deny the
rebels military victory and of encouraging dialogue to end
the conflict peacefully. My delegation supports the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL).

Finally, the future of Sierra Leone lies in the hands
of the people of Sierra Leone themselves. It demands that
the rebels recognize the legitimacy of President Kabbah's
Government and that they cooperate with the Government
to help end human suffering. It warrants pressure by the
international community on those who are supporting and
supplying the rebels.

