Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Morocco for the initiative of holding today's
open debate to discuss post-conflict peacebuilding. I
would also like to express my appreciation to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Ambassador Momen, the
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
for their respective statements.

Post-conflict peacebuilding plays an effective role
in eliminating the root causes of conflict. It has an
important bearing on achieving endurable peace and
sustainable development. Over the years, the United
Nations has been an active partner in post-conflict
peacebuilding in the countries where it has chosen to
work, where it has accumulated rich experiences and
achieved remarkable results. However, the organizations
involved also face a number of challenges. Here I want
to emphasize four points.

First, it is imperative to respect the ownership of
the countries concerned in post-conflict peacebuilding.
Post-conflict countries bear the primary responsibility
for their own peacebuilding. In assisting with
peacebuilding efforts, the United Nations and the
relevant agencies should strengthen partnerships with
the countries concerned, respect the priorities set by
those countries, and help them draw up their integrated
peacebuilding strategy based on their own conditions.
In the implementation of peacebuilding strategies,
it is important to emphasize capacity-building and
personnel training in those countries, fully utilizing
their existing human resources and expertise, and to
enhance their level of governance.

Secondly, it is important to tackle, as a matter of
priority, the root causes of conflict in post-conflict
peacebuilding, especially those related to economic
and social development. In post-conflict countries
and regions, economic reconstruction should be the
constant and overarching theme. Efforts to strengthen
economic security and development should be carried
out in parallel. Justice and the rule of law are important
in their own right; however, development merits
the primary attention. Only by achieving economic
reconstruction and recovery and only when people
can enjoy the peace dividend will there be an overall
situation that enables the promotion of political
reconciliation, the stabilization of security and the
establishment ofa political basis for the peace process.

Thirdly, post-conflict peacebuilding should enjoy
adequate and guaranteed resources. The international
community's swift and timely support in the form
of assistance is important in terms of achieving
peacebuilding objectives. The United Nations should
continue to pay attention to the financing requirements
of reconstruction programmes in the countries
concerned. The Organization should also urge the
international community to continue to provide
assistance to peacebuilding activities within those
countries and to work together to broaden the channels
for financing. In that connection, China commends
the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund for the active
role it has played and supports its efforts to improve its
work in enhancing the evaluation of the projects that it
has carried out and in enhancing the efficiency of the
utilization of resources.

Fourthly, it is important to strengthen coordination
and cooperation in post-conflict peacebuilding. The
United Nations should continue to play a leadership
role in post-conflict peacebuilding efforts and should
seek to establish a stable relationship, or coordination,
with the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund
and other international partners. At the same time, it
is important to bring into play the unique advantages
of regional organizations, including the African Union,
and subregional organizations in that respect. The
relevant agencies within the United Nations system
should have a clear division of labour and work together
more effectively. The United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission may have a greater role to play in helping
post-conflict countries in their peacebuilding activities.

China has been a strong supporter ofpeacebuilding
efforts in post-conflict countries and is ready to play its
due role in helping those countries in achieving durable
peace and sustainable development. The Chinese
delegation supports the draft presidential statement
that will be adopted at the end of today's meeting and
wishes to thank the Permanent Mission of Morocco to
the United Nations for their efforts in that regard.

