Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin my statement by welcoming the holding
of this open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including Palestine. I would also like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing, which reminds
us that our meeting today is taking place in a very
disturbing context in which the situation on the ground
is volatile, there is an ongoing unacceptable building
of settlements and violence; as well as a very difficult
humanitarian situation; in particular in Gaza.

However, in spite of these obstacles, the past year
has been marked by the ongoing commitment of the
international community to peace in the Middle East.
Indeed, from the French initiative, which the Permanent
Representative of France referred to quite elegantly,
to the efforts of stakeholders in the region, including
Egypt and the Russian Federation, and the issuance of
the Quartet's report (S/20l6/595, annex) on the situation
on the ground, the international community has shown
that it continues to have faith in a two-State solution.

The crowning achievement is that eight years
after the most recent action taken on this subject, the
Security Council, which has regularly focused on the
intensified and accelerated building of settlements,
adopted resolution 2334 (2016) last December. The
resolution calls for a halt to the settlements, which are
deemed illegal from the standpoint of international
law and reaffirms the two-State solution as the only
way for a positive and lasting outcome to the conflict.
The same resolution also invites us to pursue and
intensify diplomatic efforts to arrive at a settlement
to this dispute, which bears witness to our common
commitment to peace in the Middle East.

The peace has been threatened by considerable
obstacles, which we are regularly alerted to primarily
by the Secretary-General. Among the most disturbing
obstacles undoubtedly are the ongoing accelerated
building of settlements and the occupation of the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, which in addition to
dangerously imperilling the two-State solution, fuels
and spurs on hatred and violence affecting Palestinians
and Israelis alike, two peoples who must coexist in peace
and security, each within secure and internationally
recognized borders.

The most recent tragic illustration of this violence
was the attack in Jerusalem, on 8 January. We condemn
that attack and all acts of Violence or terrorism,
regardless of who the perpetrators are or what their
motivations are. In order to overcome these obstacles
to peace, Senegal, echoing the recommendations of
the Quartet's report, urges the parties to put an end to
the building of settlements and to related policies, as
well as to renounce violence and incitement to hatred.
This is what resolution 2334 (2016) calls for in order
to prevent acts of Violence against civilians, as well
as those intended to provoke or cause destruction or
terrorist actions, requires that the perpetrators for such
actions be brought to justice.

As the report of the Quartet reminds us, we cannot
ignore the dangers posed by the precarious situation
in Gaza, especially its catastrophic humanitarian
dimension, which affects 70 per cent of the nearly
2 million people living there. The demonstrations ofthe
people in Gaza last Sunday against the precariousness
of basic social services, especially electricity. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to acknowledge
the humanitarian dimension in the occupied territories
during the Council's briefings on the Middle East,
including Palestine.

We reiterate our appreciation to humanitarian
actors, in particular the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
for their efforts in support of Palestinian refugees. I
urge Member States to continue to provide assistance
to that Office, which has just launched an appeal for
emergency aid in the amount of $813 million. Beyond
the provision of humanitarian aid, we must help restore
the Palestinian economy, which is in a very difficult
situation, primarily as a result of the occupation,
but also as a result of reduced aid from international
partners. In this connection, I welcome the fact that
the French initiative provides for economic and
political incentives to make the two-State solution
more attractive and mutually beneficial for Israelis and
Palestinians. The same is true of the support needed
by the Palestinian Authority in its strategy of building
credible institutions and reaffirming the essential role
of civil society.

June 2017 will mark the very sad anniversary of
50 years of occupation of the Palestinian territories.
However, despite the frustrations that can arise from
the lack oftangible progress in the political process and
the difficult reality on the ground - frustrations that
may lead to discouragement and even cynicism - we
have no alternative but to redouble our perseverance
and efforts on this issue. In that regard, we reiterate our
call on the Israelis and the Palestinians, who in fact are
the only parties that can give a real chance to this much-
desired peace and work to overcome their differences
with a View to achieving a two-State solution on the
basis of international law and relevant resolutions.

In conclusion, Senegal, in its capacity as Chair of
the United Nations Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, would
like to assure these two peoples, with whom we share
legitimate aspirations to peace and progress, that
it will join the rest of the international community
in accompanying them on the path of dialogue and
cooperation with a View to definitively resolving this
dispute, which is certainly deep but not insurmountable.

