Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The topic that the British presidency has
chosen for today's debate, despite its innocuous
appearance, poses, in our view, certain risks for the
Security Council. On the one hand, it does not take
much imagination to understand that there is a definite
link between security and development. The danger
lies in making that an absolute truth in a hasty attempt
to craft some sort of universal approach to resolving
problems in the context of security and development.
The Council does not have the requisite Charter-based
prerogatives for that, nor the requisite toolkit. To
go beyond its purview while the world is witnessing
heightened conflicts that demand the Council's
practical intervention, we risk seriously degrading the
Council's effectiveness.

Development has inherent value. To promote it, the
United Nations has the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and other bodies. For the Security
Council to encroach on those prerogatives would be
inappropriate, as well as simply counterproductive.
On the other hand, excessive focus on any one aspect
of security means that we lose sight of many others,
including territorial, ideological, historical, religious,
psychological, environmental and technological
aspects. Today, a particularly dangerous challenge is
the threat of terrorism, the theory and practice of which
involves essentially declaring war on the civilized
world.

A separate aspect is the emergence of conflict as
the result of outside interference. Let it be recalled that
Iraq, Libya, Syria and even Yugoslavia were far from
the poorest of States, but their territories fell prey to
some of the deadliest crises of our time. Now, as the
world map is ever changing, various regions are seeing
sweeping and swift geopolitical transformations.
The world is witnessing a rise in the risk of conflict.
There is a constantly increasing eruption of crises,
which are compounded by armed clashes and difficult
socioeconomic situations. There is a hardening of
interethnic and sectarian antagonisms, which is being
exploited by terrorist and extremists of all stripes. In
that situation, the Security Council must not get bogged
down in theoretical research but must keep its finger
on the pulse of international life, speedily responding
to any harbingers of trouble that could arise in the
security sphere.

We have constantly called for efforts to seek
collective, agreed approaches to resolving existing
issues by establishing a fairer and more sustainable
architecture for international relations. The United
Nations is, in that regard, a completely unique platform.
However, we are convinced that the development of
shared approaches with respect to issues that concern
the future and current world, namely, questions of
international law, human rights and development - in
other words, essentially peacebuilding - is a role that
should fall to the General Assembly, where, under the
Charter of the United Nations, each nation has a vote.
Every State has a vote, whether small or large, strong or
weak, rich or poor. Countries are not all the same, but
they are all part of human history.

The development of States is a process that cannot
be forced into implementation. There is no one right
answer. The process can be assisted but not imposed.
Over the past years we have seen the development
of various concepts conceived by a limited group of
States, in which development assistance is conditioned
on adherence to very strict criteria with regard to
State-building. We believe that particular care should
be taken in disseminating such concepts, especially at
the international level. On the one hand, there is the
issue of interference in the internal affairs of States.
Donors impose particular standards that they claim
ensure transparency. On the other hand, donors do
not honour their pledges for aid to development and
technology transfer.

There has been a lack of progress in alleviating the
debt burden and a certain avoidance of issues that some
find uncomfortable, such as increasing the participation
of developing countries in the activities of global
governance bodies, instead of establishing transparent
and agreed rules to foster free trade, investment and
open competition, as well as ensuring developing
countries' access to technologies. We are witnessing
the fragmentation of the international economy, the
creation of closed economic alliances and a stalemate
in efforts to reform international financial institutions.

We have repeatedly heard the argument that human
rights violations are one of the root causes of crises.
However, everyone is well aware of countries that
have extremely harsh laws in that regard, but on whose
territories there are no conflicts. Indeed, in an number
of cases, no one even complains about them.

In recent years, we have frequently encountered
initiatives in the drafting of United Nations documents
aimed at promoting the idea that the existence of
national resources is allegedly a root cause of conflict.
As a primary measure to combat that so-called evil,
there have been proposals to increase the transparency
of the extractive sectors, in particular by admitting into
those countries some allegedly socially responsible
international corporations - of course from the
West. Actually, there is no direct link between those
phenomena. There is no lack of countries in the world
whose the extractive industries are totally closed to
foreign players, but there are no conflicts there. If
conflicts arise in natural resource-rich countries, then
the majority of those cases are not linked to a lack of
transparency.

With regard to the linkage between security and
development, one must acknowledge the destructive
impact on both sides of the equation of the phenomenon
of unilaterally imposed economic sanctions, which are
used by some members of the international community
to serve particular political aims. Sanctions imposed
by circumventing the Security Council at the very
beginning of the conflict in Syria had, of course, the
effect of worsening the situation of the Syrian people.
But did they help resolve the conflict? Of course not.
The very goal of such sanctions was to exacerbate the
conflict and to achieve the infamous goal espoused
by a number of capitals, namely, regime change in
Damascus. We are seeing the full consequences of
that now. What do the economic sanctions imposed
at various times against the Sudan, Zimbabwe and
Myanmar have to do with peace? We believe that the
recent General Assembly resolution 70/5 on anti-Cuba
sanctions has the broader significance of representing
the growing understanding within the international
community of the unsuitability of that practice.

The Security Council naturally plays the most
important role in conflict prevention. It is one of our
primary tasks. However, there can be no one-size-fits-
all approach in that regard. Each conflict situation
is unique and there is a need in every case to duly
address its specific civilizational, historical, national
and religious characteristics. Of particular importance
in that respect is the intellectual capital and the
knowledge of countries and their specificities, as well
as the historical memory of United Nations experts.
There is a need to build capacity in that regard rather
than generate new coordinating structures or bodies,
as is sometimes suggested. The Security Council needs
to be particularly careful and respectful of sovereign
States that have fallen on hard times, and offer them
help rather than a public thrashing.

In conclusion, we have unstintingly stood for
peaceful societies and successful conflict prevention.
To our mind, one sine qua non in that respect is
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States and
respectful dialogue with sovereign authorities.

