Mr. Pascoe: In resolution 1939 (2010), the
Security Council requested the present report,
following discussions between the United Nations and
the caretaker Government of Nepal and the political
parties. I visited Nepal on 6 and 7 October 2010 on the
Secretary-General's behalf and held extensive
consultations to obtain a first-hand understanding of
the state of the peace process, and more specifically of
the implementation of the four-point agreement of
2
13 September between the Government of Nepal and the
Unified Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M).

Some important steps have been taken, and
efforts continue towards achieving the objectives that
the Government and the UCPN-M. have set for
themselves, but the political impasse remains. No
breakthrough has been achieved. It is too early to
conclude that the parties are on a course that would see
the 13 September agreement implemented by
15 January 2011.

I should like to step back very briefly and put the
current state of affairs in Nepal into perspective. Nepal
is undergoing a process of significant political and
social transformation and consolidation of its
democracy. As the Secretary-General has reported to
the Council on numerous occasions, Nepal has made
remarkable strides in this journey. In a span of only a
few years, it has successfully ended the decade-long
insurgency through a series of agreements, culminating
in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement of November
2006. It held a successful election for the Constituent
Assembly in 2008, declared itself a republic and a
secular State, and embarked on far-reaching political,
social and economic reforms.

Like many grand compromises of this scale, the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and the constitution-making process have
encountered serious difficulties along the way. Over
time, the unity of the parties, both internally and in
working together, has frayed and been eroded by
differences of ideology and perspective and the
challenges of balancing the rules of competitive
democratic politics with the need to share power and
maintain a modicum of political consensus. There are
important commitments that have not been completed,
chief among them the adoption of a new constitution
and addressing the future of the two armies. If the
parties fail to manage their differences in order to
complete this common agenda, it is they and the people
of Nepal who stand to lose.

The Council established the United Nations
Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) on 23 January 2007, with a
one-year mandate. It was conceived as "a focused
mission of limited duration", in the words of the
Secretary-General. It was tasked with helping Nepal to
hold a successful election to the Constituent Assembly
by monitoring the arms and armies of the Government
and Maoist sides, providing technical assistance to the
10-58090

Election Commission and assisting in the monitoring
of the ceasefire code of conduct. UNMIN largely
accomplished these tasks. The election for the
Constituent Assembly was held in a largely peaceful
manner and the outcome accepted by all sides.
However, the parties requested the continued presence
and support of the Mission, given in particular the lack
of progress on the integration and rehabilitation of
Maoist army personnel.

The debate on integration and rehabilitation, a
fundamental task of the process, has been marked by
disagreements on the number of Maoist army personnel
to be integrated into the security forces and the
modalities for their integration. At the same time, the
political climate has turned negative and the degree of
mistrust among the parties has sown the seeds of the
political stalemate that has persisted for well over a
year and a half now.

UNMIN's presence has been extended seven
times, at the request of the parties, without any
adjustment in its mandate that might have enabled the
Mission to deliver more effective support to resolve the
ongoing disputes. Each extension request was
accompanied by renewed, and ultimately unfulfilled,
commitments by the parties and the Government to
expeditiously complete the outstanding tasks.

Of course, it has not worked out that way. While
UNMIN's continued monitoring and its presence are
widely recognized and appreciated as important factors
of stability, the Mission has found itself subjected to
controversies stemming from the deterioration in the
political climate, misrepresentations of its mandate and
the ensuing mismatch between the parties' high
expectations and the reality of UNMIN's limited
responsibilities. As the Secretary-General stated in his
last report to the Council (S/2010/453), of2 September
2010, we are not in favour of repeated extensions of
the Mission's mandate in a climate that undermines its
ability to function effectively. The Council's decision
to extend the mandate for a final period of four months,
as requested by the Government of Nepal, was born out
of these considerations and predicated on the
agreement signed by the Government of Nepal and the
UCPN-M. to basically complete the remaining tasks of
the peace process by 14 January 2011.

The 13 September agreement between the
Government and the UCPN-M, in addition to
requesting the extension of UNMIN's mandate by four
10-58090
months, commits the Government and the Maoists to
move towards what is termed "the logical conclusion
of the peace process" in three areas. Allow me to
provide an update from the visit on those.

First, the parties agreed to reach consensus and to
give final shape to and implement the documents
prepared in the Special Committee on integration and
rehabilitation. On this, all my interlocutors pointed to
the reactivation of the Special Committee, which, until
recently, had been meeting only infrequently and
irregularly. The Special Committee has now taken a
number of procedural decisions, but it has yet to achieve
progress on the core issues. It is evident that the
Committee will be able to discharge its responsibilities
effectively only when political leaders agree on the
essential decisions that have to be made regarding the
integration of Maoist army personnel into the security
forces, notably on the numbers and the modalities.

Secondly, under the agreement the parties also
committed themselves to bringing the Maoist
combatants under the Special Committee. It was agreed
that combatants' complete data would be provided to
the Special Committee without delay. Accordingly, and
at the request of the Special Committee, UNMIN has
provided the Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction
with the data on verified Maoist army personnel that
was collected in the 2007 registration and verification
exercise.

One important step taken in that context was the
formation of a secretariat as the body supporting the
Special Committee to implement the supervision,
integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army
personnel. However, there is as yet no agreement on a
"convenor" for this body, negotiations on which
continue at the political level. The secretariat is thus
far focused on the conceptual and operational planning
of bringing the cantonments under the Special
Committee's effective supervision. Clearly, this work
can be useful only if the essential political decisions on
integration and rehabilitation are made, and made soon,
by Nepal's political leaders.

I advised the parties to give priority to carrying
out the integration and rehabilitation of combatants,
which would permit the closure of the cantonments,
rather than focusing on building an elaborate and
expensive supervision and monitoring system to take
over responsibilities from UNMIN. The latter course
3
does not solve the problem and raises many challenges
from the political, financial and logistical perspective.

The Special Committee's secretariat is
developing a methodology for a survey that would
provide information on the preferences of combatants
with regard to integration and rehabilitation and lay the
ground for later work on both processes. The parties'
current thinking envisages three broad avenues for
Maoist army personnel to choose: integration into the
security forces, rehabilitation to civilian life through
vocational training and support packages, and
"voluntary exit" involving a cash payment.

On a parallel issue under the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement - namely, the democratization of the
Nepal Army - I was briefed by the Defence Minister
on the broad content of a proposal that has been
submitted by the Ministry to the Cabinet. It is
important that work on this issue proceed with the
wider consultations required under the Agreement and
the interim constitution. I conveyed the United Nations
encouragement and the view that progress in this area,
as well as in addressing outstanding human rights and
accountability issues, are important to Nepal's standing
as a significant United Nations peacekeeping
contributor. I also underlined that the Maoist army and
its leadership share the responsibility to account for
human rights violations during and after the conflict,
and must fulfil its solemn commitments in that regard.

Thirdly, the parties also recommitted themselves
to taking up the remaining tasks of the peace process
from 17 September, and basically completing them by
14 January 2011. Apart from the integration and
rehabilitation of former combatants, two areas are
significant in this regard: constitution-drafting and
power-sharing, to which all outstanding peace process
tasks have now been linked. A package deal on
essential aspects of all three areas was raised by many
political leaders as the right approach to ending the
current stalemate.

Many of my interlocutors pointed to power-
sharing as the most immediate issue of concern and
argued that a solution could generate meaningful
progress across all contentious areas. Three months
after the resignation of Prime Minister Nepal, the
country is still led by a caretaker Government. Twelve
rounds of voting in the legislature-parliament to elect a
new Prime Minister have not produced a winner.
The constitution-making process has similarly
stalled, but most of my interlocutors said differences
on the nature and shape of the new constitution were
surmountable and could be bridged once the political
climate improved. The Speaker of the Constituent
Assembly has initiated discussions on a renewed effort
on the constitution that focuses on some 200 areas of
disagreement. A meeting of the 27 political parties of
the Constituent Assembly on 11 October established a
seven-member task force headed by former Prime
Minister and UCPN-M. Chairman Pushpa Kamal Dahal
"Prachanda" and comprising senior political leaders
and lawmakers, which will seek to address differences.
Its report is due on 24 October.

The prolonged political stalemate in Nepal, most
vividly symbolized by the continuing failure to elect a
new Prime Minister, is compounded by persistent
internal divisions within the main political parties,
personal interests and calculations, and regional
factors. Yet dialogue continues across Nepal's political
fault lines, and many of the leaders I spoke to in
Kathmandu expressed to me their hopes that there
could be a political breakthrough in early November,
after the end of the current holiday period in Nepal. We
also believe this is possible if the parties exhibit the
necessary flexibility and will. Progress on forming a
consensus Government or on substantive issues related
to integration and rehabilitation could provide the
critical momentum for a breakthrough.

In my discussions with Nepal's political leaders, I
was very firm on the Security Council's clear decision
in resolution 1939 (2010) that UNMIN will leave
Nepal after 15 January 2011. This means that the
Mission's arms monitoring and other substantive
functions will cease on that date, and that any UNMIN
staff in Nepal after that date will be there to liquidate
the Mission. I urged all concerned to use the time
remaining to complete the outstanding tasks. I
underlined that UNMIN's departure should not be
abrupt or disruptive to the peace process; nor should it
create an unhelpful vacuum in their political transition.
I conveyed UNMIN's readiness to work with all sides,
within its mandate, to ensure a seamless transition.

I also tried to allay concerns, raised frequently
across the political spectrum in Nepal, that, with
UNMIN's withdrawal, the United Nations might be
abandoning Nepal and its peace process. I made it very
clear that, while UNMIN was leaving, the United
Nations would remain very much engaged. Our efforts
will be available through the country team and from
New York to support Nepal's Government and its
people after UNMIN's withdrawal.

The challenge for all of us in the international
community is to make it clear to all the political actors
that the status quo is not tenable. We should emphasize
our support for their good-faith efforts and willingness
to compromise. Nepal's friends and neighbours should
be ready to facilitate solutions and assist in
implementation of agreements, including the
integration and rehabilitation of former combatants, the
constitutional process and future elections, as well as
the consolidation of the country's democratic
institutions.

In conclusion, there is no doubt that the
15 January deadline for UNMIN's withdrawal has
created a new sense of urgency among the parties in
Nepal, and more focused thinking on how to end the
prolonged stasis is taking place. I welcome the recent
positive developments that I have just described. Let
me reiterate that, important as they are, they are no
substitute for the political decisions that are yet to be
10-58090

taken and the compromises that need to be made by
Nepal's political leaders. It is still possible for the
parties to meet their targets in time, but, as I stressed to
all of those I met during my visit, that will require
translating this new-found sense of urgency into
decision-making and concrete action. The sooner these
decisions are taken, the better.

UNMIN's priority will continue to be working
with the parties to ensure a smooth handover and
withdrawal. We will continue to follow developments
there closely, and I would be prepared, as appropriate,
to return to Nepal before year's end to provide the
Council with another update on developments should
the Council deem it useful.

