Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Deputy High
Representative Thomas Markram for his briefing. As
he noted, it has been a year since the chemical attack in
Khan Shaykun claimed the lives of innocent civilians
in Syria. We reiterate our strong condemnation of this
inhumane attack. I thought that I should tell the Deputy
High Representative that the way in which he concluded
his statement was very, very appropriate. He is right in
stressing how critical the unity of the Council on this
matter is and that it is the key to everything.

One year after the barbaric attack in Khan
Shaykun, the alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria
continues unabated, hence this matter remains a source
of great concern. We still believe that those responsible
for the use of chemicals as weapons must be held
accountable based on robust evidence. This requires,
as the Secretary-General mentioned in his letter
dated 28 March 2018 (S/2018/283), a unified response
from the Council. We believe that without unity, the
damage to the chemical-weapons disarmament and
non-proliferation regime cannot be repaired.

We find it very encouraging indeed that the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) has continued to make all the arrangements
required to support the Syrian Government in destroying
the two remaining above-ground facilities, including
by agreeing additional amendments to the tripartite
agreement concluded among the OPCW, the United
Nations Office for Project Services and the Syrian
Government. We hope that all these preparations will
lead to the elimination of the two remaining facilities.

Regarding the outstanding issues related to the
initial declaration, we note that the OPCW remains
unable to state that the declaration is accurate and
complete. In this connection, we reiterate the importance
of continued and more fruitful communication between
the OPCW and the Syrian Government, with the
ultimate objective of addressing the remaining gaps
and inconsistencies. We see no reason why this could
not be expedited.

We also note that the Fact-finding Mission has
continued its investigation into allegations of the use
of chemical weapons in Syria, including by deploying
a team in Syria, as mentioned by the Deputy High
Representative. It is imperative that the mission's
investigation into all allegations continue, including
recent reports of the use of chemicals as weapons.
However, the Council must address the current
institutional gap by creating an independent, impartial
and professional investigative mechanism that could
identify the actors responsible, both State and non-State.
We have no doubt that the issue of an accountability
mechanism should be given extremely high priority.
This, as we have said repeatedly, would require unity on
the part of the Council. Hence we join in the call made
by the Deputy High Representative that the unity of the
Council should be restored on this important matter
so as to deter and stop the use of chemical weapons in
Syria and beyond.

We indeed would recall, as others have already
mentioned, that the Council had successfully summoned
its collective will in the past to achieve unity with a
view to addressing the challenges posed by chemical
weapons. There is no reason why this feat cannot be
repeated.

