Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Like
others, I am grateful to the Secretary-General of his
report (S/2005/88), to the Special Representative for
his briefing and for the energy with which he is
carrying out his tasks in Kosovo and to Mr. Covic' for
his intervention. The United Kingdom associates itself
fully with the European Union's statement to be
delivered subsequently by the representative of
Luxembourg.

The United Kingdom shares the Secretary-
General's assessment that progress in implementing the
standards for Kosovo in recent months has been
tangible and is encouraging, and the view of the
Special Representative that the new Prime Minister and
his government have shown impressive commitment
and energy in striving to achieve the standards. Focus
now must be on continued delivery in the run-up to the
comprehensive review later this year. Yet, at the same
time, the overall situation in Kosovo is fragile. Hence
the need for the United Nations, in cooperation with
other appropriate organizations, to manage processes
and outcomes so that we are not again overtaken by
events.

I would like to make four simple points on what
we see as the priorities of Kosovo in the coming
months. First, Kosovo cannot take its eye off the
paramount task of fulfilling the standards, especially
those that relate to Kosovo's minority community. The
onus is on the Provisional Institutions, on the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and on all the
communities in Kosovo to make sufficient progress on
the standards in order for the comprehensive review,
which will probably take place this summer, to decide
that it is possible to move to the next stage of the
process and therefore to start to discuss Kosovo's final
status, as is already provided for in resolution 1244
(1999).

That may not be a foregone conclusion, but it is,
we believe, achievable if all make the necessary effort
and if current trends continue. But standards,
particularly those pertaining to the protection of
minorities, freedom of movement and the rule of law,
are not just a means to starting the status discussion.
They are essential to improving the daily lives of all
people in Kosovo, and they are also a precondition for
European integration. Obviously, any failure to
cooperate fully with the International Tribunal in The
Hague or any incitement, explicit or implicit, to inter-
ethnic violence would be a very serious setback.

Secondly, local government reform is a key to
reassuring minorities. The United Kingdom hopes to
see early progress on the five pilot decentralization
projects that the new government is now establishing.
We hope that these can be launched as soon as
possible, and we look forward thereafter to the
devolution of further competencies to the
municipalities.

Thirdly, Kosovo's struggling economy, with up to
60 per cent unemployment, is obviously a threat to
political stability. As regards the European Union and
UNMIK's pillar IV, their leadership has an important
role in helping the Provisional Institutions to develop
an economic development plan and short-term job
creation schemes.

Fourthly, Kosovo Serbs remain largely outside
Kosovo politics, and we all know the background and
the reasons for that. There has been some progress
recently with a Kosovo Serb minister in charge of the
new Ministry for Returns and Communities, and there
has been some Kosovo Serb participation in the
decentralization working groups. The prospect of the
resumption in March of the direct dialogue working
group on the missing, which will take place with
Belgrade, is encouraging. But I have to say that,
despite the efforts of Mr. Covie, a much more
constructive approach is needed from Belgrade. And
let me put it to Mr. Covie bluntly, ifI may. The only
way for Kosovo Serbs to have a say in the future of
Kosovo, a future where they can live in peace with
their neighbours, is to engage now in the political life
of Kosovo. In our view, Belgrade will not be allowed
to derail a possible future status process by deliberately
obstructing standards implementation.

In conclusion, 2005 will be a key year for
Kosovo. The onus lies with the people of Kosovo to
make the necessary progress themselves to allow a
final status process to start. But the international
community, the United Nations, the European Union
and NATO must be engaged in ongoing deliberations.
The investment being made in Kosovo, if it is to be
successful, has to lead to a Kosovo at peace at home
and with its neighbours, as Mr. Jessen-Petersen put it
in his intervention. But success will also have to
recognize that the European destination of Kosovo and
its neighbours will be key to insuring that peaceful
outcome. But that destination comes with a heavy
conditionality.

