The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms the statement of
its President of 24 April 1997 (S/PRST/ 1997/22) and
welcomes the recent agreement by the President of
Zaire and the leader of the Alliance of Democratic
Forces for the Liberation of Congo/Zaire (ADFL) on
a time and venue for a meeting to discuss a peaceful
and negotiated settlement of the conflict in Zaire. It
reiterates its full support for the United Nations five-
point peace plan, endorsed by its resolution 1097
(1997) of 18 February 1997, calls for an immediate
cessation of hostilities, and especially calls for both
parties to reach a rapid agreement on peaceful
transitional arrangements leading to the holding of
democratic and free elections with the participation of
all parties.

"The Security Council notes the commitment by
the leader of the ADFL to allow United Nations and
other humanitarian agencies access to refugees in
eastern Zaire in order to provide humanitarian
assistance and to implement the repatriation plan of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), including the use of both airports in
Kisangani. It also notes his commitment to be flexible
regarding the duration of the repatriation operation,
which should move ahead as quickly as possible. It
expresses concern at reports of obstruction of
humanitarian assistance efforts but notes that
humanitarian access has improved recently. It calls
on the ADFL to abide by these commitments and to
enable the UNHCR repatriation plan to be
implemented without conditions or delay.

"The Security Council also expresses its deep
concern regarding the continuing reports of
massacres, other atrocities and violations of
international humanitarian law in eastern Zaire. In
this context, it reiterates its call upon the ADFL and
others concerned in the region to cooperate fully
with the recently established United Nations
investigative mission by ensuring unimpeded access
to all areas and sites under investigation, as well as
the security of the members of the mission. It
attaches great importance to the commitment of the
leader of the ADFL to take appropriate action
against members of the ADFL who violate the rules
of international humanitarian law concerning the
treatment of refugees and civilians.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l997/24.

Before closing the meeting, I wish to thank you very

much for all the cooperation during this month of my
presidency. I really enjoyed being here and working with
all of you, my colleagues, and with the Secretariat. I am
very grateful to all of you. Thank you very much.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present

stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at I] p.m.
