Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): We would like to express
our appreciation for Chad's initiative in organizing
this important debate, which enables us to reflect on
the challenges facing the international community in
combating terrorism. We would also like to pay tribute
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad for presiding
over the meeting and for his opening remarks, and to
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, and Ambassador Tete Antonio, the
Permanent Observer of the African Union, for their
introductory statements.

Terrorism, in both its magnitude and its diversity,
is one of the gravest challenges not only to international
peace and security but also to human dignity. It has
affected every facet of our societies and national values.
It threatens the security and sovereignty of States, as
well as the rule of law, freedom and the development
aspects of our societies. We reiterate Egypt's position
in condemning unequivocally all acts of terrorism in
all their forms and manifestations, irrespective of their
motivations or objectives and regardless of the nature
of their perpetrators, whether individuals, groups
or States. In that context, we denounce the utterly
despicable and incomprehensibly vicious attack on
defenceless children that took place in the Pakistani
city of Peshawar, as well as the recent terrorist siege
in Sydney. Those incidents demonstrate the importance
of the international community's being unified against
terrorism. We need to offer positive solutions and
express resolve to eliminate the terrorist menace, which
targets Muslims and non-Muslims alike.

Cross-border illicit trafficking in drugs, arms,
humans and other illegal trade, goods and services is
fuelling terrorist activities across Africa and in other
parts of the world. These activities indeed increase the
space within which terrorists operate and weaken State
capacity and authority, while enhancing terrorist groups'
own capabilities and support and severely hampering
conflict resolution efforts. This is particularly evident
in the Sahel region, where cross-border smuggling has
exacerbated instability and affected conflict dynamics.

In that regard, we commend the regional cooperative
mechanisms in Africa, including the Nouakchott
Process on the enhancement of security cooperation
and the operationalization of the African Peace and
Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Saharan region,
the adoption of the action plan adopted by the first
regional ministerial meeting on border security held in
Tripoli in March 2012, and the creation of a regional
training centre to enhance border security during the
second regional ministerial meeting, which was held in
Rabat in November 2013.

The reality today is that we live in a world where
there is no region, country or people that remains
untouched by the destabilizing effects and negative
influence of cross-border crime and violent extremism.
We therefore believe that it is imperative to take
the following steps to deal with both threats on the
operational level.

First, we must exchange information on the
measures that Member States have taken to curb cross-
border illicit drug trafficking, human smuggling and
trafficking, cybercrime, illegal migration, money
laundering and the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.

Secondly, Member States must exchange best
practices on fighting terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and provide bilateral assistance in
capacity-building to the most affected States, in
particular in areas related to countering violent
extremism and money laundering.

Thirdly, we must strengthen cooperation and
contacts among the relevant authorities of Member
States, including through promoting law enforcement
cooperation and exchange of information on legal,
judicial and criminal matters.

While recognizing the importance of States
working closely to combat terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, including by preventing terrorists
from benefiting from transnational organized crime,
we reaffirm that States have the sovereign right, in
accordance with international law, to secure their
borders. Egypt emphasizes that respect for the principles
of sovereign equality, political independence, the
territorial integrity of all States and of non-intervention
in matters that are essentially within a State's domestic
jurisdiction should be upheld.

Finally, we call for increasing the resources
allocated to the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and other United Nations entities dedicated
to supporting the development and strengthening of
the capacities of national and regional institutions,
especially the African Union, in order to combat
the criminal-terrorist connection with transnational
organized crime, including law enforcement and
counter-terrorism agencies.

