The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General Jack Lang for his
report (see S/2011/30) and for his informative briefing.
I also thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs and the representative of Somalia for their
statements.

The phenomenon of piracy is a challenge that has
yet to receive an adequate and effective response from
the international community. Although some measures
have been taken in the areas of security, judicial
arrangements, prevention best practices and awareness-
raising, we cannot say there has been a reduction in the
number of piracy attacks off the coast of Somalia.
Unfortunately, on the contrary, we can see how, over
time, piracy is acquiring structured features in financial
and organizational aspects. We are also concerned by
the further expansion of the area threatened by piracy
attacks, southwards along the coastline of Somalia and
eastwards into the Indian Ocean.

Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly condemns acts
of piracy and expresses its concern regarding the
impact of such acts - first on regional security and,
subsequently, on the global economy and international
security. In that context, we share the view expressed
by Special Adviser Lang that there is an urgent need to
establish effective counter-piracy measures before
spillover effects produce further instability in the
region.

We believe that the Somalization of a solution, as
Mr. Lang wrote in his report, is a valuable proposal for
beginning a new phase in fighting piracy, which is
evidently needed. We consider that institution-building,
especially in the security sector, will make the
Transitional Federal Government and regional
authorities in Somaliland, and principally in Puntland,
critical partners of the international community in
fighting piracy.

Impunity, as most delegations that have spoken
before me have stated, is a factor that leads to an
increase in piracy activities. The fact that a catch-and-
release method is applied in 90 per cent of cases points
out the serious flaws in the international approach to
combating piracy. We therefore believe that the new
proposals outlined in the Special Adviser's report
aimed at establishing specialized piracy courts in
Somaliland and Puntland, along with an extraterritorial
court in Arusha, as well as an increase in incarceration
capacity in Somaliland and Puntland are a good basis
for creating a new approach and instruments in
counter-piracy activities.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Lang to make some
concluding remarks.

