Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan): We are grateful to you,
Sir, for your spirited and able leadership on this vital
issue, and we thank you most sincerely for having
organized today's discussion, which affords us an
opportunity to comment on the Secretary-General's
report on the rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict and post-conflict societies.

It is, from every angle, a very fine report - one
that we welcome most warmly. It is thoughtful
throughout and very well written. In particular, my
delegation appreciates the repeated references the
report makes to the pivotal importance of common
sense - that those who plan for rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies must be guided by those simple tenets of the
obvious: listen to the local actors; know what is unique
from what is not and therefore - drawing from our
shared historical experiences - what is relevant to the
circumstances in question from what is not; appreciate
the broader picture when seizing on the details; and do
all this before sequencing an approach, maintaining,
always, a policy that is nimble and alive to changing
conditions. We applaud that way of thinking and
congratulate the Secretary-General on a very well
produced, analytical report.

My delegation would very much like to offer
three observations on the detail itself. The first relates
to the refrain, found particularly in paragraphs 41 and
42 of the report, that the two ad hoc Tribunals are and
have been expensive propositions - the insinuation
being, perhaps, that they have become too expensive
and may not even worth it. Indeed, so often has that
assertion of high cost been repeated in this Chamber in
the context of the Tribunals that we can safely say it
has now become almost a given to many Governments,
as well as to the United Nations itself. But why?

In all honesty, my delegation is at a loss to know
where this thinking comes from, and we believe that it
needs to be thought through further. For a start, the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) costs the United Nations
membership, per year, close to $175 million, which, to
my delegation's way of thinking, is a very reasonable
amount. For $175 million is less than one twentieth of
what the United Nations paid annually, during the war,
to maintain its peacekeeping operation in the former
Yugoslavia - less than one twentieth. Put another way,
the ICTY would have to continue operating until 2014
for its budget over the span of 20 years to measure up
to what this Organization spent in one year alone -
1994 - on the operations of the United Nations
Protection Force. And were it not for the ICTY, we can
all be certain that the Dayton Peace Agreement would
not have held in the form it has done for the past nine
years. And so, if the alternative to justice and
accountability is a likely return to a condition of
general warfare, with all its familiar consequences, can
the amounts already spent on the ICTY be construed as
too great?

Much is often made by those who question the
cost of the seeming absence of any impact the ongoing
work of the ICTY has on the situation on the ground.
And yet, we would argue, it is simply not necessary for
the peoples of the former Yugoslavia to know what
exact cases are now before the Court, who the
defendants are, who is litigating or who is judging; or
to know the judgements and the sentences; or even to
understand the jurisprudence for there to exist a state
of continuing peace. What is important is that the
majority of people are aware that the Tribunal exists
and that it functions properly - that is, that those
accused of bearing the greatest responsibility for the
commission of the worst crimes are being prosecuted.
And that is sufficient.

With the international community prepared to
spend almost $1 trillion a year on weapons - that
historic companion of war - how can we say that
anything we have spent thus far on justice - the surest
companion of peace - is too expensive? In short, we
the international community clamour in an ad hoc
manner for instant results when it comes to
international criminal justice, and we insist that those
results must be quantifiable, when the very systems of
justice we seek to create aspire to much more than
simply that. We suffer collectively from a very short
memory. We tend to be thrifty when it comes to
spending on law, and generous when it comes to
spending on weapons.

Our second observation concerns the Secretary-
General's conclusions and recommendations, which are
found at the end of the report and with which we agree
almost entirely. We would have liked to see, however,
the inclusion, in the last portion of the report, of the
Secretary-General's pertinent observations concerning
the International Criminal Court and its significance,
remarks found earlier in the report. With three more
countries having acceded to the Rome Statute in recent
days, bringing the total number of States parties to 97,
the majority of Member States of the United Nations
are now party to the Statute, and all of those were
ratifications were concluded in only six years. That is
by no means a small accomplishment.

Turning to the second portion of the
recommendations, where they relate specifically to the
United Nations system, we are pleased to join the
delegation of Finland in attaching ourselves to the
remarks made earlier by the Permanent Representative
of Germany on what possible institutional changes
could be considered by the Executive Committee on
Peace and Security in the foreseeable future, as
proposed in our joint non-paper. My delegation
believes earnestly that if we wish ourselves and the
United Nations a high measure of success in that area,
it will ultimately only be attainable through the
establishment of a dedicated rule-of-law department -
a field-oriented legal and judicial service.

Finally, it is important that the Security Council
is hosting this second thematic debate on justice and
the rule of law and the role of the United Nations, for it
not only compliments well the priorities established by
the Secretary-General in his speech before the General
Assembly two weeks ago but also because it will, we
hope, set the tone in the times ahead for the Council's
own approach to the rule of law, the recognition of the
law's primacy and the law's centrality to the
maintenance of international peace and security. In the
same vein, my delegation looks forward to the
Council's upcoming consideration of the advisory
opinion rendered recently by the United Nations
highest judicial body, the International Court of
Justice, in a matter known to everyone here that is also
of substantial importance to my delegation. We hope
that, when that time comes, the Council's actions will
be consistent with its current reflections.

