Mr. Bessho (Japan): After the bitter experience
of two world wars, Europe embarked on an ambitious
effort to promote a rules-based international order,
fully rejecting coercion. It has upheld principles that
prohibit the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State and
oblige the peaceful resolution of international disputes.

With 57 member States today, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has become
the world's largest regional security institution and has
long contributed to conflict prevention and sustaining
peace through confidence-building measures.

For over 70 years, Japan has joined its European
and American partners in upholding the fundamental
values of freedom, democracy, the rule oflaw, a market
economy and human rights. It has strongly supported
the United Nations system that embodies those values.
In sharing the same liberal values and proactively
contributing to peace, NATO has similarly been a
trusted and natural partner for Japan.

Notwithstanding this progress, Japan is concerned
by the continuation of hot and frozen conflicts
in Europe. While the majority of those conflicts
originated in long-standing ethnic tensions, many have
been prolonged and exacerbated by flagrant acts that
contravene the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and the Helsinki Accords.

Japan is deeply concerned at the recent deterioration
ofthe situation in eastern Ukraine. The ongoing conflict
in Ukraine, in which almost 10,000 people are estimated
to have been killed, is a significant threat to the peace
and security of Europe. The full implementation of the
Minsk agreements - which the Council endorsed in
resolution 2202 (2015) - by all the parties concerned
is essential. We commend efforts by the OSCE, as well
as those by France and Germany under the Normandy
format, including the convening of last week's Foreign
Ministers meeting.

On Crimea, we are opposed to any attempt to modify
Ukraine's borders through the threat or use of force or
other unlawful means. The so-called referendum held
in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol
in March 2014 does not constitute the basis for any
alteration of the status of Crimea. We call upon all
States to fully respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine.

The situation in Europe affects the entire
international community. Threats to the territorial
integrity of one country cannot be ignored, because
they would undermine the fundamental principles upon
which the entire international legal order is based.

In order to resolve Europe's conflicts, major
countries of the region need to step up their efforts.
Regional and subregional organizations, such as the
OSCE and the European Union, play a significant role
in conflict resolution, and the cooperation between the
United Nations and those organizations is becoming
increasingly important. The Council should pay closer
attention to protracted conflicts in Europe so that they
do not turn into serious threats to the peace and security
of the region.

Today, Europe faces emerging issues, such as
violent extremism and humanitarian crises involving
refugees and immigrants. The international community
must strengthen its response to those crises. United
Nations-wide efforts are essential to address root
causes such as poverty and social injustice, and we
fully support the ongoing reform efforts by Secretary-
General Guterres. The Japanese Government has
decided to provide an additional $750 million in
assistance to address humanitarian and refugee issues,
as well as terrorism, through the United Nations and
other international organizations.

Europe must play a crucial role in upholding the
international order based on the rule of law. It is well
positioned to do so, as the host to the major international
courts and tribunals such as the International Court of
Justice, the International Criminal Court, the Permanent
Court of Arbitration and the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea.

Japan's faith in the ideal of regional integration
in Europe, which has contributed and will hopefully
continue to contribute to an improved quality of life,
vanishing borders and the resolution of ethnic tensions,
remains unchanged. We stand shoulder to shoulder with
Europe in supporting ethnic and religious tolerance and
in upholding the values of freedom, democracy and the
rule of law.

