Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening this important meeting. I also thank Dr.
David Nabarro, Dr. Margaret Chan, Mr. Tete Antonio,
Mr. Per Thoresson and Dr. Mosoka Fallah for their
comprehensive briefings. At almost the same time last
year, we met (see S/PV.7268) to consider the serious
consequences of Ebola and how to deal with this
unprecedented type of threat to international peace and
security.

The unity within the Council and the intensified
coordination of regional and international efforts guided
the effective response to the Ebola outbreak and the
establishment of the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response (UNMEER), which completed its
tasks a few days ago, having achieved the key goals
of its mission. I offer my thanks and appreciation to
the entire staff of UNMEER for their sacrifices and
efforts to control the spread of Ebola. We also thank
all countries that provided medical equipment and
financial resources. We hope that the World Health
Organization (WHO), which has assumed UNMEER's
responsibilities, will be able to halt the spread of Ebola
altogether.

We must capitalize on this international achievement
and completely finish our work, especially given
the fact that the ongoing negative indications, while
limited, could reignite the danger. Guinea and Sierra
Leone, for instance, continue to suffer Ebola virus
infections, despite the decline in the number of cases
and the shrinking areas of transmission. The resurgence
of Ebola in Liberia following the announcement that it
was Ebola-free requires the international community
and the stakeholders to support the affected countries
in preventing the rebound of Ebola cases.

The public health systems of the countries of West
Africa constitute a major obstacle to the elimination
of Ebola. The Governments of the affected countries
should, with the assistance of international and regional
organizations, scale up and improve their health-care
systems. It is clear that Ebola spread very quickly
because of the weakness ofthose systems. We must also
establish monitoring, surveillance and early detection
systems, especially in areas of migration and cross-
border movement, in order to prevent transmission at
the regional and international levels.

The countries of West Africa should invest in and
benefit from the human resources that were developed
during the Ebola response period so as to strengthen
the confidence of the international community in
their national health services. That will enhance the
engagement oflocal communites in post-Ebola recovery
strategies. The capacities of those communities could
be built up so as to strengthen their countries' economic
development. The international community cannot
ignore the serious impact ofEbola on the socioeconomic
situation of those countries, especially given the fact
that the three countries most severely affected are
on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission. We
commend the Secretary-General for convening the
international conference on Ebola last month, which
stressed the importance of ongoing investment in those
three countries.

In conclusion, we call on the international
community to maintain its support for the affected
countries by providing resources and assistance in
order to eliminate Ebola and for the post-Ebola recovery
strategy, as well as in strengthening preparedness in
facing the challenges raised by the virus.

