At the outset, I would like to reiterate that any contribution of this Council, in relation to the Israel-Palestine situation, must be within the framework of the recognition and respect of mutual rights, including self-determination and independence. These are the basic principles. With that in mind, we must ensure respect for previous international agreements. In this regard, we continue to believe that the Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, particularly Gaza, including East Jerusalem, and the direconsequences that they cause for the Palestinian people, induce an atmosphere of tension and insecurity and undermine any possibility of reaching a point from where they can continue the process of reconciliation and peace between the parties. We reiterate that the only way forward is through a political dialogue and positive leadership that ultimately lead parties back to the negotiating table. Colleagues, as others have already mentioned, the situation in Gaza continues to be of high concern for the Dominican Republic. We all know the long-standing dire situation of the health system, particularly in the Gaza Strip. And now, with the global COVID-19 pandemic, it is even more threatened. With already confirmed cases, more sooner than later we may be dealing with the consequences of years of neglect and inaction that has made this one of the most serious protracted humanitarian situations in the world. The World Health Organization (WHO) has already warned that the health system in Gaza could not cope with an outbreak, since the hospitals in the strip are overloaded and without resources. Facing this pandemic will be extremely challenging. I just have a few more comments: We echo the Secretary-General's call for a worldwide ceasefire to allow full response to COVID-19. We continue to see killings and injuries of people during clashes across the West Bank and other areas. This is a source of concern. But we have also seen on various reports that there has been close coordination between Israeli and Palestinian health authorities, which is unprecedented. And it must be commended. We are very pleased to learn that these are meeting several times a week to join efforts to stop the spread of the virus. This is another wake-up call and a reminder of how close and Inter-connected these two countries are. And that only through these types of coordination will there ever be an understanding between them. So, we believe that this juncture could be an entry point for further talks. Linking the cease fire and end of hostilities-including demolitions- to an effective response to a global pandemic, poses a unique opportunity in our view. We understand and as it has been stated before, that no amount of humanitarian or economic support on its own, will resolve the difference between the parties, but in this context, we are hopeful that together Israelis and Palestinians, with the support of the United Nations, are able to build the bridges in the vast spaces between them, while fighting a global pandemic.
