Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Mr. Williams
for his comprehensive and detailed briefing. I wish to
thank him for his past efforts and also wish him well in
his new endeavours.

Over the last month, the situation in the Middle
East has witnessed encouraging developments. We
have noted that a group of Palestinian prisoners has
been released and Israel has returned some tax
revenues to the Palestinian Authority. These are
positive steps that should be acknowledged.

We welcome in particular the two meetings held
earlier this month between Chairman Abbas and Prime
Minister Olmert, including the one concluded only
yesterday in Jerusalem. We appreciate the two leaders'
will to maintain the momentum of the meetings and we
look forward to efforts by both sides to reach
understanding, mutual trust and cooperation, and to lay
a necessary and solid foundation for the revival of the
Palestinian-Israeli peace process.

Notwithstanding these developments, the Middle
East situation remains a source of concern. Hostilities
between the Palestinian and Israeli sides and civilian
casualties continue. There is no guarantee of freedom
of movement for Palestinians in their own land. The
humanitarian situation is rapidly deteriorating. The
supply of electricity and food and the sanitation
situation are worrisome.

We appeal to the international community to
continue to provide assistance to the Palestinian
people. At the same time, we urge all parties concerned
to observe international humanitarian law and take all
necessary measures, including the opening of border
crossings, to improve the humanitarian situation in
Gaza.

At the same time, we hope that all political
parties in Palestine will fulfil the expectations of their
people and the international community, put the overall
situation and their long-term interests above everything
else and strengthen their unity and cooperation for a
joint future.

China has always believed that the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State that lives in peace,
side by side with Israel, on the basis of relevant United
Nations resolutions and the principle of land for peace
is the only way to solve the Palestinian-Israeli dispute
in a comprehensive, sustainable and fair manner.
Chairman Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert are taking
a very important first step in that direction.

If history is any guide, the achievement of peace
in the Middle East calls for arduous efforts by all sides
and will be a long process. China believes that the
international community should shoulder the
responsibilities expected of it and create a favourable
environment and provide necessary support for the
resumption of talks between Palestine and Israel.
We welcome the upcoming high-level meeting of
the Quartet next month in New York. We expect the
Quartet to come up with new initiatives to push for a
resumption of the talks between the two sides. At the
same time, the Security Council should play an active
role in the Middle East question. We hope that the
United Nations, the Quartet, the countries in the region
and the Arab League will strengthen their contacts and
coordinate their efforts in a joint bid to advance the
Middle East peace process. The question of Lebanon
and Israel is a major part of the question of the Middle
East peace process. Comprehensive peace in the
Middle East will not be possible without an appropriate
solution of the dispute between Lebanon and Israel.
China again appeals for a comprehensive
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701
(2006) and an early achievement of a permanent
ceasefire and a sustainable solution to the dispute.

China is also closely following developments in
the Lebanese situation. We hope that the Lebanese
people will stay united, solve their internal differences
in a peaceful manner and maintain the unity,
independence and territorial integrity of their country.

