The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Rwanda and Serbia, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Shalita
(Rwanda) and Mr. Loncar (Serbia) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber

The President: On behalf of the members of the
Council, I extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Zoran Loncar, Minister of Public Administration
and Local Self-Government of the Republic of Serbia.

I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend invitations under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure to Judge Fausto Pocar, President of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991; Judge Erik Mose,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other
Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994; Ms. Carla del Ponte, Prosecutor of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia;
and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

It is so decided.

I invite Judge Pocar, Judge Mose, Ms. De] Ponte
and Mr. J allow to take their seats at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
photocopies of letters dated 29 May 2006 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and from the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, which will be issued as
documents of the Security Council under the symbols
S/2006/353 and S/2006/358, respectively.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, and
the President and the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

Following those briefings, I will give the floor to
Council members who wish to make comments or ask
questions.

I now give the floor to Judge Fausto Pocar,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.


