Ms. Gunnarsdettir (Iceland): The escalation
of violence in Syria and the failure of the parties to
implement the Annan peace plan are of grave concern.
We were extremely disappointed by the use of the
veto last week (see S/PV.6810) and strongly urge the
Council to continue its deliberations with a view to
reaching consensus on how best to prevent further
conflict in Syria, while at the same time taking steps
towards permanent peace. Those steps must address the
legitimate aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people
without regard to ethnicity, religion or gender. Ceasefire
mustbe apriority and all violence aimed at civilians must
be put to an end immediately by all parties. If nothing
is done, there may be very far-reaching repercussions,
not only for the Syrian people, but for the whole region.

The number of refugees and internally displaced
persons is increasing. This includes Palestinian refugees.
Syria is host to almost halfa million Palestinian refugees
who are registered with the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
which will have growing needs for assistance should the
conflict continue to deteriorate.

That leads me to the question of Palestine, with the
Israeli/Palestinian conflict continuing to be the core
issue for peace and security in the Middle East. The
situation in Palestine is unfortunately not receiving
much international attention at the moment, including
on the part of the Security Council. The situation
is, however, far from static. It would be unwise to
assume that it can be put on the back burner much
longer, with developments on the ground continuing
to systematically cement the occupation and seriously
undermine the two-State solution.

Continued and accelerated settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including in East
Jerusalem, remain the main obstacle to peace. The
settlements are illegal and in violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention. According to the Convention, all
parties are obliged to ensure respect for the Convention.
As a party to the Convention, Iceland calls upon Israel
to adhere to its obligations and stop all settlement
activities. Iceland also urges Israel to cooperate with
the fact-finding team recently appointed by the Human
Rights Council in Geneva to investigate the implications
of the settlements for the civil, political, economic,
social and cultural rights of the Palestinian people in
the occupied Palestinian territory.

We would like to reiterate our encouragement to the
members ofthe Security Council to accept the invitation
to visit the occupied Palestinian territory at their earliest
convenience. Such a visit would demonstrate goodwill
on behalf of the Council and give Council members
the necessary insight to assist them in addressing this
long-standing problem.

At the moment, all avenues continue to seem closed
to the Palestinians, and that in itself is very serious.
There is a need for a breakthrough and, under the
current circumstances, that breakthrough has to come
from the international community. There are plenty of
avenues to be explored. In particular, the international
community could send a clear message on the illegality
of the settlement activities and demand their immediate
halt. It could also demand the immediate lifting of
the blockade on Gaza, which in itself is a collective
punishment and which reached its fifth anniversary in
June.

The Palestinians continue to look to the United
Nations, especially to the Security Council, to help them
realize their right to self-determination. The Security
Council should renew its commitment to settling the
conflict and inform the rest of the membership of the
United Nations on how it intends to proceed.

Iceland fully supports the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and reiterates its call on
the Security Council to recommend to the General
Assembly that Palestine be accepted as the 194th State
Member of the United Nations.

