The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to warmly welcome the Secretary-General and the
ministers and other representatives who are present
in the Chamber. Their participation in this debate
reaffirms the importance of the topic we are dealing
with today.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Cambodia,
Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, Sweden, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Uruguay, Viet Nam and Yemen to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent
Representative of Brazil and Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and Ms. Leymah Gbowee, President of
the Gbowee Peace Foundation Africa, to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, and His
Excellency Mr. Tete Antdnio, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2015/6, which contains the text of
a letter dated 6 January 2015 from the Permanent
Representative of Chile to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon.

