Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate. Allow me also to thank the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his
briefing, which shows us that the cycle of violence in
the region continues and that the peace process
between Israel and Palestine has apparently not
progressed.

Moreover, the last months have clearly revealed
the inability of the Security Council to reach an
agreement on this matter. Not only did we fail to adopt
a resolution on the precarious humanitarian and
security situation in Gaza that exists due to the Israeli
measures, but we were also unable to reach agreement
on a press statement condemning last month's terrorist
attack on a Jewish seminary in West Jerusalem. We
have to add here that the debates held in the Security
Council every month on this issue do not seem to
contribute in any way to the peace process. In this
context, however, we must express our recognition and
appreciation for the efforts undertaken by the
Secretary-General for peace in the region.

We all know that a final peace agreement
between the Israelis and the Palestinians must be based
on the existence of two States living in peace with each
other and with their neighbours, within the 1967
borders.

The latest significant initiative in this regard was
the Annapolis Conference organized by the United
States, in which the world placed renewed hope.
Unfortunately, at this time the Annapolis process seems
to have come to a standstill and is at risk of collapse.
That would have serious consequences for a region
already threatened by new and even bloodier conflicts.

For Panama, the lack of progress is due, inter
alia, to two overriding factors. On the one side is the
apparent lack of political resolve on the part of the
Israeli Government to commit itself to a genuine
negotiating process that, given its nature, would
require relinquishing certain aspirations and positions.
On the other side are the profound political differences
among Palestinians parties, which lead to the inability
to reach agreements with a view to establishing a
national unity Government that could advance the
negotiating process. The announcement of a new
dialogue between Hamas and Fatah, under the auspices
of Yemen, augurs well in this regard, though we cannot
ignore the results of similar, earlier efforts.

Finally, everything seems to indicate that in order
to create an environment conducive to a genuine
negotiating process with a View to attaining a lasting
and final peace, we must, in addition to resolving the
aforementioned obstacles, take the following measures
in the shortest possible time. Israeli must immediately
and unconditionally end the construction of settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including in
West Jerusalem. Hamas must end its rocket attacks
against Israel. Israel must end its incursions into
occupied Palestinian territories and its siege of Gaza.
Until these requirements have been met, all efforts for
a peace process are doomed to failure.

There is nothing new in what we are saying. On
the contrary, it is known by the majority, but it is not
said by everyone here.

