Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): First, I join
others in thanking Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing and for his introduction of the Secretary-
General's report on the situation in Afghanistan since
March 2008. I thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin of
Afghanistan for his presence and for his statement
before the Council.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2008/617), despite many efforts of the Government
and people of Afghanistan and the international
community, the situation in Afghanistan has become
more challenging over the past six months. We are
deeply concerned over the spread of violent and
insurgent activities throughout the country, especially
in the provinces adjacent to Kabul, which have
contributed to increased civilian casualties. The extent
and reach of violence is hampering reconstruction
efforts and threatens to undermine initial achievements
recorded by the Government and people of Afghanistan
so far.

We are concerned that, because of that situation,
as reported by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), 190,000 children, most of
them in the volatile southern districts of Helmand and
Kandahar, had no access to a recent immunization
programme and that food shortages due to drought and
high prices are affecting one sixth of the country's
population, making their lives - which were already
very hard due to the severity of conflict and violence -
even harder.

The trend of increasing attacks against aid
workers, convoys and facilities, as well as those
launched for whatever reason against civilians, is a
cause of special concern. In that connection, we urge
all parties concerned, in respect for international law,
including international humanitarian law, to take all
necessary measures to ensure safety for all those doing
their noble humanitarian work in support of the people
of Afghanistan and the innocent civilians of the
country.

The aforementioned situation in Afghanistan
requires that further priority be given to strengthening
security, which is needed to ensure the safety of the
Afghan people, to carry out humanitarian activities and
socio-economic development programmes, and to
create an environment conducive to a lasting political
settlement. At the same time, more efforts should be
made to address the root causes of conflict. Measures
should be taken to create more jobs, and thus more
income, for rural inhabitants so that they will be less

dependent on opium cultivation, and to improve health
care, education and other social services so that
Afghans on opposing sides will realize that they will be
better off as beneficiaries of the peacebuilding and
reconstruction process rather than of violence and
hostilities.

To that end, we welcome the enhanced efforts by
the Afghan Government to implement the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy and achieve the
Millennium Development Goals, as well as to improve
their institutional capabilities, including at the
provincial level, to promote their ownership in all
fields of governance and to use international aid more
effectively. Afghan leadership and responsibility will
be of key importance in the reconstruction process.
However, given the formidable challenges they are
facing, the Afghan Government and people deserve
continued international assistance and support. The
international community should speed up the
implementation of the commitments made at the Paris
Conference in June.

As an important factor of its development and
stability, Afghanistan's closer cooperation with
neighbouring countries and regional partners should be
further encouraged. The United Nations, through
UNAMA, should continue to play a key role in
coordinating and monitoring international assistance to
the country. We would like to stress that, apart from the
need for its effective management, it is essential to
ensure that international assistance target the most
vulnerable among the Afghan people, especially
women and children, and aim to encourage the full,
equal and effective participation of local people in the
decision-making process.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Viet Nam's
consistent support for the Government and people of
Afghanistan in their post-conflict reconstruction
process. Viet Nam will continue to work with the
United Nations and the international community to
contribute to the success of the process in the hope that
Afghanistan will soon emerge from its current
difficulties to embark on a new era of lasting peace,
stability, prosperity and development.

