Mrs. Pinto Lopes D'Alva (Guinea-Bissau): We
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
accession to the presidency of the Council for the month
of February, and to wish you success in your work.

I would especially like to thank the Secretary-
General for the report on Guinea-Bissau (S/2016/141)
that has just been presented and for his personal
engagement with the latest developments in my country.
We very much appreciate and commend the work of his
Special Representative, Mr. Miguel Trovoada, and his
team. I would also like to thank Ambassadors Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil;
Sofia Mesquita Borges, Permanent Representative of
Timor-Leste; and Fode Seck, Permanent Representative
of Senegal, the Chairs, respectively, of the Guinea-
Bissau configuration ofthe Peacebuilding Commission,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP) and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), for their statements and engagement
on Guinea-Bissau.

Today's meeting ofthe Council is taking place at the
time when Guinea-Bissau is facing a serious political
crisis that is compromising the normal functioning
of State institutions and jeopardizing all the gains
achieved after the general elections of 2014, including
the very encouraging results of the Brussels round-
table donor conference. As we can see, the instability
in Guinea-Bissau has not ended with its elections, and
the situation the country is currently facing clearly
illustrates that. That is why we are appealing to the
international community to remain engaged with
us in helping to strengthen our institutions and work
much more closely with the national authorities and all
political stakeholders in order to guide us, through open
and frank dialogue, so as to mitigate the crisis situation
that is endangering our peace and stability.

Despite of the tensions that exist within the
Republic's major institutions and the country's main
political parties, Bissau-Guineans throughout the
country continue to behave relatively peacefully and
calmly even as their socioeconomic well-being is being
severely affected and their dreams and aspirations are
once again on hold. We know that it is our primary
responsibility to bring peace and stability to our
country in order to achieve economic development and
prosperity for all. But the long-suffering population
does not deserve to pay a high price for the difficulties
encountered along the hard road to peace in Guinea-
Bissau. They are counting on the international
community to remain engaged and to not abandon
Guinea-Bissau.

For Guinea-Bissau, the path to democracy has
not been easy to traverse. However, we believe that
the latest crisis, although more complicated in some
ways and costly to our people, is bringing us much
closer to the stable democracy we seek. The fact
that all the parties involved in the current political
crisis have been undertaking legal steps to resolve
their differences through the national courts is to be
highlighted and commended. We can say that these
little democratic achievements are in part the result
of a series of institutional reforms initiated by the
Government. Notwithstanding all the reforms on its
agenda, including public administration and justice,
security sector reform still is one of the priorities for
the Government, which is very engaged through the
Ministry of Defence and its security sector reform
steering committee, established for better follow-up and
proper implementation of this important reform. In that
vein, it is crucial that partners fulfil their commitment
to Guinea-Bissau with regard to the reform process by
providing their financial support to the pension fund
for the demobilization of military and police officers,
as well as by contributing financially to the special
fund for retired former freedom fighters.

The position of the military during the latest crisis
is to be commended, and the best way to ensure this
attitude prevails is to complete the security sector
reform to guarantee a smooth demobilization process
and dignified retirement or return to civilian life. We
are convinced that, with the effective implementation
of all reforms in the country, Guinea-Bissau will be
able to really achieve the needed peace and stability,
which consequently would help to create an enabling
environment to attract foreign and domestic investment,
create jobs for youth, reinforce women's empowerment
through more opportunities for decent jobs, and reduce
poverty, leading to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals for our people.

Allow me to commend before the Council the fact
that, despite the current political situation in Guinea-
Bissau, last week the Republic of Timor-Leste disbursed
$250,000 for the national dialogue and reconciliation
process, as part of their pledge at the Brussels round
table conference last year. The gesture of honouring the
commitment they made in Brussels should be followed

by other friends and partners of Guinea-Bissau. In that
regard, as it will soon be one year since the Brussels
conference, the Government intends to hold a meeting
in Bissau, in late March, to review its results and assess
the best follow-up mechanisms for its implementation.
Therefore, the fulfilment of the pledges made is very
important to us.

The engagement of our regional and subregional
partners, friends and the entire international community
has been very helpful to peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.
That is why, in consultation with ECOWAS, the CPLP
and the co-Chairs of the International Contact Group on
Guinea-Bissau, the Government wishes to have the next
meeting of the group take place here in New York at the
end March. The engagement of ECOWAS - through
its Chair, the President of Senegal, our neighbour, and
its Special Envoy, former President of Nigeria, as well
as the President of Guinea - on bringing Guineans to
dialogue is very much appreciated.

We commend the work that the ECOWAS Mission
in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) has been doing in Guinea-
Bissau, and welcome the renewal of its mandate. We
appeal to all other partners of Guinea-Bissau to provide
the financial support needed for ECOMIB to continue
the important mission of ensuring peace and security
in the country.

We welcome the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), and hope that through
the lessons learned from past mandates, the renewed
mandate would bring new perspectives to better
help Guinea-Bissau in its peacebuilding efforts. The
Government of Guinea-Bissau supports the one-strong
office of UNIOGBIS in Bissau, where all efforts
and resources are centred on the purpose of helping
peacebuilding efforts and bringing stability to the
country.

In conclusion, allow me to thank the members of
the Council and the entire international community for
their continuous support to Guinea-Bissau.

