Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank and commend Senegal for having
taken the initiative to facilitate this briefing on the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), focused on
the area of countering extremist ideologies. We are also
very grateful to you, Mr. President, for your concept
note (S/2016/965, annex). We also thank Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Miroslav
Jenca; Assistant Secretary General of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, Mr. Hameed Opeloyeru; and
Columbia University Professor, Mr. Souleymane Bachir
Diagne, for their presentations.

My own statement will primarily build upon the
reflections shared with us by Professor Souleymane
Bachir Diagne. I would like to particularly latch onto
the emphasis he lent to the issues of pluralism, diversity
and the role of education. We cherish the deeply held
belief that extremist ideologies are combatted with
freedom and tolerance. I hail from a country where
people are born and live free and where the freedom
of the individual is the cornerstone of society. We, men
and women, are free to choose in absolute conditions of
equality with no restrictions placed upon us. We, men
and women, choose our lifestyles and our education. We
elect our Governments, which enjoy legitimacy purely
through the exercise of the free voting of the citizens.
We choose our religions or we choose to not to have a
religion. In that regard, the Constitution of Uruguay, in
article 5, provides that all religious beliefs in Uruguay
are to be freely enjoyed. The State does not support any
religion. The places of worship of the various religions
are free of taxes. That is why in my country one often
finds churches, mosques, synagogues and syncretistic
temples next to each other. People are free to choose
their place of worship and does not require Government
permission. Religious practice is the personal choice of
an individual and the State does not and cannot meddle
in any way.

Even in this environment of religious tolerance,
we run the risk of intolerance rearing its ugly head. In
preventing such an outcome, education, in which boys
and girls, men and women, have equal access, plays
a crucial role. Education is vital in order to foster an
understanding of pluralism, diversity and tolerance.
The defence against extremist ideologies begins within
our individual societies by combating intolerance and
promoting freedom. There can be no doubt that at the
international level, the cooperation between States and
institutions also has a key role to play in the broader fight
against terrorism in this era of complete globalization.

As part of this cooperation, coordinating the
efforts of the United Nations and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation is of vital importance. We
welcome with great satisfaction the fact that in the final
communication of the thirteenth OIC summit, which
was held in Istanbul on 14 and 15 April, OIC hailed
its own growing cooperation with various international
and regional organizations, including, inter alia, the
United Nations. On that occasion, OIC also reiterated
its full support for the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and for the Secretary-General's
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which we
see as a very positive sign.

By the same token, the determination of its
members to remain united in the fight against terrorism
and the reaffirmation of the importance of addressing
the causes of violent extremism in holistic way are
evidence of a joint and comprehensive work, which
we commend, and we encourage the protagonists to
maintain a steady course along these lines. The battle
of ideas must be won by underscoring the values of
peaceful coexistence, pluralism, social inclusion and
freedom of opinion.

