Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to thank Mr. Wane and Mr. Haysom and
His Excellency Mr. Mogae for their briefings today.

I will be very concise because, regrettably, the
situation in South Sudan has hardly changed since the
Security Council addressed the issue one month ago
(see S/PV.8008), which is why Uruguay reiterates its
deep concern and alarm over the crisis in the country,
whose political leaders are primarily responsible for
the current situation. We are particularly concerned,
as mentioned in the statements made by our three
briefers, about the continuing impact of the situation
on the civilian population - hampered humanitarian
access, the looting of food reserves - because what
is most important is protecting civilians. We therefore
urge all parties and armed groups to immediately cease
hostilities throughout the territory and to commit now in
good faith to dialogue that will enable the revitalization
of the August 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.

Faced with this difficult scenario, I would like to
acknowledge the tireless efforts ofthe African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
to relaunch a credible political process. We welcome
IGAD's decision to convene a high-level forum in the
near future to revitalize the peace Agreement. That
will be a good opportunity for the United Nations,
the African Union and IGAD to demonstrate their
joint work and express an unequivocal message
regarding the restoration of the permanent ceasefire,
the full implementation of the peace Agreement and
the holding of democratic elections at the end of the
transition period.

With regard to the Regional Protection Force,
we note the extremely slow progress towards its
complete deployment. We reiterate our urging of the
Government of South Sudan to fully cooperate with
the implementation of resolution 2327 (2016), to cease
restricting the activities of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and to allow forthwith the
full functionality of the Regional Protection Force.

I would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our appreciation for the courage and dedication of
UNMISS staff and of humanitarian actors, who
continue to protect and assist millions ofpeople who are
victims of a humanitarian catastrophe in an extremely
hazardous operational environment.

