Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): The
establishment of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and their legacy
should serve as a message to future generations that
no one is above the law and crimes such as those that
claimed lives in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda will
not be tolerated anywhere. I thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors for their comprehensive briefings today.
Moving on to the issue of the completion of the
work of both Tribunals, we note the further efforts
that the Tribunals have made recently, together with
the additional reform of the Tribunals' procedures,
focusing on enhancing productivity and maximizing
efficiency, without sacrificing standards of due
process. It is evident that they continue to face all the
same challenges, which unavoidably have a substantial
impact on the completion of their work and the
fulfilment of the requirements necessary for transition
to the Residual Mechanism.

We are hopeful that, in their final stages, the
Tribunals will be able to swiftly overcome temporary
delays in confirming their firm, final promises and that
justice will be served on the perpetrators of atrocities.
The victims and their families have waited long enough
for the opportunity for redress and closure, and further
delays only undermine such solemn promises. In that
regard, the reassignment ofjudges, both permanent and
ad litem, according to the current requirements of trial
and appeal proceedings in the ICTY, was a positive
and necessary step in order to increase their ability to
effectively address simultaneous cases.

For those reasons, strengthening international
criminal justice, ensuring accountability and not
leaving room for impunity for registered crimes
committed on the territory of the former Yugoslavia
are some of the priorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and our commitment and dedication to them are strong
and unwavering. In that regard, we note that the
crimes committed, which were undoubtedly confirmed
by the Tribunal in The Hague, should not remain
unpunished. We note the assessments and concerns of
the Prosecutors, and we are fully aware that there is a
lot more to be done.

It is necessary to bear in mind, however, that
Bosnia and Herzegovina bears the greatest burden
of prosecutions for war crimes, and that since 2005
over 100 cases have been prosecuted successfully
and all cases transferred pursuant to Rule 11 bis have
been completed. The fact remains that my country is
still faced with a difficult task, as some 1,300 cases
remain to be processed. Furthermore, we fully agree
that cooperation between the countries of the region
is highly important, and that every effort should be
devoted to its improvement through numerous bilateral
agreements to address possible deficiencies.

Finally, I wish to reiterate that Bosnia and
Herzegovina affirms its commitment to fulfilling its
obligations and ensuring accountability for all crimes
committed. With the Mechanism ready to continue
carrying out the functions of both Tribunals, we have
ensured that the comprehensive corpus of precedents
in international criminal law created by the Tribunals,
their ground-breaking contribution to international
jurisprudence and the international justice system, will
be permanently preserved. It is our pledge to future
generations, and our obligation to the victims and their
immense pain and suffering, to ensure that for every
crime committed and every victim, on every side, a
perpetrator brought to justice.

