Mr. Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): As this is the first statement that I have made at
an official meeting this month, I extend, Sir, on behalf of
the delegation of Guinea-Bissau, my sincere congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
April. We are certain that, given your skill and savoirfaire,
you will fully accomplish your difficult task. We also
sincerely thank, through you, Ambassador Legwaila of
Botswana for the outstanding way in which he headed the
Council last month.

Guinea-Bissau considers the recent closures and
restriction of movement in the zones under the Palestinian
National Authority as a source of continuing concern,
because of their negative repercussions for the Palestinian
population. Despite claims that such steps are legitimate
security measures, we believe that they are not
appropriate at a time when it is the job of all parties to
redouble their efforts to consolidate what has been gained
and, through specific actions, to implement fully all the
other aspects of the peace process, particularly those
related to security in the area.
We condemn the recent acts of terrorism in Israel,
which cost innocent lives. Those base acts have been
condemned in all countries that seek peace and security.
We welcome the convening in Egypt of the Summit
conference under the co-chairmanship of President
Mubarak of Egypt and President Clinton of the United
States, with the participation of many Heads of State or
Government, including those from countries of the Middle
East. We hope that the conclusions reached by that
conference will be applied in such a way as to facilitate
the peace process in the region and to combat terrorism.

As the Security Council is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, it could
not remain indifferent to the latest developments in the
situation in the Middle East or to the suffering of the
civilian population. Nevertheless, we believe that at this
stage any progress towards peace in the region will
depend fundamentally upon the will of the parties
concerned. We therefore encourage the parties to confront
the enemies of peace and to respect existing commitments
and agreements, and to continue their direct negotiations,
which is the only way of reaching a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace and social and economic development
in the Middle East.

