Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic is
pleased to welcome very warmly Mr. Jacob Zuma,
Deputy President of the Republic of South Africa. We
should like to thank him for the sincere message of
peace that he brought to the Council. We should also
like to express our great appreciation for his successful
efforts that led to the signing of the agreement on 2
December in Arusha to put an end to the conflict in
Burundi and to achieve peace in that country, which
has suffered greatly and now deserves to live in peace
so that its friendly people can have the opportunity to
build a new and developed Burundi.

I should also like to welcome Ambassador de la
Sabliere, the new Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations, and to reaffirm our full
cooperation with him in the coming phase of the
Council's work.

I should also like to pay tribute to President
Mbeki of South Africa, which holds the current
presidency of the African Union and of the Non-
Aligned Movement, for his constructive efforts to bring
about peace in Burundi and in other parts of the
African continent. We would also like to welcome the
signing of the peace agreement between the
Government of Burundi and the Forces for the Defence
of Democracy, and we look forward to the forthcoming
Council consultations, during which we will be
discussing the new developments in Burundi.

We listened attentively to Mr. Zuma's very
important statement, and we took note of all the
proposals and opinions therein. We noted in particular
the opinions he expressed and the role he assigns to the
international community, especially the Security
Council, to implement, fully and successfully, the
agreement that has been signed on Burundi. The
delegation of Syria would like to reaffirm its support
for the proposals that Mr. Zuma submitted with regard
to the role of the Security Council. I would like to
reiterate the important role to be played by the donor
countries in making the agreement that has been signed
a great success.

