The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative
of Uruguay.

I thank Ms. Mogherini for her detailed and
informative statement. Allow me to congratulate her,
and through her all States members of the European
Union, on the sixtieth anniversary of the signing of the
Rome Treaty, a date that coincides with the seventy-
second anniversary of Victory in Europe Day.

Uruguay attaches the utmost importance to
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The challenges of the twenty-first
century are too numerous and complex to be addressed
only within the United Nations. It Is essential to
revitalize Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
in order to make the outstanding work more effective,
and to progressively guarantee international peace
and security.

We acknowledge the important work that the
European Union does in the field of international
peace and security. The ongoing support that the
European Union offers to various countries through the
deployment of a variety of instruments - from good
practices, mediation, support for the development of
national institutions and capacities, as well as training,
funding and equipping peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Council, among others - provides
the multilateral system with a committed and effective
actor in the search for solutions that ensure sustainable
peace. In that regard, the European Security and
Defence Policy is a fundamental and complementary
part that allows the multilateral system machinery to
work properly.

The European Union and the United Nations work
jointly in several peacekeeping contexts. The European
Union provides training and support for security-sector
reform in, for example, the Central African Republic,
Mali and Somalia. Furthermore, the European Union
performs relevant work in the Balkans. I would highlight
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
under the auspices of the United Nations, as well as
its contribution to the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, and the 2015 Minsk agreements. In Bosnia and
Herzegovina the presence of the European Union-led
multinational stabilization force represents a guarantee
for the political and social stability of the country.

Uruguay is strongly committed to the promotion
and protection of human rights. In that connection,
it is understood that there can be no sustainable
development, peace or security without respect for
human rights. That is why human rights follow-up
and monitoring is essential to early warning and the
ability to take preventive measures in time. For that
reason I cannot fail to mention the women and peace
and security agenda, to which the European Union,
like Uruguay, attaches the utmost importance. Women
play an essential role in achieving peaceful societies,
whether in prevention or in the solution of conflicts.

Among the most vulnerable groups are refugees,
internally displaced persons and migrants.

Uruguay belongs to a region in which the
phenomenon of migration has been a fundamental
element of its past and present. It has welcomed
European immigrants throughout its history and, more
recently, during the various wars that have impacted
that continent. Without any doubt, the phenomenon
of migration is a very complex issue because it
encompasses aspects of security, development and
human rights. It is essential to develop comprehensive
plans so as to help protect those in vulnerable situations.
Uruguay therefore does not subscribe to the approach
that criminalizes migration. On the contrary, it believes
that it is necessary to attack the underlying causes
that facilitate taking advantage of people in need in
extremely precarious situations by criminal groups.

Lastly, Uruguay notes the policies and new
regulatory frameworks of the European Union in the
area of prevention and combating terrorism. Terrorism
is undoubtedly one of the primary threats facing peace
and international security. In addition to destroying
human lives, itjeopardizes the rule of law, democracy,
peaceful coexistence between civilizations, and
economic and social development. We are aware that
the list of areas in which the European Union has a
substantial role has not been exhausted in our statement.
It is a matter of acknowledging that the extraordinary
process of European integration is a model that has

contributed to peace among its members and. we trust,
will continue to contribute to international peace
and security.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The meeting ruse ar 12.10p.m.
