Mr. Alfano (Italy): Allow me to commend the
Swedish presidency for organizing today's debate.
My gratitude also goes to the Secretary-General for
his ambitious programme of action. As we begin the
year, I look forward to an open, productive and fruitful
working relationship in the Security Council.

This is Italy's first open debate since its election
to the Council. We are sharing our mandate with our
Dutch partners in the best spirit of European unity and
solidarity. As a Mediterranean country, Italy brings to
the Council its natural disposition to build bridges to
draw together all sides.

We believe that inclusiveness is key to effective
multilateralism and to addressing our common
challenges. In Libya and Iraq, we must work together
and spare no effort to achieve reconciliation and support
for legitimate institutions. In Syria, we need a greater
investment in inclusive dialogue among all the parties.
Italy also attaches great importance to the successful
outcome of the Cyprus settlement talks. I commend
the brilliant efforts of the Secretary-General in this
regard. In addition, let us not forget tensions in Africa,
such as those seen today in the Democratic Republic of

the Congo.

Unquestionably, if we truly want peace, conflict
prevention and diplomacy must prevail over military
solutions. We must preserve the primacy of political
will over the misery of military might. The principles
and the framework to achieve this shift already exist;
we do not need to reinvent them. Allow me, however, to
recall a few of these principles.

Conflict prevention and the primacy of political
solutions are at the heart of two crucial United Nations
reviews - one on the peacekeeping and peacebuilding
architecture, the other on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. The sustaining peace agenda stresses the need
for a holistic approach covering the pillars of security,
human rights and development. The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development also places great emphasis on
the strong link between peace and development. What is
now needed more than ever is a common effort to move
from vision to action. I therefore want to stress three
important objectives for our collective efforts, taking
full advantage of the Secretary-General's peace agenda.

Our first objective should be comprehensive reform
that adapts the United Nations peace system to the new
global challenges. Such reform requires an integrated
approach to peace and the development of a United
Nations machinery that is fit for the new purpose, which
might entail a revision of the Secretariat structure or
a new distribution of roles and responsibilities. The
Secretary-General should not hesitate in his functions to
bring emerging crises to the Council's attention before
they escalate. Reform must also address strengthening
local ownership and partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, such as the European Union
and the African Union.

Secondly, we need to encourage the effective use
of early-warning indicators of violence, radicalization,
extremism and assaults on human rights, religion and
culture. Terrorism attacks our fundamental values and
spreads fear. We must not be fearful because people in
fear are not free. Fighting terror and fear means fighting
for our freedom.

Thirdly, we must be focused on the root causes of
instability. I will offer just a few examples as an input
to the debate. Climate change is a growing root cause
of conflict. We have made progress in shaping a global
response, in Paris and in Marrakech, but it is now time

to deliver. Ending hunger and achieving food security is
another critical area, especially owing to its connection
to disruptive South-South and South-North migrations.
Large movements of people can be both an outcome
and a root cause of conflict. However, ifwell managed,
they can become an opportunity for peace, growth and
development. These issues, along with many others,
also appear in the programme of the Italian presidency
of the Group of Seven.

In conclusion, we are determined to build peace
for tomorrow. That is not just the motto of our year in
the Security Council; it also describes the resolve that
will drive our actions. We will work to build consensus
together with the Secretary-General, our partners in the
Council and the broader membership.

