Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): 1 thank you, Mr. President,
for holding this important debate.

While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement of
the European Union, I find it pertinent to make a few
brief points in my national capacity.

Security in Afghanistan and the Central Asian
region is one of the important issues that attract the
attention of the international community. Ukraine
believes that without providing adequate security
conditions in Afghanistan, it is difficult to talk of
reviving the Afghan economy, better living standards
and implementing social programmes and other projects
to rebuild the country.

The presence of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan for more than
10 years has made an important contribution to the
process of stabilizing the political and security situation
in the country. Currently, Ukrainian peacekeeping
personnel in the country comprise 28 representatives.
Since 2009, Ukraine has permitted the transit of cargo
for ISAF needs in Afghanistan over its territory.
Ukraine supports the gradual transfer of responsibility
for maintaining security from the international forces
to the Afghan National Army and Police.

The withdrawal of ISAF from Afghanistan
requires the development and implementation of a
possible response by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to new challenges and
threats that have a direct impact on OSCE States that
border Afghanistan, as well as on the whole OSCE area.

In order to make a detailed analysis of potential
risks to the security of OSCE participating States, the
Ukrainian chairmanship of the Organization sees merit
in conducting in-depth discussions on that important
issue within the OSCE framework. With regard to such
activities, the Ukrainian chairmanship proposes to
devote a specific session of the 2013 Annual Security
Review Conference to border-related issues. Such work
may lay the basis for developing an update to the OSCE
Border Security and Management Concept, which
defines the framework for cooperation among OSCE
participating States.

Ukraine supports the decisions of the international
conferences on Afghanistan of 2010 to 2012 aimed
at strengthening peace and security in the country,
promoting its social and economic recovery, supporting
integration processes and developing regional
cooperation. We fully share the common view that
the regional approach plays a key role in ensuring
durable stability in Afghanistan and in the wider
region. Afghanistan's neighbours play a very important
role, and their commitment to our joint efforts is
indispensable.

