Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me start by expressing
my appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Aichatou Mindaoudou, for her
briefing and for the successful work that she and her
team have carried out in order to ensure the successful
completion of the mandate of the United Nations
Operation in cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI).

I would also like to thank His Excellency,
Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire. I take this opportunity
to extend our warmest congraulations to him on the
election of Cote d'Ivoire as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council for the period of 2018-2019. I
look forward to working closely with his country in
the Council.

The closure of UNOCI marks a significant
milestone, both for Cote d'Ivoire and for the United
Nations. Over the past 13 years, UNOCI has worked
to promote the rule of law, national reconciliation,
security sector reform, the protection of civilians and
human rights in Cote d'Ivoire, thereby contributing to
the restoration ofpeace and stability in the country. We
hope that the experience of UNOCI will provide useful
lessons for similar missions in the future. Without a
doubt, the progress made over the past 13 years would
not have been possible without the active participation
of the people and Government of Cote d'Ivoire. The
leadership and commitment of the Government to
undertake necessary reform should be commended.

We are confident that the efforts of the Government
aimed at fostering greater unity and national
reconciliation will continue. Without a doubt, the
need for greater unity and national reconciliation have
been made self-evident by recent developments. The
country certainly needs the continued support of the
international community as it strives to sustain peace
and consolidate the political and economic gains made
in recent years. Therefore, the sustained engagement
of the United Nations country team remains very
important. We are encouraged to note that the handing
over of commitment from UNOCI to the country
team took place in line with the plan established for
the transition.

Let me conclude by paying tribute to the entire
ONOCI team, including the military and civilian
personnel, for their dedication and service.

