Mr. Sezibera (Rwanda): I would like first of all
to thank you, Madam President, for having associated
Rwanda with the deliberations of this meeting of the
Security Council. We are pleased and honoured to see
the United Republic of Tanzania presiding over the
proceedings of the Council this month. We are
extremely glad to see you, Madam, occupying the
presidency. We have no doubt that your able leadership
will make the work of the Council extremely
productive. We pay tribute to the United Republic of
Tanzania, working in concert with all of its neighbours,
for its tireless efforts in the search for peace and shared
development in the Great Lakes region and, indeed, in
the entire African continent.
This meeting of the Security Council is dedicated
to the examination of events in the Great Lakes region.
More specifically, it seeks to address peace, security
and development in the region. Those issues are,
indeed, all interrelated and crucial. The people of our
region are not only interlinked ethnically, culturally,
linguistically and economically, but they also have -
as the developments in post-genocide Rwanda, the
elections in Burundi and the electoral process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo attest - expressed
their desire and their determination to forge a better
future, despite, and moving beyond, the traumas of the
past.

The countries of the region have been tireless in
the search for peace and stability in the region. They
have played a major role in the return of peace in
Burundi and the advent of a new political dispensation
in that country. They continue to play a key role in
finding solutions to the crises in Somalia and the
Sudan.

The principles of regional ownership of peace
processes and international partnership are not merely
empty slogans. Our region has shown that they are
possible, and that, when applied correctly, they
produce results.

Rwanda is encouraged by the progress of the
political process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Many of the pillars of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement of 1999 have slowly but surely been
realized. The war, which at its peak involved many
States, has stopped. Instead of confrontation and
conflict, States in the region are now exploring avenues
of increased cooperation. The Congolese people have a
new political dispensation and are involved in a
process that will further cement it, as they move
beyond the transitional arrangements agreed on at Sun
City, South Africa, and establish structures reflective
of the will of the people. Foreign troops have
withdrawn from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in a process aided and observed by the region and by
the international community.

Rwanda believes that the prospects for lasting
peace, deepened stability and shared prosperity are
better now than they have been at any other moment
since the genocide of 1994. The region and the rest of
the international community need to work together to
consolidate the gains in peace and security, while also
laying a solid groundwork for sustained and
sustainable shared prosperity. In order to effectively do
that, however, we will all need to address the
unfinished business of the Lusaka process. As I have
already said, many of the building blocks for regional
peace, as identified by that process, have been put in
place. Unfortunately, there still remains one key
impediment to lasting peace: the presence of genocidal
forces and other armed groups in the region, whose
sole purpose is the continued destabilization of our
countries.

Until and unless the people of the region are
freed of the fear, the tyranny and the attacks of the
forces currently calling themselves the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), the
Lord's Resistance Army, the Palipehutu-Forces
nationales de liberation and other armed groups that
currently sow desolation in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the rest of the region, the
emerging peace will continue to be fragile and
development will remain a distant dream for many of
our people.

Rwandans continue to ask why, for 11 years now,
they have had to continue to live with the spectre of
genocide. They would like to know why the Security
Council has not yet permanently ended the threat posed
by those forces, and they question why the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) and the Group of Experts re-established under
resolution 1596 (2005) have not yet tackled the issue of
the flow of arms and other supplies to those groups
with the seriousness it deserves. I dare to hope that this
open meeting will provide the answers to those
questions, both through the draft resolution to be
adopted later and through actions taken by United
Nations forces on the ground.

Rwanda would like to take this opportunity to
express its condolences to the Government and the
people of Guatemala, to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and to the entire United Nations family on
the loss of the Guatemalan peacekeepers in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The deaths of those
valiant peacekeepers should spur the Council to
further, stronger and more effective action.

The Governments of the region, through their
ministers for foreign affairs, meeting in Kampala in
October last year, provided the Council with
suggestions about how that could be done. I hope that
this body will take the necessary decisions. Rwanda,
for its part, will continue to extend to any and all
members of the FDLR who repatriate all the rights and
responsibilities that Rwandans enjoy, as is their
unconditional and inalienable right.
An important building block in the emerging
architecture of peace in our region is the International
Conference on Peace, Security and Development in the
Great Lakes Region. The first Summit of Heads of
State and Government, held in Dar es-Salaam in
November 2004, provided a vision of a region
transformed from a theatre of incessant conflict to one
of shared prosperity. They also provided a road map for
how that transformation could occur. Rwanda hopes
that the postponed second Summit will take place as
expeditiously as possible.

As the region works towards the signing of the
proposed Security, Stability and Development Pact, the
key principles of the region's ownership of both the
process and the outcomes, sustained international
partnership and inclusion, which are the pillars of the
Conference process, will continue to be critical. It is
also important to reaffirm the link among peace and
security, good governance and economic development.
Peace and security processes that are not anchored by
good governance practices, sustained growth and
poverty reduction are fragile indeed. That is why we
believe that the four themes of the Conference are
equally important.

The Conference process has fostered dialogue
among Governments, parliamentarians, civil society
actors, the private sector, women's groups, young
people, media professionals, religious leaders and
others. It has raised the expectations of millions of
citizens in the region. In order for those expectations to
be met, additional resources will have to be mobilized
both within the region and from the international
community. If that is not done, then it will simply be
another conference that makes lots of headlines but has
no measurable impact on the region's poor.

As the region establishes a follow-up mechanism
for the Conference, there is a need for serious
discussions on mechanisms for continued partnership
with the international community in the years ahead.
Serious thought will also have to be given to novel
ways of funding the identified outcomes, which will be
reflected in the pact.

The formal establishment of a Peacebuilding
Commission in December 2005 by the Security
Council through its resolution 1645 (2005) and by the
General Assembly through its resolution 60/180 is a
very welcome event. Many countries in the Great
Lakes region are in transition from conflict to
sustainable peace and development. They are therefore
ideal candidates for assistance from the Commission.
Rwanda, given its history, is ready to contribute
to the Commission's success. It is important that the
initiatives currently under way in the Great Lakes
region find some link with the Commission. We are
ready to make our contribution when called upon to do
so, be it through the sharing of ideas, material
resources or personnel. Rwanda also pledges to
continue to make its contribution to the return of peace
and stability to the region and to the protection of
vulnerable populations, especially on our continent, in
concert with the African Union and the United Nations.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute to all
those who have worked tirelessly for peace in our
region. First of all, my tribute goes to the people and
the leaders of the region, who have decided to take its
destiny in their hands. They need the Council's
support. We wish to recognize the invaluable role
played by the United Nations and all its organs and by
the African Union and all its organs. We thank the
United States of America, the facilitator of the
Tripartite Plus One Commission. The Commission has
contributed to the emerging return of confidence
among the Governments of Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, enabling
them to identify common threats and to face them
collectively. I thank the Group of Friends of the Great
Lakes Region, co-chaired by Canada and the
Netherlands, for their invaluable assistance to the
International Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy
and Development in the Great Lakes Region.

All those concerted efforts have led the region to
the brink of lasting peace and sustainable development.
Rwanda believes that this is not the time to rest and do
less; it is the time for a recommitment to do more -
much more.

