Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): My delegation thanks you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely and important
meeting. I also wish to thank all the briefers for their
respective presentations, which provided important
views and perspectives on the issue at hand.

Before moving on to the subject of our discussion
today, I take this opportunity to express the deepest
condolences and sympathies of the people and the
Government of Malaysia to the victims and loved ones
affected by the terrorist attacks in Mogadishu, Cairo
and Istanbul yesterday. We wish the injured speedy
recovery. We are also deeply troubled by a report coming
out of Maiduguri, Nigeria, where yesterday two young
girls allegedly carried out suicide bomb attacks only
mere minutes apart. Malaysia reaffirms its solidarity
with Somalia, Egypt, Turkey and Nigeria, and we stand
together with all countries that are victims of such vile
and cowardly attacks.

Those attacks underscore the importance of
collective and coordinated action at all levels in
combating the scourge of terrorism. In my delegation's
view, our meeting today represents another significant
step towards that end by seeking to strengthen
international cooperation in the administration of
justice and accountability for perpetrators of terrorism
and terrorist attacks. In that connection, my delegation
also welcomes the currently ongoing joint meeting
between the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities,
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-
terrorism, focusing on lessons learned and challenges
in preventing terrorist groups from accessing, raising
and moving funds. We believe that resolution 2322
(2016), just adopted by the Council, which Malaysia
was pleased to co-sponsor, will make a meaningful and
significant contribution to strengthening international
cooperation in combating terrorism in the particularly
crucial aspect of financing.

As alluded to in the briefings, and as delegations
have attested, the task of ensuring accountability for
perpetrators of terrorist attacks can be complex and
challenging, particularly for law enforcement and
judicial authorities. We share the view that issues of
sovereignty, borders and differences in legal systems
are some of the major obstacles to better cooperation
among States. Such an apposition takes advantage of
the differences between legal systems, the clash of
bureaucracies, and often exploits the cumbersome
nature of inter-State trials and arrangements for
legal and judicial cooperation. That notwithstanding,
Malaysia firmly believes that traditional arrangements
for cooperation, such as mutual legal assistance
and extradition arrangements, could continue to be
enhanced. Where appropriate, areas such as evidentiary
standards, communication and records could be
streamlined with a view to minimize the transactional
processes involved when such arrangements are
activated between countries.

At the domestic level, Malaysia enacted its mutual
legal assistance legislation in 2002. Act No. 621, also
knows and the Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters
Act, designates the Attorney-General as the central
authority empowered to make and receive requests for
mutual assistance in criminal matters to be rendered
and sought between Malaysia and other countries
and for matters connected therewith. With regard to
extradition, the designated central authority is the
Minister of Home Affairs, who will act upon advice
from the Attorney-General's chamber. For Malaysia,
a reciprocal commitment is a mandatory requirement
that needs to be fulfilled when a requesting State makes
an extradition request. As such, we are pleased that this
important principle is duly recognized in resolution
2322 (2016).

The Government of Malaysia is currently in
the process of reviewing the current mutual legal
assistance legislation, including the model treaty, with
a view to keeping abreast of common international
practices in dealing with the threat posed by terrorism
and terrorist actors, including the foreign terrorist
fighters phenomenon. Furthermore, at the regional
level, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) has in place mutual legal assistance treaty
arrangements intended to facilitate the implementation
of ASEAN member States' obligations under
mutual legal assistance regimes established under
international instruments, such as the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
Those arrangements reflect the common desire and
commitment of ASEAN member States to improve
the effectiveness of law enforcement authorities in the
prevention, investigation and prosecution of offences
through cooperation and mutual legal assistance at the
regional level.
In conclusion, the multidimensional nature of the
threat posed by terrorism and terrorists, including
foreign terrorist fighters and related activities,
especially on financing, constitute an ongoing
challenge to international peace and security, which
requires intensified cooperation at all levels in order to
fully counter that scourge. We believe that the adoption
of resolution 2322 (2016) strengthens the underlying
foundations for such cooperation and paves the way for
all States, as well as other partners and stakeholders,
in taking effective measures and cooperation in
that regard.

As my delegation prepares to leave the Council,
I wish to underscore Malaysia's commitment to
continuing its cooperation and engagement with key
partners, including the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL, in their tireless
efforts to ensure accountability for perpetrators of
terrorist acts and supporters of terrorism.

