Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are very grateful to the briefers,
Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General, Mr. Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and
Mr. Umarov, Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan,
for their thorough analysis of the evolving situation
in Afghanistan. Their briefings constitute a good
basis for today's discussion. We note the selfless
work being done by the entire United Nations team in
Afghanistan. For our part, we would like to make the
following comments.

The Government, the armed forces and the people
of Afghanistan continue their courageous efforts to
overcome the challenges to their security, both old and
new. Having suffered a crushing defeat in the Middle
East, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
is moving to other regions. The main centre where the
terrorists are concentrated is now Afghanistan. There
are clear signs that ISIL is putting down roots in the
country. A recent result of ISIL's strengthened presence
was the seizure by militants of new areas in the north of
the country. Additional ISIL groups are moving into the
area. The secret to the jihadists' successful infiltration
is material and military support coming from outside
sponsors. We call on the Afghan authorities and
the leaders of foreign presences in the area to take
determined steps to rid the country's northern regions
of terrorist elements, which represent a serious threat
to the security of our partners the Central Asian
States. This cannot be tolerated. It is important that
Kazakhstan, as a member of the Security Council, is
drawing general attention to the developing situation
on the ground.

We are also very concerned about the deteriorating
drug situation in Afghanistan. As Mr. Fedotov rightly
noted, the figures in UNODC's most recent report
are confirm that unfortunate trend. We are seeing an
increase in drug crime and terrorist activities. The
situation requires an immediate ramping up of efforts
on the part of the international community. We urge
everyone to consider the robust efforts of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization in that regard.

The efforts to counter terrorism in Afghanistan have
been going on for 16 years, but the situation remains
difficult and military personnel and civilians are still
dying. The task of ensuring sustainable development
has become harder. The entire system of international
efforts there should be rebuilt, based on the principles
of cooperation and good-neighbourliness. Counter-
terrorism efforts should be supplemented by robust
steps aimed at national reconciliation.

We wholeheartedly support the view of the
Secretary-General that there can be no military
solution to the conflict in Afghanistan. The emphasis
must be on negotiations to pave the way for rapid
national reconciliation. However, that will be possible
only through collective, mutually respectful efforts.
There is no place here for competition, hidden
agendas or mutual reproaches. We must refrain from
unilateral projects, or the situation will deteriorate
into a vicious circle. We support the efforts of all
initiatives to renew peace negotiations between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban leaders
and to achieve national reconciliation in the country,
led by the Afghans themselves. But the evolution of
the political and military situations means that with
the surge in terrorist threats emanating from Afghan
territory, it will be esesntial to include the country's
neighbours, including the Central Asian States, in the
reconciliation mechanisms. In our view, the Moscow
format has in fact achieved that in practice, along with
the revived mechanism of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group in its new
format. The principle of an honest, equal partnership,
based on the efforts of such forums, can help to achieve
the desired goals.

Afghanistan is at the threshold of a new electoral
cycle. We sincerely hope that the elections will take
place in a secure, united atmosphere. Afghan society
cannot be allowed to become polarized. The elections
should lead to consolidation and enable the country to
close this bloody chapter in its history.

To sum up, we want to note that Russia and
Afghanistan are historically linked through friendship.
President Putin has emphasized clearly that the
central Government in Kabul needs the support of the
international community, and we are ready to provide
that support, including by helping to train national
personnel in law enforcement and the armed forces and
in establishing essential arms and military technical
systems. In that context, we are open to cooperating
actively with the United States and other international
and regional parties.

Russia has contributed significantly to
Afghanistan's development on every front as a major
donor and a consistent supporter of the Afghan people's
efforts to find lasting peace. We have a deep-rooted
interest in ensuring that Afghanistan becomes a source
of stability, prosperity and sustainable development,
which accords with our national interests and with
regional stability.

