Mr. Akhinzhanov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
would like to thank His Excellency Minister Alfano,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for his briefing.

Kazakhstan welcomes the priorities of the OSCE
Italian chairpersonship, under the motto, "Dialogue,
Ownership, Responsibility". We commend its intention
to focus efforts on strengthening the organization's
effectiveness in responding to the conflict cycle and
arms control by deepening the OSCE Structured
Dialogue, which was previously initiated by the German
and Austrian chairpersonships.

We encourage the OSCE to further develop
its preventive toolbox in order to tackle existing
conflicts and growing challenges, such as terrorism,
radicalization, trafficking in human beings and the
uncontrolled influx of migrants. In doing so, we are
ready to stand side by side all participating States.

We support the OSCE key priority to seek a peaceful
resolution to the conflict in and around Ukraine, on the
basis of the Minsk agreements. We also reiterate our
strong support for the activities of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, to the work of which
Kazakhstan representatives contribute.

In the same vein, we welcome the three-day visit of
the Adviser to the Special Representative of the OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office for the Transnistrian settlement
process, Alfredo Conte, to Moldova on 20 February.
His meetings on the ground are important steps in the
ongoing confidence-building process. We also welcome
the meeting of the co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk
Group with the Presidents of Azerbaijan and Armenia
in February.

The position of Kazakhstan regarding conflict
remains crystal clear and unchanged. My country
adheres to a balanced and realistic approach to
conflict resolution that is based on the fundamental
principles of international law. As a member of the
Security Council, we stand for the implementation of
its relevant resolutions, while as an OSCE participating
State we also reaffirm the importance of the regional
platform provided by the OSCE. The outcome of the
recent Munich Security Conference clearly shows the
necessity for a more cooperative approach, focusing on
the Structured Dialogue and apositive, unifying agenda.

In addressing transnational threats, we also
encourage the promotion of cooperation among the
OSCE and other regional organizations, such as
the Eurasian Economic Union, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in
Asia, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization, which
play an important role in strengthening regional and
subregional cooperation and security in Eurasia. We
welcome the plan of the Italian chairpersonship to
actively involve its Mediterranean and Asian partners
by fostering joint work.

I would like to thank the Italian chairpersonship
for entrusting Kazakhstan with chairing the OSCE
Economic and Environmental Committee. We
believe that the secondary priorities of the Italian
chairpersonship that aim to enhance dialogue on the
issues of promoting economic progress and security
through innovations, including in the spheres of the
environment, human capital and good governance,
open new avenues for mutually beneficial cooperation.
I would like to highlight the fact that Italy's priorities
correspond closely to those outlined by my President,
Nursultan Nazarbayev, in his recent addresses to the
nation in January and March. They focus on the issues
of economic and social security of people and the
development of human capital, among others.

We very much welcome the initiative of OSCE
Secretary General Thomas Greminger to create a new
generation of OSCE field missions, and we offer the
grounds of Expo 2017 in Astana to serve as a platform
for the establishment of an OSCE centre for green
economy and connectivity. We count on the support of
the Italian chairpersonship and participating States.

The OSCE remains one of the key United
Nations partner organizations. As security challenges
continue to evolve, we need to deepen United Nations-
OSCE cooperation. As in the 2010 Kazakhstan
chairpersonship of the OSCE, and later on, we support
a comprehensive approach to security issues through
inclusive dialogue, joint ownership and common
responsibility, where no one and no concern is
left behind.

