Mr. Sarovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me
to participate in this important meeting. I believe that
the final report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2002/1314) represents the end of one era and the
beginning of another in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Unfortunately, at the beginning of previous
decade, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina was
often under consideration in this Chamber. By adopting
resolution 1031 (1995), which welcomed the Peace
Agreement reached under United Nations auspices, the
Council established the International Police Task
Force, whose role was of great importance for the post-
Dayton Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Council thus
provided for the implementation of the comprehensive
Peace Agreement by defining the mandate of the
United Nations peacekeeping mission.

The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is about to complete its mandate. We are
grateful to the United Nations and to all those who
have supported the mission and sent troops to Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We consider the withdrawal of the
peacekeeping operation to be a sign of confidence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that other
international missions will gradually be withdrawn, so
that the local infrastructure can take over their roles in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The role of the United Nations mission was of
key importance in assisting the parties to ensure
stability and establish the reform process, including the
restructuring of the police force, with a View to
creating a foundation for the rule of law. The United
Nations mission helped to establish the State Border
Service, which recently assumed the full control of the
State border.

With the completion of the UNMIBH mandate,
the European Union Police Mission will take over the
process of institution-building in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Given Bosnia and Herzegovina's
orientation towards integration into Europe, we fully
support the transition from the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to the European Union
mission, as well as continued cooperation with its
special agencies there.

With that transition, the United Nations mandate
in Bosnia and Herzegovina will have been successfully
completed. I would like to express my gratitude to the
United Nations, the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jacques
Paul Klein, as well as to all other personnel of the
mission. It was a very successful mission.

Given our efforts aimed at peace, both in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in the institutions and bodies of
the United Nations, I would like to remind the Council
that we have submitted our candidacy for non-
permanent membership of the Security Council for
2010-2012. We believe that we will be able to create an
environment and build an infrastructure that transforms
our shortcomings into advantages, as we will be able to
use the experience gained during the foundation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the fight against crime and
terrorism and thus contribute to the building of
democracy in our country and in the world.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is playing an active role
in the fight against terrorism. We are ready to support
the United Nations in its war against terrorism, as well
as the United Nations activities pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001).

Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully committed to the
implementation of United Nations resolutions. During
Secretary-General Kofi Annan' visit to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the representatives and the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina confirmed their
absolute commitment to reform and to the European
and Euro-Atlantic integration processes. In this
connection, following the October elections in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, our newly elected three-member
Presidency, which represents our three constituent
peoples and two entities, would like to emphasize its
determination to continue the process of democratic
transformation as we move towards sustainable peace
and democracy.

We have a common responsibility and a common
goal to ensure a brighter future for our children. I
would like to note that, since the general election, we
have been working to build a sustainable governmental
infrastructure. The State and entity governments of
Bosnia will have a new administration, and I am
convinced that, working in partnership, we will
continue to move towards reform and away from
internal conflict. I believe that, in place of the bad
news, we will increasingly be hearing good news from
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Finally, I would like to take
this opportunity to express my gratitude to Mr. Jacques
Paul Klein for the work about which he spoke.

