The President (interpretation from Russian): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

Russia is devoting serious attention to the question of
improving the working methods and procedures of the
Security Council. A solution to this complex task must be
sought within the framework of a carefully considered
evolutionary approach, above all in the interests of
preserving and strengthening the efficiency and
effectiveness of the Security Council's work. We believe it
important that innovations in this area, which are necessary,
should not work against the Council's functions under the
Charter or its prerogatives in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The Russian Federation has actively supported the
initiative of a large group of countries, led by Argentina
and New Zealand, to convene a formal meeting of the
Security Council to discuss the question of consultations
between the Council and countries contributing troops to
United Nations peace-keeping operations. Nearly 2,000
Russian citizens are participating in such operations in
various regions and we are thus well aware of the need to
establish such machinery. This link is particularly important
when force is brought into play during the implementation
of an operation. This is an extremely sensitive question and
any reaction made or action undertaken behind the
contributors' backs is fraught with serious consequences.

We note with satisfaction that many of the
recommendations regarding such consultations that were
made in the Security Council's presidential statement a year
ago are being successfully implemented. Meetings are
taking place between members of the Council, troop
contributors and the Secretariat before decisions are adopted
on the extension, termination or significant modification of
the mandate of a given operation. The information supplied
at such meetings has improved. At the same time, as
everywhere, there remain shortcomings that affect the
effective implementation of operations, and these
shortcomings must of course be eliminated. The means of
improvement are indicated in particular in General
Assembly resolution 50/30 and the report of the Special
Committee on Peace-keeping Operations.

This is also important because, despite the
impending downsizing of several major operations -
those in Bosnia, Rwanda and Haiti - the burden on the
Organization in this area remains significant. We
therefore cannot allow its peace-keeping potential to be
weakened.

In our view, this can be achieved through a flexible
and pragmatic approach to strengthening the mechanism
for consultations between the Security Council and troop-
contributing countries. It would probably make sense to
see how planned improvements work as they are
implemented; the ordering of additional measures could
then be based on such an analysis.

As we see it, the most important thing is not the
formalization of meetings as a goal in itself, but rather
making it possible for the views of all potential
participants in a given operation to be effectively taken
into account. Clearly, the group of troop-contributing
countries will vary from one operation to another, and
that alone creates serious practical complexities with
regard to institutionalizing a consultative mechanism. We
are in favour of timely involvement, before the Security
Council adopts decisions on a given peace-keeping
operation, in particular on the deployment of a new
operation, by countries contributing not only contingents
of troops but also equipment and other services. It is
useful to invite Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General and force commanders to certain meetings. All of
this is particularly germane to the preparations for new
and complex operations that have enforcement elements,
inter alia to ensure that such operations properly
implement the Security Council's mandate. Where a
routine extension of the mandate of an operation is
involved, however, it could be possible, upon agreement
between the countries concerned and the Secretariat, not
to hold consultations each time.

It would be useful to make it possible for
information on topics to be discussed at the consultations
to be more widely disseminated among other delegations,
first and foremost among those most affected by a given
United Nations peace-keeping operation, even though they
may not be troop-contributing countries.
 

Russia is open to constructive ideas and initiatives to
enhance the effectiveness of the way in which meetings
with troop-contributing countries are held. We must
remember here that the consultative mechanism was
devised and put in place with a View to helping the Security
Council in carrying out its Charter functions. In our View,
the functioning of that mechanism must retain precisely that
character.

We hope that the results of today's discussion will
make it possible to achieve further progress towards
strengthening the peace-keeping potential of the United
Nations, in accordance with the Charter.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Japan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

