Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
report presented by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission of Support in Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan
Salame, to whom we reiterate our support for the
outstanding work he continues to do. Similarly, we
are grateful for the report provided by Ambassador
Carl Orrenius Skau on the activities of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya.

While taking note of the work carried out by the
Special Representative during the reporting period, it
is also necessary to reaffirm the importance of the full
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement in
order to complete and finalize the transition period. To
that end, it is essential that all parties and actors involved
commit themselves to the action plan promoted by the
Special Representative. We call on them to engage in
dialogue and to fulfil all their commitments in order
to achieve an outcome that meets the interests and
aspirations of the Libyan people.

We underscore the conclusion of the first phase of
the national conference, which was held in May, at which
more than 40 meetings were held in 27 Libyan cities and
towns and in which the Libyan people expressed their
will to achieve a united country with competent and
credible institutions that redistribute resources fairly,
and above all expressed their aspiration to have unified
security and order institutions capable of guaranteeing
their security and protecting their sovereignty. In that
regard, we echo the message of presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/11, of 6 June, and express our support for
all efforts to achieve definitive stability in Libya.

We also take note of the commitment made by
the parties to holding parliamentary and presidential
elections at the end of this year. To that end and within
the framework of Libya's sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, it is important that the
necessary consultations on the new constitution take
place expeditiously and that necessary legislation
be developed to establish clearly and concretely the
elements of and requirements for carrying out those
elections. Similarly, policy development is essential for
the establishment of formal institutions that are capable
of guaranteeing the integrity of that process.

Along the same lines, the registration of nearly
2.5 million people must serve to ensure the active
participation of the entire population, especially
women, who make up almost half of the electorate.
We are confident that the collaboration and technical
assistance of UNSMIL throughout that process will be
key to achieving that goal.

We welcome the joint visit of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United
Nations Mine Action Service to the cities of Benghazi
and Misrata to assess the situation on the ground and
to participate in meetings organized by civil society
on mine action and humanitarian demining activities
in order to ensure the safe and dignified return of
internally displaced persons and their free movement.

Despite those positive developments, there has
been an alarming increase in violence and fighting
between the parties. In particular, the escalation of
violence in Derna is clearly a threat to the political
process and the security of the population. According
to the reports of various United Nations agencies, there
has been considerable damage to civilian infrastructure
owing to military action, including against schools,
mosques and private homes, as well as hospitals and
health-care centres, which have had to suspend their
functions. Regrettably, violence throughout the Libyan
territory has resulted in at least 16 fatalities and nearly
20 serious injuries as a result of those clashes and the
use of explosive devices in public and civil service
spaces. My delegation reiterates once again its call on
the parties and local actors to lay down their weapons,
respect international humanitarian law and avoid any
rhetoric that claims violence as a means of achieving
any objective, since such attitudes threaten the lives of
innocent people and undermine the progress made so
far in implementing the Libyan Political Agreement.

Furthermore, we express our concern about the
events that occurred in Ras Lanuf and Es Sider oil
fields in the Libyan crescent region and about the
measures implemented in managing the oil installations
and the production of oil and its by-products, which
considerably affected the production and export of
those products to the detriment of the Libyan people's
interest. While the situation was resolved through
dialogue at the beginning of the month, it is important
for all parties to bare in mind that the only legitimate
entity with the power to administer the oil resources
in the country is the National Oil Corporation which
belongs to the Government of National Accord, as set
forth in resolutions 2259 (2015), 2278 (2016) and 2362
(2017). In that understanding and in accordance with
the Libyan Political Agreement, all parties and actors
involved must respect and strengthen State institutions,
establish channels for dialogue and negotiation when
they find themselves in disagreement, and avoid the use
of weapons and violence at all times.

In conclusion, we reiterate that there is no military
solution to the conflict. We therefore call on all parties
to join in the ongoing efforts to maintain an ongoing
dialogue to achieve a peaceful, orderly and inclusive
political transition that responds to the interests of
the Libyan people and allows them to freely and
consensually define their future. To that end, compliance
with the Libyan Political Agreement, recognized
through resolution 2259 (2015) and reaffirmed through
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/26 of 14 December
2017, is imperative.

