The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.

I would like to begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
informative and comprehensive briefing. We thank him
for his hard work and able leadership in Kosovo, and
we look forward to continuing to work closely with
him. We also welcome the insights provided to the
United Nations by Ambassador Kai Eide of Norway.

The United States remains committed to a secure,
stable, democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo. In that
vein, we congratulate the people of Kosovo on
conducting an open, democratic election in October.
We encourage all people in Kosovo to take an active
part in the political process, including those who chose
not to vote. Participation represents the best way for all
in Kosovo to advance their interests.

The primary responsibility of the next provisional
government in Kosovo is to accelerate implementation
of the standards, ahead of the mid-2005 review. But the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) has an essential role to play in that
process. UNMIK, under the able leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, has
prioritized the implementation of the standards to focus
on ensuring the security and protection of all ethnic
groups. We fully support the Special Representative's
efforts.

Decentralization is an essential element in
protecting the rights of ethnic groups. As
recommended in the Eide report, UNMIK has begun
the important process of developing ways to devolve
more authorities to the community level. That process
will empower local communities and promote the
further reform of local government. Decentralization
provides a critical mechanism to protect minority
rights, thus making it a priority element in the political
development of Kosovo. We recognize the interest of
Belgrade in that process and welcome its thoughts,
which can enrich the Pristina-led process. We are
committed to decentralization and stand ready to assist
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
that area should he so request.

Let me close by reaffirming my Government's
commitment to the Contact Group statement of
September, which said that Kosovo's future, like that
of the entire region, is as part of Europe. The basis of
any settlement must include the promotion of security
and stability in the Balkans. As the Standards for
Kosovo document states, the future for Kosovo must be
one in which all people, regardless of ethnic
background, race or religion, are free to live, work and
travel without fear, hostility or danger, and where there
is tolerance, justice and peace for everyone.

Our attitude towards the future of Kosovo will
depend heavily on the extent to which that statement
matches the reality on the ground in Kosovo,
particularly in regard to Kosovo Serb and non-
Albanian communities. The emergence of such a
Kosovo will contribute to moving the western Balkans
region towards European integration. Those indicators
mean that Kosovo would not return to the situation
prevailing there before March 1999.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Netherlands, whom I invite to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

