Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium wishes to associate itself with the statement
made earlier today by the observer of the European
Union and congratulates Luxembourg for its
commitment to the issue under discussion.

The past few years have been marked by significant
progress in the field ofprotection ofthe rights ofthe child
in armed conflict, more specifically in the prevention
of and response to violence and abuses committed
against them. In that context, we refer in particular to
the demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration of
thousands of children recruited into armed forces and
the signing of national action plans between parties to
armed conflict and the United Nations.

Despite such progress, however, huge challenges
remain. We stress first of all that although positive
achievements have been made in the fight against
the recruitment of children into armed forces, it is
limited at this stage to governmental forces. It is
therefore necessary to pursue dialogue to achieve
our goal of eliminating the use of child soldiers by
non-governmental armed forces and groups.

Belgium welcomes the attention accorded
in resolution 2143 (2014) - which the Security
Council has just adopted today and which Belgium
co-sponsored - to the problem of military use of
schools by governmental and non-governmental armed
groups, and to attacks on schools and hospitals. Indeed,
the Secretary-General's report on children and armed
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic (S/2014/31) notes
an increase in attacks on schools and hospitals, which
should be areas of peace and refuge. The report notes,
however, that they are increasingly attacked or used for
military purposes.

Resolution 1998 (2011) highlights the impact ofsuch
attacks on the security, education and health of children
in armed conflict, and calls for increased attention to
the issue. Belgium and Luxembourg have therefore
undertaken the initiative of organizing an event on the
margins of the current Human Rights Council session
to raise awareness of that urgent problem and shed
light on the challenges and opportunities involved in
implementing the resolution.

Belgium has similar concerns about the
reintegration of children who were involved in armed
conflict, not only as child soldiers but as sexual slaves,
scouts, messengers or in any daily life task. The
psychological impact of recruitment into armed forces
and the significant stigmatization of the children make
their return to civilian life especially difficult. Without
appropriate, targeted and long-term follow up - as
the Council heard in today's testimony - they risk
becoming, in turn, perpetrators ofviolence as a result of
limited life experiences focused on the use of weapons.
That is why we need to provide them with special
assistance and include their opinions and experiences
in peace processes.

Moreover, various awareness-raising actions are
necessary on the issue of children in armed conflict. On
the one hand, there is a need to raise awareness among
families and communities to prevent stigmatization
of the children; on the other hand, security forces
themselves must be informed of the negative
consequences, both for children involved as well as for
the security forces themselves.

Awareness-raising is also necessary in tackling the
issue of sexual violence, especially in cases involving
children. In the Sudan and in Syria, for example,
children who have suffered sexual abuse tend to remain
silent, rather than to complain, because they fear social
exclusion and reprisals. It is therefore of the utmost
importance to implement specific provisions in order to
guarantee access to justice and appropriate assistance
as part of children's reintegration process.

In addition, while reporting such crimes is an
important first step for the victims, their voices need to
be heard and the perpetrators need to face justice.

Belgium remains highly concerned by the impunity
surrounding the perpetrators ofviolence. In that respect,
we welcome in particular the efforts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to implement a national plan
aimed at preventing and eliminating the recruitment of
children in the national armed forces and preventing
sexual violence. However, Belgium notes with concern
the impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators of sexual
violence. We encourage the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to undertake all possible measures to bring to
justice those responsible for such crimes.

Under the framework of the fight against sexual
violence, my country again calls for the application of
the broadest possible definition of sexual violence, as
determined by the International Criminal Court.

Finally, Belgium calls upon all of the countries
that have not yet ratified the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict to do so as
quickly as possible.

