Mr. Richmond (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom shares the grave concerns expressed in the draft
resolution before us today, which it has chosen to co-
sponsor.

The recent fighting has only prolonged the suffering
of the people of Afghanistan and, internationally, has
threatened the peace and stability of the region. It has
done nothing to achieve a lasting solution to the Afghan
crisis. History, old and new, shows us that military
conquest is not the answer. Only a political settlement,
negotiated between the factions and accommodating the
rights and interests of all Afghans, can achieve a durable
peace. We therefore strongly support the demand that the
Afghan factions stop fighting and enter urgently into
negotiations, under United Nations auspices, aimed at
creating a fully representative, broad-based government.

One particularly worrying aspect of the current
situation is the increasingly ethnic nature of the conflict
in Afghanistan. In that context, we share the concern of
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy and others about
the consequences of the latest fighting for the Hazara
community. We urge all factions to ensure the safety of
civilian communities, to refrain from any acts of
indiscriminate Violence and to facilitate the provision of
humanitarian assistance.

The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned by
continuing reports of outside interference in the affairs of
Afghanistan. All countries with an influence on the
factions in Afghanistan should do more to promote the

 

cause of regional stability by using their influence to
prevent the supply of arms and other military support and
to encourage the parties to negotiate.

The crisis in Afghanistan has recently had a direct
impact on the international community. The United
Kingdom joins in the strong condemnation of the attacks on
United Nations personnel, including in particular the
incident in which an Italian adviser to the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA) was killed. We
extend our condolences to the family and to the Italian
Government. We also condemn the capture by the Taliban
of the Iranian Consulate-General in Mazar-e-Sharif. We call
upon all concerned, and especially the Taliban, to cooperate
in investigating the incident in Kabul and in doing
everything possible to ensure the safe return of the Iranian
diplomats and other Iranian nationals who have been
missing since the seizure of the Consulate.

