Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): First,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this Council meeting pursuant to paragraph
24 of resolution 1483 (2003). Cameroon welcomes the
decision of the United States and the United Kingdom
to report to the Council on behalf of the Coalition that
is provisionally co-administering Iraq. Their excellent
briefings have drawn a candid and very complete
picture of circumstances in Iraq with respect to the

SANA-869

 

humanitarian situation, combating insecurity and
terrorism, reconstruction and, above all, the process of
reappropriation by the Iraqis of the administrative,
economic and political management of their country.

While we appreciate all the information we have
just received, I wish to stress two or three points. My
country particularly welcomes the acceleration of
Iraq's reassumption of the management of its cities,
towns and villages. The rapid and well-managed
transfer of power to the Iraqis is today essential. The
Iraqis are undoubtedly grateful to their liberators of 8
April, but they are a proud people that has inherited a
civilization that is millenniums old.

It is good that the Coalition, in its recent
initiatives, has taken these decisive points into
consideration. The accelerated political timetable is
excellent news that the international community must
approve and support. The orderly transfer of power is
essential to a recognized, credible Iraqi authority with
full responsibility for governing the country. Of course,
beyond June 2004, the Iraqis will still need many kinds
of assistance from friendly countries and their
neighbours. Like others, I recognize the unprecedented
effort of the United States in approving an $87-billion
spending package, $20 billion of which are earmarked
exclusively for the reconstruction of Iraq.

The security situation in Iraq is especially
alarming today, requiring an imaginative and proactive
collective response from the international community.
We believe that the current international situation calls
for alert but in-depth thinking on this issue, since the
terrorist factor is now undeniably present. In any event,
however, combating insecurity in Iraq must be
primarily the responsibility of the Iraqis themselves.
My delegation feels that the ongoing systematic
reconstruction of an army and an effective republican
police force is a good omen, even if more immediate
tasks must be addressed first.

This meeting is being held on the very last day of
the oil-for-food programme. We have discussed that
fact at length all week, but I wish to endorse the
Coalition's approach to assuming the work of the
programme. The Coalition's activities will employ
Iraqi personnel and structures that have proven
effective in managing the humanitarian situation in
Iraq, including Cotecna for the authentication of goods
and the World Food Programme for distribution. We
appreciate such pragmatism and reliance on the United
Nations legacy.

In conclusion, I reiterate our full faith in the
ability of the Iraqis to meet these challenges. They
survived tyranny and in the future will certainly be
able to overcome the insecurity posed by terrorism and,
in particular, rapidly to meet the challenges of
reconstruction and re-appropriation of their country.
We support them in this Herculean endeavour and are
grateful for the onerous burden assumed by the
Coalition at the cost of great sacrifice, notably in
human lives. We reiterate our sympathy to the
countries that have been victims of attacks and to the
bereaved families.

