We thank Assistant Secretary-General Alexander Zouev and the Heads of the police contingents of the United Nations missions in South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Mali and Haiti for their assessments. We would also like to thank all police peacekeepers for their dedicated service and for the discharge of their assigned tasks in the challenging environment of field missions, which is further exacerbated by the spread of the coronavirus disease. We commend the work of the Secretariat in taking preventive measures to combat the pandemic, while ensuring that peacekeepers can continue to implement their mandates without interruption. The importance of the police component in United Nations peacekeeping operations cannot be overestimated. As of today, approximately 9,000 police peacekeepers are deployed in 16 United Nations peacekeeping and special political missions, and that figure is steadily increasing. The recent report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the General Assembly (A/74/19) also highlights the particular role of police contingents in United Nations peacekeeping operations. They have an important role to play in implementing the protection of civilian mandate by patrolling, monitoring and dealing with violators of public order. They assist in strengthening the national law enforcement capacity and security sector reform. Police peacekeepers are increasingly required to deal with organized crime, drug trafficking, human trafficking and other security threats. Police officers represent a connecting link among the population, the peacekeeping presence and host Governments. Their efforts strengthen public trust in State institutions and lay the foundation for national reconciliation and post-conflict reconstruction. Blue Berets should continue to act within the framework agreed by Member States, in line with the Security Council mandate, the Charter of the United Nations and the basic principles of peacekeeping. At the same time, the main prerequisite for the effective work of police peacekeepers is establishing constructive relations with the host country, while respecting its sovereignty and taking its national circumstances into account. We agree that police officers can effectively carry out their tasks only when they have adequate logistical and personnel resources. It is also necessary to improve planning and management within missions and avoid the duplication of efforts. We believe that it is counterproductive to assign police officers functions that are not specific to them, for example, those of a political or human rights nature, which detract from the mandated tasks and reduce the overall effectiveness of their activities. The Russian Federation continues to enhance its contribution to United Nations police peacekeeping, including under the commitments undertaken at the United Nations Chiefs of Police summits. Since 1992, more than 600 employees of Russian internal affairs bodies have become United Nations peacekeepers. The department has set up a personnel reserve for participants in peacekeeping operations, which makes it possible to send internal law enforcement officers to United Nations missions on a regular rotation basis, even in times of a pandemic. Today our police officers are deployed in South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Colombia and Cyprus, as well as the United Nations Mission in Kosovo. Currently, the proportion of women is more than 20 per cent. The United Nations-certified Peacekeeping Training Centre of Russia's Ministry of the Interior regularly graduates police peacekeepers, including foreigners, many of whom are women. Particular attention is paid to language training, taking into account the specifics of the host country. Since 2000, the Centre has trained more than 1,750 Russian officers and over 600 foreign police peacekeepers from more than 50 countries around the world, 150 of whom were women officers from Russia and a number of African States. The Russian Interior Ministry's training centre for peacekeepers has scheduled the next course for Russian police officers and their counterparts from African States from 16 November to 25 December, which is expected to culminate in the international Selection Assistance and Assessment Team qualifying examination with the participation of United Nations officials. We are also ready to deploy experts to specialized police teams in United Nations missions, including jointly with other States. We are committed to actively recruiting Russian Interior Ministry officers to contract positions in United Nations field presences and the United Nations Police Division on a competitive basis.
