Mr. Badji (spoke in French): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on France's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council in this first
month of 2009. I am certain that, thanks to your mastery
of the procedures of and issues before this important
body, the Council's work will be fruitful. I would like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to Ambassador
Neven Jurica, the Permanent Representative of Croatia,
for the excellent way in which he steered the work of
the Council over the past month.

I am grateful to you, Sir, and to the other
members of the Council for having given me the

opportunity to take part, as Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, in this discussion of the serious
situation in Gaza due to the brutal, deliberate and
unrelenting military attack launched by Israel 12 days
ago.

The Committee most vigorously condemns this
military attack and the destruction perpetrated by Israel
in the Gaza Strip, which have killed more than 600
Palestinians and wounded thousands of others, mostly
innocent civilians. The Committee demands that Israel
cease immediately and without condition its deadly
military campaign against the Palestinian people in the
Gaza Strip. Israel must be held responsible for the
murders and wounding of innocent unarmed civilians,
including women and children, which is a flagrant
violation of the principles of international law. The
Committee also demands that Israel immediately open
the border crossings with Gaza in order to allow
emergency medical assistance to be delivered along
with other essential goods for the Palestinian people,
who desperately need them.

The blockade, which has strangled the Gaza Strip
over the past year, has already sparked humanitarian
disaster. The Committee underscores that the Fourth
Geneva Convention requires occupying Powers to
protect the civilians who are living under their
occupation, in particular by providing them with
essential services such as food and medicine.

The Committee has always opposed and has
continually condemned the rocket attacks launched by
Palestinian groups into Israeli territory. The Committee
once again calls for an immediate end to these rocket
attacks, which give Israel a pretext for its military
attacks against the Gaza Strip, although it is totally
unacceptable that the population of the Gaza Strip in its
entirety be collectively punished for attacks perpetrated
by groups or individuals.

The Committee reminds the Israeli Government
that the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the
Fourth Geneva Convention many times affirmed that
the Convention applied to the occupied Palestinian
territories. That was then reiterated by the General
Assembly and the Security Council. The Gaza Strip
continues to be an occupied territory by the very fact
that Israel controls the daily life of the Palestinian
population, down to the smallest details. The
international community needs to take immediate
action to put an end to what is a flagrant violation of
this important international instrument. Specifically,
the Committee urges the High Contracting Parties to
the Fourth Geneva Convention to immediately take
decisive measures in order to meet their commitments
taken under article 1, that is, to comply with and ensure
compliance with the Convention under all
circumstances.

The Committee believes that the entire
international community is responsible for ending the
carnage. Given the gravity of the situation, the
Committee believes that the Security Council must
shoulder its responsibilities under the United Nations
Charter and do its utmost to end the crisis by
immediately taking specific and effective measures to
protect the civilian population. To that end, the
Committee believes that the Council must cooperate
closely with the parties and all actors involved, in
particular the Quartet and the regional partners. Such
an effort would help to prevent further victims and to
calm the situation on the ground. An immediate and
permanent ceasefire should be followed up forthwith
by measures aimed at finding a solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict in the framework of the ongoing
negotiations and at establishing a viable Palestinian
State living in peace and security alongside Israel.

