Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): We sincerely appreciate the
scheduling of this open discussion, which enables the
Security Council to evaluate the achievements of the
important multinational operation in Albania and to focus
on the tasks that remain after its completion.

Slovenia fully endorses the statement just made by
the representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union, with which it aligned itself. We would
like to add the following points.

In recent months, Albania has gone through an
extremely difficult period. The events leading to the
collapse of State institutions and public order are well
known. The resulting phenomenon of social disintegration
had the potential seriously and negatively to affect the
already precarious security situation in the immediate
neighbourhood. The gravity of these circumstances
demanded quick and meaningful action.

The States of the region and others proved their
capability effectively to cooperate in dealing with this
situation. Soon after the appeal by the Albanian
authorities for assistance, the multinational protection
force was assembled under the leadership of Italy and
deployed in the country. It has been very encouraging to
see that a rapid and effective response is possible. We
pay tribute to Italy for the initiative and for the effective
leadership of the operation, and to the Government of
Albania for its cooperation, which substantially
contributed to fulfilment of the mandate. Moreover, this
operation represents an example of successful cooperation
between the United Nations and the relevant regional
arrangements, as well as an example of timely and
adequate preventive action.

The role of the multinational protection force in
Albania was indispensable. The force was instrumental in
creating the conditions for the restoration of stability and
the return to normalcy. In addition to its primary task of
protecting humanitarian assistance, the multinational
protection force provided a secure environment for
holding the elections. The conduct of elections and their
results were certified as acceptable by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and by
the Council of Europe. As such, these elections
represented a crucial step towards the rebuilding of a
democratic order in Albania.

 

The successful election process, however, is just the
beginning. The challenges facing the new Albanian
Government are enormous. Political reconciliation, the
consolidation of democracy, and institutional and economic
reforms will all require a secure and stable environment.
The restoration of public order throughout the country is a
daunting task in the light of continuing lawlessness and the
presence of armed gangs in some quarters. It is necessary
to be aware that the situation continues to be fraught with
dangers that could jeopardize the progress achieved so far.
Therefore, the international community has to continue to
be engaged in Albania and to assist in its progress.

Slovenia participated in the multinational protection
force and stands ready to provide further assistance, through
appropriate multilateral mechanisms or bilaterally.
Development and humanitarian assistance will be of special
importance in the coming phase of the reconstruction of
Albania. Slovenia has recently dispatched humanitarian
assistance to Albania, including medicines. We are also
willing to contribute to the efforts to train and develop
security forces, especially personnel designated to deal with
organized crime.

We welcome the consideration of the possible role that
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) could play
in the process of stabilization. Through its membership in
the Partnership for Peace, Slovenia is ready to support such
a role.

Finally, Slovenia welcomes the readiness of the World
Bank to assist in the implementation of a quick-impact
programme for economic recovery and the preparedness of
donor countries to convene a conference on assistance to
Albania as soon as an agreement has been reached between
the Albanian Government and the International Monetary
Fund on an economic reform programme.

Stability and security in the region of southeastern
Europe remains a preoccupation of the international
community. The involvement of appropriate international
institutions in Albania continues to be of great importance.
Slovenia is willing to contribute its share. In this context,
we welcome in particular the scheduling of the ministerial
conference on Albania to be held this autumn in Rome.

