Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto
for his comprehensive briefing, which was based on
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security (S/2017/189).

I should like to underline the important role
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) last year. In 2016, we bore
witness to many developments, which the Mission
addressed positively. We therefore look forward to
working with other Council members in the next few
days to extend the mandate of UNAMA for a further
12 months.

We also wish to congratulate the Afghan
Government on the major efforts it has undertaken
in the face of grave challenges, in particular the
deteriorating humanitarian situation and the troubling
consequences for women and children. In that vein,
we urge the international community, and UNAMA in
particular, to make further efforts to mediate between
the Government and the Taliban in order to end the
cycle of violence and conflict between them.

We also encourage the Afghan Government to
reach internal agreements. In that regard, we appreciate
the latest achievements with regard to the establishment
of a consultative mechanism on high-level Government
posts and power-sharing. We also support the efforts of
the Government to complete the organizational bases
for elections in order to hold parliamentary elections as
soon as possible. As for the efforts of the Government
to combat corruption, we believe that the creation of
the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre is a step on the right
path. We encourage further steps to achieve justice and
to draw in further foreign investments.

Egypt strongly condemns the barbaric acts of
terrorism that have been committed in Afghanistan
over the past few months. We express our concern at the
exponential rise in such attacks during the past year.
We condemn in particular the barbaric acts against a
major hospital in Kabul yesterday.

Allow me to take this opportunity to reaffirm the
importance of combatting and uprooting Da'esh in
the context of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We also stress that the narcotics trade is a threat to
stability and security in Afghanistan and Central Asia
as a whole. Moreover, we express our concern at the
increase in opium production in 2016, in addition to
the exponential increase in the production of synthetic
drugs. We stress the importance of close regional and
international coordination with the Afghan authorities
with a view to combating the narcotics trade, including
by addressing the issue of illegal money transfers.
That cannot be separated from the efforts to combat
terrorism because drugs are one of the main sources of
funding for armed militias and terrorist groups.

Egypt appreciates fully its historic and traditional
ties with Afghanistan. We also appreciate the
repercussions the security situation there has on
stability in both Central Asia and the Middle East,
and we support the efforts of the Afghan Government
to combat terrorism. We support the efforts of the
Afghan authorities to develop programmes aimed
at increasing the prosperity of the Afghan people,
as well as the important cooperation of Al-Azhar in
spreading enlightened Islamic thinking and concepts of
moderation and non-violence in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, Egypt reiterates its full support for
Afghanistan. We also appreciate that country's need
to improve its capabilities so that it can overcome
these important obstacles and achieve stability, peace,
security and sustainable development.

