Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): The youth,
peace and security agenda is about transforming
systems that lead to the exclusion of young people and
engaging youth in all aspects of social, economic and
political life. It requires targeted funding and targeted
programming and, above all, giving young people
the opportunity, capacity and access to be leaders
in their communities, as well as at the national and
international levels.

How to do that is a challenge that every country
faces. This agenda is universal. As the independent
progress study on youth, peace and security so well
illustrates, it lies at the heart of all of our prevention
efforts, whether we are talking about preventing violent
conflicts, violent extremism or violent crime.

To that end, Canada welcomes the progress study
and is proud to have supported its innovative and
participatory research process. We were also pleased
that Canadian youth were able to discuss and validate its
emerging recommendations last fall on the margins of
the Vancouver Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial. We
believe that the progress study will make an important
contribution to the discussions we will be having this
week on building and sustaining peace. As the recently
launched United Nations-World Bank "Pathways for
Peace" report recommends, managing youth's unmet
aspirations and their inclusion in society is a critical
component of any measures to prevent violent conflicts.

(spoke in English)

As we collectively consider the recommendations
of the progress study, Canada would like to highlight a
number of key points.

First, there is genuine synergy between the youth,
peace and security agenda and the women and peace
and security agenda. Canada is implementing a feminist
foreign policy with a strong focus on women and peace
and security. Canada's second national action plan on
women and peace and security provides a framework
for a cohesive whole-of-Government approach to
ensure that gender perspectives are integrated into all
peace and security efforts. Gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls are also driving our
feminist international assistance policy, which includes
the need to engage men and boys.

Secondly, we recognize that some of the most
important work is being done by civil society at the
grass-roots and local levels. Too often the work of such
organizations is unrecognized, while our interventions
target processes led by capital-based actors.

Through our new Women's Voice and Leadership
Programme, Canada will allocate $150 million over
five years to respond to the needs of local women's
organizations in developing countries that are working
to advance the rights of women and girls and promote
gender equality. We hope that there are lessons here for
how we can support youth leadership and participation
as well.

Thirdly, as outlined in the Secretary-General's Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which Canada
strongly supports, engaging youth and making them
part of the response to violent extremism is crucial.
Youth, predominantly affected by violent extremism,
can play an important role in identifying solutions,
supporting communities and building resilience to
this threat.

Fourthly, when we talk about youth, peace and
security, we must not forget about child protection,
including preventing the recruitment of children in the
peacekeeping context. As many here know, Canada
developed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of
Child Soldiers last fall. This initiative seeks to identify
early-warning signs, take action to end recruitment and
promote the reporting of abuses and grave violations
against children. Since then, the Vancouver Principles
have been endorsed by 63 Member States. In the coming
years, Canada will convene the endorsing States, the
United Nations and members of the child- protection
community to develop practical implementation
guidance for these principles.

Finally, responsibility for taking this agenda
forward ultimately rests with Member States, but the
United Nations has an important role to play. We believe
that the United Nations and Member States can do more
to facilitate young people's meaningful participation
in peace negotiations and peacebuilding processes,
ensure the collection of sex- and age-disaggregated
data related to youth, peace and security, and put in
place mechanisms for meaningful consultation and the
engagement of young people. We also believe that, as
with the women and peace and security agenda, the
Council should mandate regular reporting from the
Secretary-General on youth, peace and security, and
ensure that young people's participation is included in
Security Council mandates.

Canada will continue to support this important
agenda through our own domestic and international
policies, and we stand ready to support the work of the
United Nations in implementing the progress study.

