Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November. We are confident that your
sagacity and leadership skills will enable the Council to
achieve fruitful results in dealing with the important and
sensitive issues before it.

I wish also to pay tribute to Ambassador Gambari of
Nigeria for the exemplary manner in which he conducted
the work of the Council last month.

We witness today a historic development in the events
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a country whose people and
Government have suffered, for years, the agonies of a
bloody conflict which has claimed many lives and caused
tremendous material damage as a result of hateful military
practices that aimed at achieving regional expansionist
aims.

Today, the problem enters upon a new phase, a phase
of transformation that has taken concrete shape in the
initialling yesterday of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This development
paves the way towards putting an end to this human
tragedy. As we look forward to the final signing of the
Peace Agreement in Paris in the first half of December,
we should like to thank all the States that took part in
sponsoring and supporting the negotiations, especially the
United States of America.

Egypt has persistently emphasized, both in word and
in deed, its support for the cause of the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for the right of this newly independent
people to live in peace and security within the
internationally recognized borders of its State and for the
enablement of that people to exercise fully the rights of
membership of this Organization.

Today we welcome the step agreed to by the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have
declared before that we shall accept and support all that
the Government of Bosnia accepts. We hope that this step
will lead to preserving Bosnia and Herzegovina as one
State. We also applaud the Agreement's preservation of
the special identity of Sarajevo as a unified city and a
capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as Sarajevo is the
symbol of peaceful coexistence of various ethnic groups.
In this connection, we call upon the international
community to contribute to the reconstruction efforts so
that this historic city of Sarajevo may be restored to its
former glory.

As I have just said, the signing of agreements is a
very important step. However, we need to see practical
implementation - true, bona fide implementation on the
ground. Here, it is extremely important that all parties
fulfil the international obligations enshrined in the
Agreement and that they abide by the procedures that will
have to be adopted to ensure its complete implementation.
In this respect, the delegation of Egypt wishes to
underscore that the follow up of implementation should
reflect the international community's commitment to the
following: guaranteeing the voluntary return of all
refugees, displaced persons and expelled Bosnians, to
their homes, under international protection and with
appropriate compensation; bringing all those responsible
for the perpetration of war crimes to trial, so that others
may be deterred from committing similar crimes in
future; and according priority to supporting the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the rehabilitation and
reconstruction process after the war, to ensure the return
to normal life.

 

My delegation wishes to underscore the importance of
enabling the Government of Bosnia to exercise its
legitimate right to self-defence. Now that the international
community is reconsidering the military embargo imposed
by resolution 713 (1991), in stages, we believe that the
issue of providing the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the means of defence that it was denied
as a result of the embargo should be addressed, so that the
balance of military power in the region may be restored,
and, thereby, ensure mutual deterrence, on the one hand,
and provide a practical means of building confidence
between the parties facilitated, on the other.

Right from the start, Egypt has played its part in the
international efforts in respect of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Having participated actively in the United Nations
Protection Force, we should like to take this opportunity to
praise the men of that force - including sons of my
country - for the role they have played over the past four
years, under very difficult circumstances.
In this connection, we call upon all Member States,
especially the more affluent, to contribute to the trust fund
to be established to finance the participation of troop-
contributing countries, not members of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), in the United Nations
Protection Force with a view to implementing the Peace
Agreement in a balanced fashion. Egypt, which is not a
NATO member, hopes to participate in that force in order
to strengthen and support the implementation of the Peace
Agreement concluded yesterday.

In conclusion, Egypt, proceeding from its commitment
to its international role and as a member of the contact
group of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, hopes
that the effective honest implementation of the Peace
Agreement will restore peace to the Balkans region.

