Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina aligns itself with the statement made by the
delegation of Norway on behalf of the States that have
endorsed the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration.

At the outset, I wish to thank France for having taken
the initiative to organize this open debate in the context
of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Paris
Principles and Paris Commitments, intended to protect
children illegally recruited or used by armed forces or
groups, which Argentina joined and fully supports.

We are also grateful for the statements made by
the Secretary-General, the Special Representative
and Mr. Mubin Shaikh. In this context, we wish to
express our gratitude and strong support for the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, and for her presentation of the
report (S/2017/821) and its annexes. We reiterate once
again that it is vital to provide all necessary support in
terms of human and financial resources so as to make it
possible for the Special Representative to continue with
her work, in compliance with her mandate.

Argentina staunchly supports the Organization's
efforts to prevent, to avert and put a stop to the six
grave Violations of the rights of the child in the
framework of armed conflict. This commitment
has been demonstrated on numerous occasions, as
Argentina was one of the first States to ratify, in 2002,
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. It also supported the adoption of resolutions
1261 (1999), 1612 (2005), 2143 (2014) and 2225 (2015).

We also stress the progress made in terms of
preventing Violations of and protecting the rights
of children through coordinated action between the
Security Council's Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and the tasks undertaken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, with
the cooperation of UNICEF and other bodies of the
United Nations system.

Argentina also firmly supports the need to agree
upon and implement measures aimed at bringing
greater pressure to bear on State and non-State
actors that persistently commit Violations, as well
as to maintain contacts with such actors in order to
demobilize, separate, rehabilitate and reintegrate
children associated with these groups, in cooperation
with their various communities.

Child protection from a human rights perspective
must be taken into account in the elaboration of the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, as well as in the peacebuilding
activities of the Security Council and efforts to counter
terrorism and Violent extremism.

In this vein, it is vital to develop, maintain and
strengthen capacities in the area of peacekeeping
operations in terms of prevention, protection, assistance,
advice and documentation, and in monitoring violations
of children's rights.

Lastly, Argentina expresses its deep concern at and
vehemently condemns the growing use of schools for
military purposes and the increased number of attacks
against schools and hospitals. Education is key for
development and the full enjoyment of human rights,
and access to safe education contributes to protecting
girls and boys from the perils of armed conflicts.

In this vein, Argentina stresses the adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of hospitals
from armed attacks. We reiterate our staunchest support
for the Oslo Declaration on Safe Schools, adopted in
May 2015 and initiated by Argentina and Norway. The
Declaration commits States to applying the guidelines
for protecting schools and universities from military
use during armed conflict, thus ensuring the right to
education and the protection of children and youth in
conflict situations.

In this vein, Argentina is grateful for and endorses
the recommendation of the Secretary-General to
adhere to the Declaration and urgently calls on the
States Members of the United Nations, in particular
Council members, to endorse it. In that context, in
March Argentina hosted the Second International
Conference on Safe Schools, in which delegations
from more than 80 countries participated together with
representatives of the United Nations system and civil
society. The main goal of the Conference was to assess
the progress made since the Declaration was adopted,
in 2015. To date, it has been endorsed by 70 States.
Argentina is persuaded that only through international
cooperation will it be possible to combat the scourge of
attacks on schools in all their forms and manifestations,
in the framework of full respect for human rights,
international humanitarian law and international law.

