Mr. Ibuge (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania welcomes this open debate
on the theme "United Nations peacekeeping operations:
new trends". We especially thank the Russian presidency
for organizing the debate and for its incisive concept
note on the subject (S/2014/384, annex). We also thank
the Secretary-General for his remarkable introductory
statement this morning.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of the Republic of
Malawi on behalf of the Southern African Development
Community.

The fact that United Nations peacekeeping
operations have reached an important juncture in the
Organization's history may sound like a cliche', but
I should like to indulge in it nevertheless. When the
United Nations peacekeeping enterprise began more
than 60 years ago, none of its founders, who defined
that noble undertaking, could have foreseen that
contemporary peacekeeping operations would have
to navigate through the waters they must sail through
today. The multidimensional reality of United Nations
peacekeeping operations means that they must now
include ever more complex mandates at the tactical,
operational and strategic levels. Such characteristics
have developed from necessity.

The reality is that the nature of the conflicts that
peacekeeping operations must confront today, in
particular the settling of intra-State conflicts, neither
justifies nor warrants us to lose sight of what those
operations are intended to be and must continue to be.
In that regard, I will identify but a few salient points.

First, United Nations peacekeeping operations
must invariably adhere to the agreed basic principles
of peacekeeping, namely, the consent of the parties
to the conflict, impartiality, and the non-use of force
except in self-defence and in defence of their mandates.
Indeed, those are time-tested principles essential to
the maintenance of the credibility and legitimacy
of the flagship activity of the United Nations that is
peacekeeping.

Secondly, we need to ensure that we remain clear-
eyed about the Challenges faced by contemporary
United Nations peacekeeping operations and those
whom we deploy to implement the mandates. Almost
everywhere an active peacekeeping operation exists,
including current deployments, the intra-State nature
of most conflicts is a phenomenon that we cannot
wish away. Today, the focus of most United Nations
peacekeeping operations with Chapter VII mandates is
to ensure the protection of civilians. Undoubtedly, the
overall implementation of that primary responsibility
must remain that of the host-country Government,
however weak it may appear, so long as it maintains
legitimacy with the majority of its population. In that
regard, United Nations peacekeeping operations must
work closely and in tandem with the host Government.
The mission must offer support to the host country in
its attempt to achieve the priorities its polity deems
necessary to enable it to restore sustainable peace
and attain the sociopolitical harmony and economic
development its population deserves.

Thirdly, when a Government's capacity to exercise
authority Within part of its territory is manifestly weak,
the commission of atrocities and impunity for such
crimes are likely to reign. That reality may become even
graver when the intentions of some armed belligerents
may be purely criminal or terroristic. They are likely to
be uninterested in any semblance of political dialogue,
whether through mediation, conciliation or negotiations.
At the same time, the danger they pose to the population
and to peacekeepers has increased dramatically year
after year. When such groups appear to focus solely on
the personal aggrandizement and profiteering on the
part of the individuals who control them, it is unlikely
that there will be any motivation to achieve peace
unless the United Nations mission is able to present a
viable deterrence posture. Indeed, the activities of such
rebel forces, which respect no national or international
humanitarian law, keeps peacekeepers at great risk of
their lives. The current toll of peacekeepers who have
lost their lives - 106 in 2013 alone - reminds us of the
perils that need to be addressed, including the impunity
of those who attack peacekeepers.

Fourthly, as peacekeeping continues to move
towards more Chapter VII mandates, there is a
stark contradiction in the fact that United Nations
peacekeeping operations have not been allocated
adequate resources to implement them. The debate on
the current global economic crunch, while pertinent,
must not be one-sided. As cost-cutting, downsizing or
right-sizing continues, the alternative narrative is that
troop- and police-contributing countries end up bearing
the brunt of the burden of peacekeeping. That is neither
acceptable nor sustainable.

The Council must ensure that the mandates it sets
not only are realistic but that they are commensurate to
the resources allocated to the missions. In doing so, the
Council will immensely benefit from the experience of
troop- and police-contributing countries. Their active
participation in all stages ofa mission must therefore be
the centre point of the triangular cooperation among the
Council, the troop-and police-contributing countries,
and the Secretariat.

Collectively addressing the question of new
technologies in United Nations peacekeeping operations
must be a goal of ongoing triangular engagement.
Innovations that enable effective United Nations
peacekeeping operations must be clearly assessed in
the light of their tactical and operational value, as well
as their political and legal implications. This debate
will ultimately require balancing views from across
the United Nations membership, for peacekeeping
operations have indeed been and must remain based
on the collective and individual goodwill of the nations
that participate in them.

In closing, we pay tribute to the men and women who
have laid down their lives in the pursuit of peace under
the United Nations flag. We honour their memories well,
not by breaking the ranks of our international unity
and will, but by appropriately ensuring the conditions
necessary to enable them to confront the challenges in
maintaining international peace and security that we
collectively continue to face. That is why we remain
these United Nations.

