Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I fully
align myself with the briefing by Ambassador Gerard
Araud on the Security Council mission to Mali. I would
just like to add a few comments.

The arrival of the Security Council mission in Mali
gave rise to much hope among Malians, who are weary
of the stalemate in the negotiations that are the only
way to return to lasting peace and a normalization of
the situation. We note their enthusiasm and genuine
willingness to proceed to inclusive negotiations. All
parts of Malian society are unanimous on the fact
that the roots of the crisis affecting their country are
neither religious nor tribal, as the population is mostly
Muslim and the fact that several ethnic groups live side
by side in almost every part of the country has led to a
number of mixed marriages and has woven solidarity
and tolerance into the country's social fabric.

While the Malian authorities recognize the merits
of the Ouagadougou Preliminary Agreement, they
believe that it is time for Mali to take ownership of
the Agreement. At the same time, they are exploring
new initiatives, such as the Algerian process that is
currently under way.

Despite the significant progress made on
normalizing situation, real challenges persist in the
areas of security, politics, food, health, and the legal
and educational systems. Crime persists, due to the
lack of legal authority, in particular in the north of the
country, despite a limited return of administrative rule
in some parts of the country.

The Ouagadougou Preliminary Agreement is a bone
of contention between the signatories and certain armed
groups who joined the Agreement. The signatories
complained that they were ignored or excluded from
the process leading to the resumption of negotiations.
We also see divisions within the armed groups, for
example in the Arab Azawad movement, which has two
different factions, each claiming legitimacy. That could
complicate things when the negotiations are relaunched.

The Government has been accused of coopting
parties or candidates, whose representative nature is
often contested by their base. The Government is also
accused of giving preference to armed groups instead
of to the victims of those same armed groups.

Women, although they are in the majority and very
involved in civil society organizations, are feeling the
weight of sociocultural and religious pressures that
make certain subjects taboo, such as sexual violence,
physical abuse, forced marriage and divorce, as the
perpetrators of such acts often cannot be held liable
under the law.

Despite the prominent role that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali plays alongside Malians in their search for peace
and stability, it is seen as a kind of second Government.

The reconstitution of the jihadist groups in Mali's
interior and along its borders is a cause for concern not
just for Mali but for the entire Sahel region. As President
Buyoya of Rwanda stated, Mali's priorities - to
develop a security strategy and the capacity to fight
against transnational terrorism - will progressively
become those of the countries of the Sahel.

The road map that the Malian Government has
settled on is a hopeful one and a good opportunity for
the relaunching of the peace talks.

Finally, all of the international community
represented in Mali expressed their willingness to
support Mali in the dialogue aimed at laying the
foundations for lasting peace.

