Mr. Ben Youssef (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
My delegation wishes to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his
exhaustive briefing. We are all aware of the excellent
work and efforts undertaken by UNTAET in carrying
out its mandate in East Timor, especially at this crucial
stage.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report. My delegation is also grateful to Mr. Gusmao
and to Mr. Ramos-Horta for their briefings on the
situation in East Timor and on the challenges ahead in
the completion of the independence process.

East Timor is heading slowly but surely towards
independence. We must, however, continue closely to
follow developments in the situation and to maintain
our commitment to the process. The Secretary-General
states in his report that East Timor's preparations for
independence are well advanced, but he notes that
much remains to be done if its objective is to be
achieved. These two observations demonstrate that we
must make further efforts to meet the aspirations of the
population of East Timor to live independently and to
safeguard the investments made by the international
community in the future of that country.

After independence, East Timor will still need
significant international assistance and the United
Nations presence in order to ensure stability and to
prepare for the future stages in the consolidation of
peace in that country. The establishment of a working
group to assess the need for competent international
personnel to assist the future East Timorese
Government is also an important step in that process.

We believe that it is necessary to reach a
comprehensive final settlement of the problem of
refugees, which remains a source of concern. This
requires the commitment of all the parties, allowing for
the acceleration of the repatriation or resettlement of
refugees in good circumstances and for the onset of the
registration process. The participation of refugees in
the political future of their country is very important in
order to promote reconciliation among all East
Timorese. In this respect, we welcome the holding of a
meeting on 15 and 16 May in Denpasar between the
Indonesian Government and UNTAET, at which they
discussed several important issues.

The security situation remains generally calm,
despite some isolated incidents perpetrated by
uncontrolled elements. In this respect, we believe that a
reassessment of security in West Timor in order to
modify the security classification in that region might
help speed up the re-establishment and building of
confidence between the two neighbours and to relaunch
reconciliation among the Timorese. Furthermore, we
believe that a gradual reduction of the military
component and the international civilian police could
be considered in the near future.

However, we are of the view that the Secretary-
General's proposal to maintain the military component
as it stands until the independence of East Timor is a
prudent decision that should be taken into
consideration in order to discourage any intention to set
back the progress achieved by the international
community in East Timor.

Finally, UNTAET is a pilot project for the United
Nations whose positive record to date requires us to
make further efforts to achieve a smooth transition
towards true peace in East Timor. The donor
conference to be held in Canberra in mid-June will be a
new opportunity for the international community to
confirm its commitment in this regard.

