The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for this opportunity to address this important subject.

(spoke in English)

This is the right moment to address the contributions
of United Nations peace operations to the protection of
civilians. My latest report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2016/447) underlines the urgent
need for concrete measures and makes recommendations
to that end. Enhancing the protection of civilians was a
key focus of the World Humanitarian Summit and the

Agenda for Humanity (A/70/709, annex). It was one of
the dominant themes to emerge from the recent reviews
of peace operations, the peacebuilding architecture,
and the women, peace and security framework.

These reports, reviews and events all stressed the
political, legal, moral and operational imperative of
protecting civilians and the primary responsibility of
national authorities. They underscored the modest but
vital role that United Nations peace operations can play
in protecting civilians, and they stressed the need for a
concerted effort by the Council, Member States and the
Secretariat to further strengthen this contribution.

Protecting civilians is an overarching responsibility,
involving all the critical functions of the United
Nations: human rights, humanitarian, political
and peacekeeping. In the same way, peacekeeping
operations are most effective in protecting civilians
when protection is considered a mission-wide activity,
driven by a sound political strategy. The political
engagement of civilian staff and their dialogue with
the parties to conflict-affected communities and
with partners is essential. Civilian staff also monitor
and investigate abuses - which is the only basis for
accountability. Likewise, United Nations police make
an important contribution. United Nations police are
currently protecting tens of thousands of internally
displaced people at peacekeeping mission bases in
South Sudan.

I urge the Security Council to give precedence to
political strategy and whole-of-mission approaches
when it considers mandates to protect civilians. Those
can be even more critical than military assets and troop
numbers. The Secretariat is working to support the
Council in this by providing better analysis of threats
and better advice and recommendations on the most
effective course of action, depending on the context. As
I told the General Assembly yesterday, we are reviewing
our administrative and logistical procedures to see how
we can best support peace operations, and looking at
policies to make us more flexible and responsive.

The Secretariat is also doing its utmost to support
missions through a renewed focus on performance and
accountability. We will continue our efforts to prevent
and address abuses committed by peacekeepers.
Working with troop and police contributors, we are
generating peacekeeping forces and police in a way
that matches capabilities with requirements. We need
troops that speak the right languages, bring with them
the right technology and equipment and have the right
skills and training, in the right places. Member States
have a critical role in that regard, in contributing
troops and police who are ready, willing and able to
take up protection duties. The Kigali Principles set out
critical benchmarks for troop- and police-contributing
countries, and I urge all States to endorse them.

We also rely on the Security Council to set mandates
that are in line with resources and to use its influence to
increase those resources in certain circumstances.

Protecting civilians is a United Nations system-
wide responsibility. But the primary responsibility lies
with parties to a conflict, non-belligerent States and the
Security Council. My Agenda for Humanity, drawn up
as the framework for the World Humanitarian Summit,
sets out core responsibilities, principles, courses of
action and ambitious targets for all to improve the
protection of civilians. At the Summit, Governments,
non-governmental organizations, United Nations
agencies and others pledged to take concrete actions to
implement the Agenda. Later this year, I will report to
the General Assembly and propose ways to take those
commitments forward.

We must also look outside the United Nations
and increase our engagement with civil society,
non-governmental organizations and regional partners.
In the Central African Republic, for example, the
United Nations has been coordinating a group of
international partners, including the African Union
and the Economic Community of Central African
States, to promote stability and security. We will also
continue pressing Governments and parties to conflict
to uphold their protection responsibilities, comply with
international law and take precautions to prevent harm
to civilians - for example, by minimizing the impact
of explosive weapons in populated areas.

Governments and parties to conflict also have an
obligation to provide for the basic needs of civilians in
conflict. When they fail to do so, they should facilitate
principled humanitarian assistance by humanitarian
organizations. Many parties are failing to live up to
those obligations, and it is essential that we use all the
means at our disposal to hold them accountable.

The United Nations is determined to work
collectively to support Governments to protect their
people, and to persuade parties to conflictto abide by their
obligations. But even the most effective peacekeeping
can never protect every civilian from harm. No amount
of strategy, resources or accountability will mitigate
the grave and tragic consequences of war for ordinary
women, children and men. The ultimate solution to
protecting civilians in conflict is to find sustainable
political solutions based on the rule of law and human
rights standards. That is the core responsibility of the
Security Council, and I urge the Council to exercise it.
