Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to reiterate your condemnation, Sir,
of the odious terrorist attack on the British consulate
and other targets in Istanbul. We offer our British
colleague our most heartfelt condolences.

I thank Mr. Fall and those who spoke earlier for
the information they have provided us on the
preparation for the international conference for peace
in the Great Lakes region. I believe that the members
of the Security Council have duly noted the
commitment of the African Union to the preparatory
work for the conference.
I support the statement made by our Italian
colleague on behalf of the European Union and wish
simply to make a few additional comments.

The importance of this exercise has been amply
demonstrated. The conflicts that continue to affect the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi, as
well as the earlier conflict in Rwanda, cannot be
understand in isolation. Borders have not stopped the
movements of armed rebellions, military interventions
by States, or the traffic in weapons and raw materials.
The full normalization of relations among the
Governments of the region and the implementation of
confidence-building measures to ensure border security
are therefore the basic objectives of the conference.

France feels that three conditions need to be met
in order to ensure the conference's success. We believe,
first, that participation in the first round should be open
to all neighbouring States, including the Western
neighbours of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi. We feel that ownership of the conference
by Africans - which is being prepared, as we have
heard this morning - can be made possible only if
Governments that legitimately wish to take part in the
conference are not excluded.

Secondly, we believe that the principal themes
should be prioritized to answer to the main concerns of
the States involved. Security questions, clearly, must
remain the top priority. Other issues - such as
regional economic cooperation - are still important,
but, as Mr. Fall noted, we must ensure that the
conference is not sidetracked by considerations that fall
within the competence of other bodies.

Thirdly, we believe that the conference should
seek to achieve tangible results. The eventual
development of a follow-up mechanism should not
relegate to a lower priority the holding of a substantive
discussion about the most essential problems affecting
the peace and stability of the region. The States
concerned are in agreement about the principles that
should guide their relations. They confirmed that on 25
September 2003, during their presence here at the
invitation of the Secretary-General. We believe that the
conference should be an opportunity for them to
translate commitments into action. If the participants in
the meeting to be held next June in Tanzania decide
that two summits will be held, that idea should not
diminish the chances for a definitive conclusion of the
work of the conference.

The important thing today is to seize the
opportunity provided by the progress made in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi and
to take advantage of the hopes for national
reconciliation that that progress has provided. Let us
not run the risk losing the momentum that the
conference itself will be producing.

My comments lead into two questions that I
would like to pose to Mr. Fall. The first concerns the
request made by neighbours of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that have not yet been included
in the preparations for the conference. How will they
be guaranteed that the conference will indeed take
place in an inclusive manner, namely, including them?
My second question pertains to security issues, which
go right to the heart of our concerns. What specific
steps are being envisaged for implementation after next
June's summit?

