Mr. Raytchev (Bulgaria): At the outset, let me
convey my delegation's gratitude to the Spanish
presidency for the initiative taken in organizing this
meeting. I would also like to join others in thanking
Mr. Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Ramcharan, Deputy
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
for their comprehensive and well-focused reports.

The reports have painted a picture that is of great
concern to us. The human rights situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular in the
eastern part of the country, is deeply shocking. Like
others, we strongly condemn the abominable massacres
and other human rights abuses perpetrated in Ituri, as
well as in other areas of the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We share the View of the High Commissioner
about the root causes of the situation in the country.
Indeed, there is a vicious circle of massive violations
of human rights and vengeance, strengthened by
impunity. We agree that the future of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo cannot be based on the culture
of impunity. This is not only morally unacceptable, but,
in addition, it could not contribute to the formation of
stable transition institutions or to national
reconciliation and long-term sustainable peace.

It is of critical importance that those who are
guilty of gross human rights violations are brought to
justice. Bulgaria favours the recommendation of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights proposing that
the transitional authorities consider, as a matter of
urgency, the setting up of an appropriate judicial
mechanism with a view to bringing to trial the alleged
perpetrators of massive human rights violations in Ituri
and in other parts of the national territory.

The establishment of a truth and reconciliation
commission, as well as the idea of a national
observatory for human rights, could contribute
significantly to furthering the peace process.

In our View, for the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to be sustainable, it
is also necessary to establish it firmly on a solid human
rights foundation. In this regard, we agree fully with
the recommendation of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights that the Security Council support the
establishment of national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights and the strengthening of
the operational capacity of the judicial system
throughout the country.

Finally, my delegation would welcome any
further comments from Mr. Ramcharan and Mr.
Guehenno with regard to the concrete role that the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
MONUC and the United Nations as a whole could play
in lending assistance to transitional authorities in order
to address the question of impunity.

