Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): It is indeed a great
privilege to participate in today's meeting with you in
the Chair, Madam President. You have a very onerous
task, which you are carrying out magnificently.

I would like to congratulate our friends that have
just joined the Council, namely, India, Colombia,
Germany, Portugal and South Africa, but Portugal
specifically. We wish them success in their work in the
Council.
I align myself with my Egyptian colleague's
statement as head of the Non Aligned Movement.

A lot has not changed since we were last here, but
there is always hope. During the last open debate on
the Middle East in the Chamber (see S/PV.6404), many
of us urged the Security Council, the Quartet and the
international community to act in tandem and prevent
the collapse of Israel-Palestine dialogue and direct
negotiations. Three months later, we regret to note that
all efforts to ensure continuity have failed. The quest
for sustainable peace in the Middle East and a
permanent political settlement to the Israel-Palestinian
question based on the two-State solution appears as
elusive as ever. In that context, I share the assessment
of many Member States that this impasse is due to
Israeli expansionist thoughts, vision and policy, which
manifest themselves in the form of the ongoing
settlement activities.

This is a clear violation of international law, and
should be taken as a major provocation. This month,
the very old Shepherd Hotel in Jerusalem was
demolished to build 20 new housing units. Was that
really necessary? Elsewhere in the West Bank, the
altering of the status of centuries-old prayer places,
mosques, churches and cemeteries of the Palestinian
people goes on unabated in the name of history,
excavation and creating - truthfully - new housing
space. Each block of those settlements constitutes a
major roadblock towards what we can consider to be a
final peaceful settlement - if ever. It complicates the
peace process and vitiates the atmosphere for talks.
Israel must stop building new settlements or using
settlement activity as a political tool in the peace
process.

I am surprised that, despite the odds, the
Palestinians have done well. We hear the name of
Salam Fayyad, who has taken important strides
towards implementing the plan announced in August
2009 for the building of State institutions within two
years. He has done it; I extend my congratulations to
Ambassador Mansour,

Many independent studies, including the
Economic Monitoring Report of the World Bank, have
praised this performance and, in my mind, this delivery
of public services by the Palestinian Authority shows
that the corner has been turned. The Middle East
Quartet, despite its own banes, acknowledged these
developments in its statement of 21 September 2010.
The policies of self-reliance and empowerment and the
creation of economic opportunities pursued by the
Palestinian Authority have established a solid edifice
for Palestinian statehood and removed all pretexts for
the occupation.

The goal of establishing a Palestinian State by
August 2011 is well within our grasp. We must not let
it slip away; we must not allow peace and stability to
fall by the wayside. Failure to meet the Oslo Accord
deadlines of 1999 triggered the second intifada.
Missing the 2005 deadline for Palestine statehood set
in the Quartet Road Map of 2003 precipitated violence
and bloodshed. Do we want such calamities to revisit
the region?

The Security Council must therefore fulfil its
Charter responsibility and the Quartet Road Map, and
ensure that the historic opportunity to create a viable
Palestinian State by August 2011 is not lost. The
Council can do so by calling upon Israel to
unconditionally cease all settlement activity and
resume direct negotiations at the earliest with the
Palestinian Authority on all outstanding issues.

Pakistan is supportive of lasting peace for all the
inhabitants of the Middle East, irrespective of their
religion, ethnicity or nationality. That is where we
stand. The framework for such a peace has been
elaborately laid down in resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008); the
Madrid terms of reference; the Arab Peace Initiative;
and the several Quartet Road Maps. We share the
collective objective of the international community for
an independent, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living
side by side and in peace with its Israeli neighbours.
Our prayer is that today's open debate in the Council
will serve to bring us nearer to that objective.

