Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (interpretation from French): The ongoing crisis in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is of grave concern in that it has inflicted
untold suffering on the Congolese people, is thwarting the
efforts of the Government to reconstruct the country and
threatens peace and stability in the region.

The destabilization of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which shares a border with nine countries and
occupies an important place in Africa - particularly in

 

the light of its size, population and potential - would have
incalculable repercussions. That is why we are particularly
keen to ensure respect for that country's territorial integrity
and sovereignty. Similarly, we must not tolerate any
violation of the provisions of the Charters of the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity with respect
to non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
In that region, where cross-border populations play a
very important role and can be used as a pretext by one
State or another to interfere inappropriately in the affairs of
its neighbour, strict respect by all sides of the principle of
non-interference would make it possible to create a climate
of mutual confidence that would help to promote sounder
and more friendly relations.

In this connection, it should be noted that the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee On Security
Questions in Central Africa, which met at Libreville from
28-30 April 1998, recommended that its member States
cooperate closely in the struggle against illicit trafficking in
arms and that sanctuaries for armed groups not be
established in neighbouring States.

Even if we appear to be stating the obvious by
asserting that resort to force as a means of resolving
conflicts provides only transient solutions, whereas
dialogue, consultations and negotiations ensure lasting
solutions, my delegation would still like to emphasize this
point.

Not only does the use of arms complicate the search
for a peaceful resolution of differences, but it is also a
source of much human suffering: the displacement of
populations, the destruction of socio-economic
infrastructures acquired at the cost of great efforts, massive
flows of refugees into bordering countries and the sudden
spread of disease. This list is not an exhaustive one by any
means.

For all these reasons we reiterate our condemnation of
the massacres of civilian populations carried out in Sud-
Kivu and ask that the Council order an international inquiry
so that those responsible can be found and brought to
justice.

The time has come for the United Nations, specifically
the Security Council, to give active and concrete support to
African regional initiatives aimed at finding a negotiated
and definitive solution to the crisis that has spread through
the Democratic Republic of the Congo since 2 August 1998.

To that end the Security Council should ask the
parties to the conflict to sign without delay the ceasefire
agreement that they have already agreed to in principle.
In order to enforce this ceasefire, the United Nations, in
cooperation with the Organization of African Unity,
should start thinking now about deploying in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo a neutral international
peacekeeping force. In addition to monitoring borders,
this force would also be mandated, inter alia, to
demobilize armed groups, collect and destroy weapons
and control illicit arms flows.

In View of the interrelatedness of the problems
facing the Great Lakes region, we believe that the
convening of a carefully prepared international
conference, as suggested by France, under the auspices of
the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
would help extinguish the hotbeds of tension, re-establish
confidence and strengthen peace and security in the
region.

