The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list, but I should like to make some
concluding remarks myself as Council President.

I first of all welcome back the Secretary-General to
join us. I thank everybody for entering into the spirit of this
debate. The willingness, for the most part, to keep
interventions brief and to the point has allowed us to cover
a great deal of ground. I would have preferred to have had
time for greater interaction afterwards. I know that, for
example, the Ambassador of the Netherlands would have
like to have come back, but as we learn this format - and
I note that the Ambassador of Sierra Leone has asked that
it become a regular feature of Security Council debates, and
no doubt that will be considered - perhaps greater
interaction could proceed to great benefit.

A lot of useful ideas and suggestions have been made,
and we heard a lot today about double standards. We must
replace double standards by common purpose. We must
replace divided counsels by common action, and today's
debate is a big step forward in doing so. I intend to make
the conclusions public, as was requested, and distribute
them to all United Nations Member States. I hope this
will feed into the Council's future work.

First of all, there was a broad consensus that we
should try to institute regular and more structured
consultations and coordination between the Council and
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the regional
bodies. A number of useful suggestions have been made,
such as joint envoys, missions, exchanges of staff,
working groups and more regular meetings between the
Security Council, the OAU and subregional bodies. I hope
that the Council will now work up some detailed
proposals so that decisions can be taken before the end of
January on what they should be doing and how.

Second, we heard views today, particularly from
African Member States, which send a clear message. The
United Nations is not responding quickly or effectively
enough to meet the peacekeeping needs of Africa. We
heard today many useful, practical suggestions: increasing
capacity and planning in the United Nations Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, enhancing its ability to hold
more stocks of key equipment and quickly deploy them;
and further United Nations help to build Africa's own
peacekeeping capabilities, including through training,
personnel exchange and logistics partnership
arrangements. These are all critical elements in the
package, and the Council has today given strong support
for taking them forward.

Participants have been equally clear that providing
the right resources is critical. The importance of matching
resources to mandates has also been widely stressed. So
have the limitations of trust-fund financing for
peacekeeping. More support for regional peacekeeping
efforts were stressed by a number of delegations.

But it is clear from the debate today that none of
these measures is a substitute for greater political
engagement from the Council in conflicts in Africa. Only
with that will there be greater engagement by the United
Nations in peacekeeping there and greater success as a
result.

A wide variety of important proposals have been
raised today: preventive deployments; more use of
Security Council missions; imaginative use of friends or
contacts or other forms of support groups; better
cooperation between the Council and the Economic and
Social Council (ECOSOC), especially in building peace
after conflicts; better use of the variety of diplomatic
channels available to us; improved coordination

 

cooperation with regional and subregional groups; more
effective collective diplomatic action by the Council and
wider United Nations membership; and stricter and more
targeted implementation of the Council's other key tool:
sanctions and arms embargoes.

Many speakers stressed the crucial importance of
preventive action to address root causes of conflict. I also
endorse calls for greater focus on AIDS prevention. Five
thousand five hundred Africans are dying a day from AIDS,
as the Secretary-General has previously reported to us. I
agree too that ensuring the rights of minorities and genuine
power-sharing in divided societies is important to prevent
conflict.

Many speakers have pointed to the need for better
early warning and exchange of analysis. If this is to
succeed, we must all - the Secretariat, the OAU and
United Nations Member States - contribute. Potential
conflict zones must be brought to the Council's attention,
enabling it to act in time. It is the responsibility of all of
us to use the Council to do this and to strengthen existing
early-warning mechanisms, including those of the OAU.
I intend to return to the Council to participate in one
or more of the United States presidency's Africa
meetings. I shall ask our permanent representative to start
work with others around this table to ensure action by the
Council as quickly as possible following this meeting. I
hope that we will see the first results within the next few
weeks. Today's debate shows that all of us want to move
quickly.

I want to conclude with an observation. Africa still
gets a very bad press, and Africa has many real problems.
But all of those who know and love Africa know that
Africa can and will build a better future for itself, a future
of peace, prosperity and democracy. The people who will
build lasting peace in Africa are the people of Africa
itself. But it is our duty to help them. Today's debate
shows that the Council and the wider United Nations
membership are indeed resolved to do so.

In my presidency capacity, I thank all of those who
contributed to today's debate and apologize to all of those

who have been unable to speak.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.
