Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Allow me to congratulate Jordan on its election to
the Security Council, and on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month, at a particularly
important juncture for the Middle East. Your presence
among us, Mr. President, highlights the significance of
this open debate, at the beginning ofa crucial week for
efforts to end the conflict in Syria, the impact of which
represents a very heavy burden for your country and
the other neighbouring countries of Syria, above all for
Lebanon.

I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
I also thank the Permanent Observer of the State of
Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel
for their statements.

First, I would like to address the Middle East
peace process. There is today a historic opportunity
to build peace between Israelis and Palestinians. The
announcement six months ago of the resumption of
negotiations was an important first step. It is now
our shared responsibility to support the efforts of
the United States and the indefatigable commitment
of Secretary of State John Kerry in order to help the
parties take the difficult yet indispensable decisions to
realize the vision of the long-term interests of the Israeli
and Palestinian peoples. To succeed, the negotiations
process requires a favourable political environment and
measures that strengthen mutual trust. Some steps still
need to be taken. Unilateral acts that feed the logic of
distrust must cease.

The year 2013 ended on a positive note, with Israel's
freeing of a third group of 26 Palestinian prisoners.
However, we remain deeply worried about the pursuit
of the Israeli settlement policy, which is illegal under
international law and represents a real threat to peace
and goes against the principle of good faith negotiations.
Nobody will believe that the efforts to achieve peace
can succeed if settlement activities continue, if the
Gaza blockade persists, if the separation wall keeps
on grabbing Palestinian land, and if the destruction of
Palestinian infrastructures intensifies.

We are also highly worried by the continuing rocket
attacks launched by certain Palestinian factions from
the Gaza strip against Israeli territory. Nothing justifies
that blind and unacceptable recourse to violence, which
clearly does not serve the Palestinian cause. We must
end every kind of provocation and respect the borders
of the Palestinian people and the security of the Israeli
population; both are closely intertwined.

The American initiative is probably the last
chance to end the occupation, implement the two-
State solution based on the borders of 1967 and create
a sovereign, independent, democratic, contiguous and
Viable Palestinian State, living side by side in peace and
security with Israel, with Jerusalem as the capital ofboth
States. We must take advantage of this opportunity, and
Luxembourg will continue to engage with its European
Union partners to contribute to the ongoing efforts, in
close cooperation with key stakeholders, the Quartet
and the countries of the region.

The Secretary-General has just recalled the
objective of the second Geneva Conference on Syria,
which starts the day after tomorrow in Montreux - the
cessation of hostilities, an end to all violence and the
beginning ofa political settlement on the basis ofthe full
and comprehensive implementation of the 30 June 2012
Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex). That must
lead to the establishment of a transitional governing
body exercising full executive powers and formed on
the basis of mutual consent. We welcome the decision
taken on 18 January by the Syrian National Coalition
to attend the second Geneva Conference. I can only
encourage the Syrian National Coalition to maintain
the courageous position it has taken. I also call on Iran
to commit to playing a constructive role to put an end
to the Syrian conflict by explicitly signing onto the
implementation of the Geneva communique of 30 June
2012 and the establishment of a transitional governing
body exercising full executive powers, as called for in the
Secretary-General's letter of invitation. The authorities
in Damascus must now allow the Syrian people to take
their destiny into their own hands, and they must stop
rejecting the principles of a political transition, which
were agreed in the Geneva communique.

The needs and rights of all Syrians must be taken
into account - in particular those of the Syrian women,
who, together with the children, have borne the brunt of
the repression since it started. With others, Luxembourg
is working towards the full participation of women in
the political transition process in Syria, in accordance
with resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2122 (2013). In order
for the negotiations process to lead to lasting peace, it is
indeed important that, from the beginning, women are
empowered to make their voices heard and express their
point of view, share their experiences, their concerns
and their specific needs.

The humanitarian and security challenges can be
resolved only through a negotiated political settlement
of the crisis. Faced with the spiral of violence that
threatens the region, however, we cannot wait for the
conclusion of a future political process, and we cannot
turn a blind eye to the long list of war crimes and
crimes against humanity, which bring Syria each day
closer to its destruction. Given the bombing of hospitals
and schools, the deliberate and indiscriminate attacks
against civilians and medical and health-care workers,
the targeting of pharmacies, the use of starvation as a
weapon of war to pressure the people of Ghouta, the
sieges and massacres, and the use of chemical weapons,
Scud missiles and barrel bombs, nothing seems to
be off-limits any more in Syria and a climate of total
impunity prevails. In the face of those horrors, I want
to repeat here what we have been saying for a year:
the Council must refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.

The humanitarian crisis has reached catastrophic
proportions. We know this. More than 9 million
Syrians, about half the population of the country, are
in desperate need of emergency aid, in particular those
who are trapped in besieged and hard-to-reach areas.
Confronted with that crisis, the world is mobilizing:
more than $2.4 billion in assistance was pledged at the
second conference held in Kuwait City on 15 January. I
personally participated in that conference to announce
a new contribution of Luxembourg representing an
increase of more than 60 per cent compared to our
pledge of 2013.

Unfortunately, the pledged aid will not be able
to achieve its aim if there is no progress in terms of
humanitarian access on the ground. Without immediate,
safe and unhindered access, the survival of half the
Syrian population is at stake. The same goes for the
Palestinians trapped in Yarmouk. The Syrian people
cannot be content with a few localized and fragile
ceasefires, or the liberation of a few political prisoners.
It cannot be content with concessions made here and
there by the authorities in Damascus when it is in their
strategic or political interest. The authorities must
respect their obligations and they must implement the
demands of the Council. Without significant progress in
terms of access, the Council will need, in our opinion,
to assume its responsibilities and adopt a humanitarian
resolution.

I shall conclude my statement by addressing the
situation in Lebanon. In the past months, the number
of deadly attacks have multiplied. I will mention only
the attack in Beirut on 27 December 2013, which cost
the life of former Minister Mohamad Chatah, a man of
dialogue. That is a very worrying sign of the growing
impact of the Syrian conflict on the security and
stability of Lebanon. The very clear message sent by
the Council in its presidential statement of 10 July 2013
(S/PRST/2013/9) and in the numerous press statements
that followed remains more than ever valid today. That
message calls on all those who disregard the Baabda
Declaration to put an end to their actions, which
threaten the model of unity in diversity that is Lebanon.

In that regard, I would like to reiterate our support to
Lebanon, its institutions and its policy of dissociation.
Finally, I welcome the opening, on 16 January, before
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon of the trial in absentia
of four members of Hizbullah accused of assassinating
former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri in 2005. I hope that
the trial will mark the beginning of the end ofimpunity
for the crimes committed in Lebanon.

