Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing on developments in the Syrian
Arab Republic. We listened carefully to the briefings
made by Dr. Hala, head of Syria Bright Future, and
Ms. Amina Khoulani of Families for Freedom.

We were perplexed by the initiative taken by our
Western colleagues to call for today's meeting. The
thoughts it evokes are not the most positive. Instead
of reliable information, we have once again heard
speculation based on unverified and extremely biased
information regarding the situation in Syria. The
sources of such information have lied time and again.
We view steps to exacerbate and distort the situation in
and around Syria as part of an attempt to continue to
hinder the political settlement process in the country.
I will be frank. We were very disappointed about
the statements made by our Western colleagues, in
particular that of our American colleague. Since the
United States and States that support it have initiated
today's meeting on the topic, we expected them to
finally provide us with information on the situation in
the territory of Syria that they de facto occupy. What
are the laws governing the lives of its people? How is
justice being administered? That is the big question.
In whose interests are large armed groups and law
enforcement bodies a if they can even be called
that - being prepared? How many people are detained
or missing? Regrettably, we have not received any
answers to those questions today.

The information we receive from human rights
organizations is, frankly, horrifying. We have
repeatedly stated that politicizing humanitarian and
human rights issues is unacceptable. However, we
have again heard accusations being levelled against
only one of the parties - the official authorities in
Damascus - while outright terrorists, who, let me
remind the Council, have introduced the practice of
public executions and torture in that country, are being
presented as innocent victims. We are convinced that
the international community should instead, not only
in word but in deed, help Syria recover after the very
serious crisis, which, incidentally, was fuelled and
exacerbated by outside forces, including by some of
those who now express concern about the humanitarian
situation in the country. Nonetheless, action should not
fan the flames of scandal but consistently strengthen
Government bodies and the justice system, assist
economic recovery and repair broken connections
among the people of the country.

Allow me to inform the Council that the thirteenth
international meeting on Syria in the Astana format
was held in Nur-Sultan on 1 and 2 August. As the
Council knows, as part of the process, we have a
successfully functioning working group on detentions,
abductions and missing persons, which is comprised of
representatives of Russia, Iran, Turkey and experts from
the United Nations and the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC). That unique mechanism
has demonstrated its effectiveness in restoring trust
among the Syrian parties. Last week, on 31 July, the
fourth operation to liberate detainees took place and
an exchange of prisoners was conducted on a l4-for-15
basis. In this way, the total number of persons released
thanks to the Astana working group is in excess of 110
people. Similar operations took place in November
2018 and in February and April this year. In addition,
it is important to recall the common practice of the
local exchange of prisoners in Syria, which occurs
almost daily.

The group is also focused on the issue of missing
persons. Together with experts of the United Nations
and the ICRC, we are in the process of developing
procedures and modalities for compiling databases of
people who are considered by the Syrian Government
and the opposition to be missing, as well as for further
action in that area. At the same time, we must recall
that such issues are extremely sensitive. We count on
our Security Council partners to understand that it is a
humanitarian issue that should not be publicized, much
less politicized. We have serious concerns about the
fact that addressing the issue in the Security Council
could have the opposite effect and disrupt the very
complex process of establishing trust among the parties
to the conflict. We would hope that no one is interested
in such a negative development. We would also like
to ask our Western colleagues who support the armed
Syrian opposition to help the international community
determine what happened to the thousands of people
who were forcibly held by militants in eastern Ghouta,
Homs and south-western Syria and are currently
reported to be missing. It is obvious that those questions
should not be posed to Damascus.

All those present here, as well as the representatives
of interested organizations, have had the opportunity to
familiarize themselves with the most recent report of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
on the humanitarian situation in Syria. The maps
show locations where humanitarian activity is being
conducted at both the domestic and international levels.
The area beyond the Euphrates river is a blank spot on
the map and not because the situation is fine there. On
the contrary, the north-east is in ruins. According to
information from our military, more than 300 terrorist
acts took place in June and July alone. According to
Western non-governmental organizations, more than
1,200 people - most of them civilians - died as
a result of mass coalition air strikes in Deir ez-Zor
province just in the first quarter of 2019 alone.

The situation in the internally displaced persons
(IDP) camp in Rukban remains complex. However,
thanks to the efforts of the Russian Centre for the
Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab
Republic and of the Government of Syria, more than
17,000 people have been able to leave Rukban. We will
continue to work with the United Nations to address
the issue of returning refugees and ensure they have all
they need.
The situation in the Al-Hol camp is truly
catastrophic. Half of the camp's residents are women
and children. If preserving the status quo in the camp
and spreading jihadist ideology are not goals in and of
themselves, then it is high time to consider transferring
that territory to Syrian control in order to address the
IDP issue. However, for the time being, we are under the
impression that the Al-Hol camp, where 11,000 of the
73,000 residents are foreign citizens, and thejails in the
north-west that are not under the control of Damascus
are just one big concentration camp.

We are also concerned about the situation in the
Al-Tanf area. With regard to the territories that have
been listed, we recall once again that the occupying
Power bears responsibility for the people in the occupied
territories, in accordance with the Geneva Conventions.

In conclusion, I would like to pause to underscore
that, although we listenedto our United States colleagues
regarding the humanitarian and human rights aspects
of the situation in Syria, that does not mean that the
ongoing illegal American military presence in that
country is legitimate in the eyes of Syrians or the entire
international community. Based on the conflicting
statements of American leadership, it would appear that
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has been
defeated in Syria and Iraq, whereas combating ISIL was
the initial goal announced for the American presence in
the area. However, continued American presence leads
us to believe that there are other goals that are not in
line with the principles of respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic,

For its part, Russia will continue providing the
necessary assistance to help the Syrians overcome their
difficulties and reach political agreements regarding
a political settlement, the humanitarian situation and
post-conflict recovery. We will do that both nationally
and in multilateral formats in cooperation with the
interested parties. We call on all forces of good to join
those efforts.

