Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We join others in expressing
our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing
this timely and important high-level debate. We thank
the Secretary-General, the Acting President of the
General Assembly and the Presidents of the Economic
and Social Council and the International Court of
Justice for their briefings.

We also support the statement to be delivered by the
Permanent Observer of the African Union, Ms. Fatima
Kyari Mohammed.

We face today unprecedented challenges and
threats to global peace and security. The need for
multilateralism has never been more indispensable to
ensuring a collective response. Of course, at the core
of international multilateralism is the United Nations.
It has always been an essential platform for advancing
collective security and promoting multilateral
cooperation among Member States in line with the
spirit of its Charter. It has also been an Organization
that has faced many challenges. It has had its successes
and failures. We can certainly draw lessons from some
of its achievements. We should also have the courage
to admit its shortcomings and make every effort to
redress them.

At the same time, we would all agree that the
United Nations is the only indispensable universal
Organization we have. Despite all of its faults, it is
an Organization that we cannot live without. The
question is how we make it more effective, functional
and relevant in addressing the challenges and threats
humankind faces in the twenty-first century. There is
no doubt that the United Nations collective security
system has helped reduce the danger ofwar. It has made
enormous contributions to peacekeeping for more than
70 years.

Nevertheless, the global geopolitical landscape
has changed tremendously since the United Nations
was established. The increasing number of intra-State
conflicts, the threats ofterrorism and violent extremism,
as well as other transnational crimes by non-State
actors, are posing increasingly greater risks to world
peace and security. The prevalence of poverty and
inequality, the spread of pandemic diseases, the impact
of climate change and other socioeconomic challenges
all have major implications on the security and survival
of humankind.

At this juncture in human history, we need the
United Nations more than ever before. That is why we
need an Organization capable of addressing its own
weaknesses. It must have the capacity to make a real
difference not only in security, but also in economic,
social, human rights and humanitarian areas. That is
why the reform of the United Nations is so critical.
The Organization must be true to the Preamble of the
Charter - that it is the Organization of the peoples of
the United Nations. We fully support the reform agenda
of the Secretary-General to make the United Nations
better able to respond to the needs and aspirations of
"we the peoples" that generated the Organization.

The Charter provides for a number of possible tools
for the Security Council to address the world problems,
Chapter VI of the Charter is clear about the primacy
of pacific settlement of disputes and emphasizes the
need to take measures to prevent conflicts before they
erupt. Chapter VII provides for parameters for action
with regard to any threat to peace, breach of peace or
act of aggression. Chapter VIII provides for regional
arrangements to buttress peace. It is deeply regrettable
that we remain unable to take full advantage of what
the Charter provides to help overcome the challenges
that we face. In effect, that undermines the credibility
of the Security Council itself. We hardly need to
remind representatives that it is the body that has
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. There is every reason
to emphasize the need for reform to start at the top,
with the membership of the Security Council. Here, as
elsewhere in our efforts to make the Organization fit
for the problems of this century, we must also remain
faithful to the principles of the Charter - sovereign
equality, territorial integrity, political independence,
non-intervention and peaceful settlement of disputes.

The global concerns and realities of today require
us to reaffirm our full commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to
multilateralism. They also demand that we muster the
courage and determination to rise to that challenge.

Allow me to conclude by underlining Ethiopia's
own commitment, as a founding Member of the United
Nations and as the largest troop-contributing country,
to fully playing its part, as it has done for more than 60
years.

