Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Ijoin previous
speakers in thanking Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, for presenting her
ninth report on Libya.

We note that, since the last report of the ICC was
submitted to the Security Council (see S/PV.7306),
the political and security situation in Libya has hardly
improved. On the contrary, it has seriously deteriorated,
as has the human rights situation. This situation has not
allowed the Court to effectively carry out its activities
in the country. The Libyan authorities for their part,
while they have not refused to cooperate, do not
facilitate progress in this regard.

With regard to the crimes committed in 2011, the
trials of the principal perpetrators - Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi - have not yet
begun, either at the ICC or in the Libyan courts, since
the issuance on 27 June 2011 of their arrest warrants.
While we recognize the complexity of the situation in
Libya, we encourage the national authorities to respond
favourably to the Court's request regarding these two
cases, calling for them to uphold the commitments
undertaken in the protocol of understanding signed in
November 2013. We welcome the ongoing cooperation
between the Office of the Prosecutor-General in Libya
and the Court, and we welcome the commitment and
professionalism of national investigators, who continue
to work under very difficult conditions.

Since the last report ofthe Prosecutor, in November
2014, approximately 8,000 persons, including many
civilians, have remained in detention without trial
under difficult conditions despite the calls made by the
Security Council. Tens of thousands of newly displaced
persons have been recorded, and cases of serious human
rights violations, such as abductions and torture, have
been reported. We condemn the persecution of members
of civil society, human rights defenders, jurists and
journalists, who have courageously denounced the
senseless violence.

The growing terrorist presence in Libya has led
to an increase in and worsening of crimes committed
for religious reasons against foreigners. In that regard,
we strongly condemn the recent savage executions of
Egyptian and Ethiopian nationals by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. The perpetrators of those crimes
must be identified and brought to account for their
crimes.

Moreover, we express our serious concern with
regard to the grave violations committed against
thousands of migrating African labourers. They are
sometimes taken hostage, often persecuted and robbed
of their belongings, or executed without any form of
trial. Those migrants also fall victim to all kinds of
traffickers who swindle them and unscrupulously pile
them, women and children included, into makeshift
boats, the tragic wrecks of which have become an
almost daily occurrence. In any event, the international
community must mobilize to help the Libyan authorities
put an end to the massive violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law and to impunity.

In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for
the negotiations taking place in Skhirat in Morocco
under the auspices of the United Nations, and hope
that the Libyan parties will quickly be able to reach
a final agreement on the formation of a national unity
Government able to put an end to the hostilities. Without
peace, it will be difficult to deliver justice.

