Mr. Guehenno: As Council members are aware,
we are meeting today to discuss two reports on the
situation in the region of Ituri, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and specifically in the areas of
Mambasa and Drodro. Those reports have been
distributed to the members of the Security Council.
While Deputy High Commissioner Ramcharan will
shed further light on those reports, as well as outline
some of the recommendations emanating from them, I
would like to draw the attention of the Council to the
broader trends that led to the violations in Ituri, as well
as to provide an update on recent developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo since our last
briefing to the Security Council, on 26 June. I shall
turn first to the reports.

The Mambasa report covers events that took
place between October and December 2002, and relates
to atrocities committed by the Mouvement pour la
liberation du Congo (MLC), the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie - National (RCD-N) and
the Union des patriotes congolais (UPC); while the
report on events in and around Drodro relates to April
2003, when atrocities were committed, in particular by
Lendu combatants, as well as possibly others. For some
time now, in successive updates before the Security
Council, the Secretariat has made Member States aware
of the ongoing violence in the Ituri region, where
issues of economic necessity and sustenance, land and
exploitation of natural resources have been fuelled by
the ambition of local and external players alike to
dominate the region.

The political context for the events described
includes not only the issues I have just described, but
also the relative isolation of Ituri from the national
context, where the perpetrators that are committing the
crimes can be brought to justice. The total breakdown
of law and order that afflicts Ituri means that no one,
including those who were "tried" by the MLC
authorities in Gbadolite, is in fact held accountable for
his or her actions. The Security Council has often
before condemned such impunity.

It is hoped that, with the installation of the
transitional Government in Kinshasa, those who are
guilty will be brought to justice. However, this can
happen only if there is a degree of centralized control
in the administration of justice and in the rule of law
sector. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
desperately needs an institutional framework whereby
those guilty of crimes are held accountable. Under the
All-Inclusive Agreement signed on 17 December 2002,
a National Truth and Reconciliation Commission, as
well as a National Observatory for Human Rights, are
to be established. It would be crucial for the
international community to support the work of those
organs.

As outlined in the second special report of the
Secretary-General in document S/2003/566 of 27 May,
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) will
collaborate closely with the soon-to-be-installed
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in the establishment and functioning of these vital
institutions.

Turning towards the political scene, Security
Council members are aware that the delay in agreement
on the distribution of the military command posts,
which had delayed the installation of the transitional
Government, was finally resolved on 29 June with the
mediation of Special Envoy Niasse, General Baril and
the Government of South Africa. The parties agreed,
under the provisions of the Second Memorandum on
the Army and Security signed that day, that the position
of the Chef d'Etat-Major General would be allocated to
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; the Chef d'Etat-Major Administration and the
Chef des Forces Navales would be awarded to the
MLC; and both Chef d'Etat-Major Logistique and Chef
des Forces Terrestres would be from the RCD-Goma.
Subsequently, on 30 June in Mbandaka, President
Kabila issued a decree announcing the composition of
the transitional Government, which would consist of 36
ministers and 25 deputy ministers representing the
various components of the inter-Congolese dialogue. In
a statement marking the occasion, the Secretary-
General has welcomed the announcement of the new
Government and has pledged the support of the United
Nations.

The next steps are the swearing-in of the four
vice-presidents and the first meeting of the Council of
Ministers, at which point the new Government will
formally commence its work. MONUC is closely
consulting with the parties in order to ensure that the
security concerns of the political leaders, especially the
MLC and the RCD-Goma, are addressed. It is, of
course, critical that all leaders arrive in Kinshasa in
order to ensure a successful commencement. In this
regard, members of the new transitional Government
have already begun to arrive in Kinshasa. MONUC is
gearing up to facilitate the arrival of the
parliamentarians and senators from all over the
country.

Turning to the Kivus, following the earlier
signing in Bujumbura on 19 June of the Acte
d'Engagement for a cessation of hostilities, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the RCD-Kisangani-Mouvement de Liberation (K/ML)
and the RCD-Goma met in Beni on 26 June, under the
mediation of MONUC, and established a "Mission de
Verification Conjointe" (MVC) to verify the
withdrawal of the RCD-Goma to 15 kilometres south
of their positions at Rwese and Kimbulu, as well as the
maintenance of the current positions of the RCD-K/ML
and the cantonment of Congolese Armed Forces (FAC)
troops at Mavivi.

According to initial assessments by MONUC,
FAC, RCD-K/ML and RCD-Goma have largely
complied with the first phase of the agreed ceasefire
and withdrawal, although RCD-Goma only participated
in the MVC for the first time on 4 July. Proposals for
further withdrawals and verification procedures have
been put to the three parties and will be discussed at a
meeting of the MVC on 7 and 8 July. The Arme'e
patriotique congolaise, the military wing of the
RCD-K/ML, launched operations on 2-4 July to disarm
the Mayi Mayi in Beni and Butembo so as to prevent
them from destabilizing the ceasefire.

(spoke in French)

I shall now discuss the situation in Ituri and
particularly in Bunia. The security situation in Bunia is
now stable and the Interim Emergency Multinational
Force (IEMF), together with the MONUC contingent,
continues to patrol the town, which was declared a
weapons-free zone as of 25 June. While the UPC has
redeployed its troops to the exterior of the town, the
presence of soldiers in civilian garb cannot be ruled
out.

In the meantime, some 6,000 internally displaced
persons, most of whom are apparently original
residents of the town, have returned from camps and
outlying areas. One discouraging factor remains the
illegal occupation by UPC elements of the private
homes of those wishing to return. The IEMF and
MONUC are also facilitating the return to town of
Lendu inhabitants, including their political
representatives. In this connection, on 29 June,
MONUC escorted the reconnaissance mission of
various United Nations and other agencies and non-
governmental organizations to Lendu-held areas 20
kilometres south of Bunia. Members of the Ituri interim
administration also accompanied the mission to
increase their political outreach beyond Bunia. More
such missions, within a 40 to 50 kilometres radius of
Bunia, are envisaged.

The local radio station in Bunia, Radio Candip,
continues to be controlled by the UPC. MONUC, under
a plan coordinated with the Ituri interim
administration, is guarding the radio premises in order
to ensure that the facilities are eventually controlled by
the Ituri interim administration and not used as a tool
to spread propaganda or messages inciting hatred.

As Council members are aware, the rationale
behind an enhanced security presence in Bunia has
been to create sufficient political space for the Ituri
interim administration to establish itself on a firmer
footing. The administration is now taking a more
proactive stance in implementing its mandate and has
appointed a mayor for Bunia and started to deploy its
local civilian police - albeit in small numbers - to
key areas in the town, in coordination with MONUC.
However, it must be recognized that establishing full
authority and competencies of the interim
administration will be a long-term process. In
cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and humanitarian agencies,
MONUC and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations have drawn up a strategy for Ituri to guide
and coordinate the activities of United Nations
agencies and their partners, focusing first on
humanitarian assistance to Bunia. This plan has been
finalized and will assist all those involved in assistance
to the region to expand that aid through the Ituri
Interim Administration. The plan will be conveyed to
Security Council members and all other potential
donors within the week, with a request for assistance. It
is a supplement to MONUC's efforts to support
cooperation with the Ituri Interim Administration.

All efforts are now being made to ensure that the
second task force will be deployed in Bunia by 15
August 2003, to allow a handover period of about two
weeks with the IEMF. The Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is also consulting potential
troop-contributing countries with regard to the final
composition of the Ituri brigade, which was proposed
in the second special report of the Secretary-General of
27 May 2003 (S/2003/566) in anticipation of a decision
by the Security Council.

Finally, let me add that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Swing, has now arrived
in the Congo and visited Bunia over the weekend to
personally assess the situation.

In conclusion, let me stress that the deployment
of a strong multinational force in Bunia has begun to
change the balance between the warring parties and the
legitimate political actors in that part of the Congo.
The main beneficiaries are the thousands of civilians
who may finally be able to return to their homes and
resume their lives under normal conditions of security.

In this regard, it is crucial that the brigade-size
force recommended by the Secretary-General to
replace the Multinational Force in Bunia, and later to
be deployed in the Ituri area as well, be configured
with enough strength and deployed under such
conditions so that it can build on the already achieved
results of the stabilizing presence of the Multinational
Force. At the same time, we are fully cognizant that
Bunia, like Ituri, will require the sustained attention of
the international community.

As the Secretariat has often indicated to the
Council, there must be continued international pressure
on the parties to convince them that a political
transitional process is the only option available to
them. In this context, the need for accountability on the
part of those who have been responsible for crimes
must also be considered. It is an axiom that peace
cannot be re-established, there cannot be any real
peace, without an end to impunity. I wish to invite the
Security Council to consider additional steps that may
be taken to help the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to develop the capacity of that
State so that there is a functioning justice system, so
that those who should be held accountable are held
accountable, with the aid of the international
community.

