Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): First, Mr. President, I would like to thank you
sincerely for agreeing to the Arab Group's request for
this public meeting because of the renewed violence in
the Middle East and the extremely grave situation in
Ramallah. The delegation of Cameroon is deeply
concerned. We would like to reaffirm the need to
respect the physical integrity and the political survival
of Palestinian institutions. Two sides are needed to
build peace and to have dialogue.

Three days ago, I unambiguously condemned the
escalation of violence and the recent attacks in the
Middle East. Today, given the tragic and terrifying
increase in bloodshed, there is a serious danger that we
and our peoples will be overwhelmed by despair. It
seems that the chance for peace is yet again drifting
further and further away and that the region may yet
again be caught up in madness and confrontation.
Despite all this, however, we have to hope, for, as the
Secretary-General just said, we need hope. His words
sound even more tragic today.

Just three days ago, Cameroon was hopeful about
the peace plan offered by the Quartet, which takes the
Council's concerns and the requirements for a lasting
settlement into account. It seemed to us then, as it
seems to us today, to be capable of restoring peace to
Palestine, the land of peace. At that time, Cameroon
drew attention to the difficulties that would inevitably
arise. More specifically, I called on the sides to adhere
fully to the peace plan prepared by the Quartet. We
insisted that neither party, on the basis of some
contingency or other, should be able to call the plan
into question.

Unfortunately, this was at a time of relative calm
that had lasted several weeks. Now, just when real hope
seemed to be emerging, further violence is jeopardizing
the new momentum. I would recall Tolstoy's words to
the effect that no reform imposed by violence will set
the wrong to rights. Wisdom has no need of violence.

Thus, I call on the parties once again to respect
human life, to act with moderation and to exercise
restraint. We still believe in the virtues of dialogue and
negotiation. Only dialogue and negotiation can bring a
just and lasting peace to the Middle East. We call on
the Palestinians and Israelis to demonstrate more
courage and a greater sense of history by deciding
resolutely to return to the path of dialogue towards a
lasting peace.

Is there any need to point out that a legal
framework already exists that could ease tension and
lead to a comprehensive settlement? I refer to the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council -
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) -
which are the bases of the Quartet's road map. We
believe that action undertaken in respect for
international law would help to bring about a real, just
and lasting peace. It is only through a political
settlement that the legitimate aspirations of both sides
to live in peace, within secure and recognized borders,
can actually be realized. Let us therefore give the
Quartet's peace plan a chance. It offers a methodical
and comprehensive settlement that takes account of the
political, security, economic and humanitarian aspects
to be addressed in parallel, not in sequence.

History is what men and women make it. It is up
to the men and women of Israel and Palestine to write
and to make their history together. To that end, as
Cameroon has said before and will say again, it is
essential for the men, women and young people of the
Middle East to launch the process of developing and
transforming their ways of thinking and acting so as to
stem this mindless tide of violence and to prime the
well of love.

