Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): As this is
our first formal meeting in November, I should like to
express to you, Sir, France's wishes for every success
as you preside over the Council during this extremely
important month for the future of the United Nations. I
should like to add to those customary compliments a
very particular tribute to the Permanent Representative
of Cameroon, who presided over our work last month
with effectiveness and distinction. In addition, it is a
pleasure to see the Foreign Minister of Uganda,
Mr. Wapakhabulo, here at this table once again.

The French delegation has listened attentively to
the previous speakers. France initiated the creation of
the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and on its link with
the continuing conflict in that country. The objective
was to put an end to such illegal exploitation, not only
because the plundering is morally unacceptable, but
also because today it constitutes one of the factors
driving conflict in the Great Lakes region.

Two years after its creation, the Panel of Experts
has kept its promises. It has carried out considerable
work, having presented three substantive reports: that of
Mrs. Ba-N'Daw, presented in April 2001 (S/2001/357);
the addendum to that report, prepared by Ambassador
Kassem last November (S/2001/1072); and the report
that Mr. Kassem submitted last month (S/2002/1146).
Those three studies form one whole. They enable us to
approach the peace process from the perspective of
economic interests. That aspect is not taken into account
in the peace agreements signed by the parties, but it is
obviously essential to bear it in mind if we are to put an
end to the conflict. The plundering of the Congo has
become one of the conflict's principal engines. And it is
all the more important to take that into account because,
as Ambassador Kassem explained, the plundering is
being adapted to developments in the peace process. If
we are not careful, it could ruin all the efforts of the
various parties finally to restore peace to the Great
Lakes region.

The picture that the Group of Experts has painted
is worrisome. It implicates all the participants: the
foreign, uninvited forces, in particular Rwanda and
Uganda; certain invited forces, such as Zimbabwe; the
Congolese rebels - the grave accusations against the
Mouvement de liberation congolais (MLC) and the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie (RCD) in
the earlier reports remain valid, if I am to believe what
Ambassador Kassem explained to us - and finally,
members of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The international community's message to those
parties is extremely clear. The natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot and must not
be used except to benefit the Congolese; no one has a
right to illegally exploit them. In that regard, a
distinction must be made among the various actors
concerned. What is meant by "illegal exploitation"?
Obviously, any exploitation is illegal that benefits
entities other than the legal Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that are not acting
within the framework of Congolese legal provisions.
The pillaging carried out by members of foreign forces
stationed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo or
on their behalf by Congolese agents therefore falls into
that category. Along with occupation of the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - which the
Council has consistently denounced - it constitutes a
violation of Congolese sovereignty and thus of
international law. It must cease immediately.

However, measures that the Congolese
Government might take with regard to exploiting the
country's resources are not inherently illegal. I recall
that, for at least four years, the Congolese Government
had to deal with conflict situations on its own territory.
Illegal actions may have been taken that were motivated,
for example, by a desire for personal enrichment. But
those constitute a violation of domestic law and should
therefore be punished and redressed by the Congolese
authorities in respect for the domestic law of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That distinction, I
believe, is necessary and must be taken into account in
any study of the linkage between the exploitation of the
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the continuance of the conflict. The entire world
recognizes the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
its Government. No one intends to equate the legal,
recognized Government with other actors in the conflict.

But that distinction should not prevent the
Congolese Government from punishing misconduct
that might occur when such practices are verified. In
that regard, I believe that I reflect the opinions of all
my colleagues on the Security Council in emphasizing
that strengthening the rule of law and extending it
throughout the territory of a reunified Congo are
decisive steps in the fight against the plundering of the
country's resources. That is one of the reasons why the
Council supports the ongoing negotiations among
Congolese parties. We hope that they will lead as
quickly as possible to an all-inclusive agreement on the
transition.

We are not here today to judge anyone, but we
want results. We want an end to the plundering of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the conflict
that has torn the region apart. To begin with, there must
be a dialogue among those who have been implicated
by the Ba-N'Daw and Kassem reports and by the
Panel's experts. Each of the parties has the right to
respond and to have his or her views heard. It would be
desirable for the Secretariat to publish, within a month,
a technical addendum to Mr. Kassem's most recent
report, taking up the elements that all the parties
mentioned in the report wish to emphasize. For the
most part, those parties have spoken this morning.

In this connection, there are reasons to welcome
the positive approach of the Ugandan authorities, who
have created the independent Porter Commission - to
which the Minister referred at length this morning - to
investigate incidents in which Ugandan officials are
implicated. We await with interest the report which the
Commission is to issue in a few days.

We also welcome the response of the Prosecutor
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, who last
week initiated proceedings involving all the members
of the Government named in the Kassem report. We
invite the other parties concerned to adopt a similar
approach. It is through dialogue and by examining
evidence with respect, of course, for the safety of
the Panel's sources - that the truth will emerge. Each
State implicated in the report is responsible for putting
an end to the activities of its citizens or undertaken on
its territory that are linked to the illegal exploitation of
the resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

 

The Council has before it a long list of
recommendations, all of which are relevant and some
of which are quite novel. The Council will meet next
week to decide on follow-up action, particularly in the
light of the statements we have heard today.

I believe, however, that two comments can be
made right away. First, the Council must continue to
hear periodic reports on this issue. The Council might
create a monitoring body, as Mr. Kassem has
recommended, or simply renew the Panel's mandate,
but we must maintain our independent capacity of
observation. I would add that the Experts' next report
will provide us with a new assessment of the activities
of those who were named in the previous report, in the
light of indications they will have provided and of any
developments noted by the Experts in the field.

Secondly, a reading of the Ba-N'Daw and Kassem
reports should encourage us to reread reports written by
other experts concerning other crises. It is disturbing to
note a certain number of similarities. We note, for
instance, that the same names of arms dealers and
commodities traders recur again and again in all these
reports. Three individuals identified by Mr. Kassem are
also active elsewhere. Mr. Leonid Minim and
Mr. Sanjivan Ruprah are also mentioned by the Liberia
and Sierra Leone Panels. The name of Mr. Victor Bout
also appears not only in the reports of the Liberia and
Sierra Leone Panels, but also in the report of the Angola
Panel and even in report of the follow-up group on
Afghanistan, which mentions transactions between Mr.
Bout, the Taliban and Al Qaeda. I emphasize that very
important point. Mr. Minim, Mr. Ruprah and Mr. Bout
are already the targets of Security Council sanctions.
Their names appear on the list of persons subject to
travel bans under resolution 1343 (2001) on Liberia. The
very least that can be said, however, is that the
restrictions do not seem to have hampered their
activities in the Congo to any significant degree.

This being the case, we believe that the time has
come once again to consider an approach that would
enable us to compare these different types of
information and the Council to adopt a coherent and
effective line of action. We must put an end to the
destabilizing activities of these international dealers
throughout Africa and beyond. We must fully shoulder
our responsibilities in this respect.

The Ba-N'Daw and Kassem reports are timely
reminders that the undoubtedly positive developments
in the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo should not lead us to forget realities in the field.
In addition to the progress made in the withdrawal of
foreign forces, which we welcome, there are local
conflicts, such as in Ituri, that are more or less
manipulated and provoke genuine humanitarian
catastrophes. Such conflicts have many causes, but
they are all fuelled, as the Ba-N'Daw and Kassem
reports show, by the ambition to control local natural
resources. This issue is therefore more timely than ever
and the success of the peace process depends on it.
This is not the time to give up.

