Mr. Berger (Germany): Let me in turn congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. Ijoin in the thanks that have been expressed to
Ambassador Rosenthal and his team for their presidency
last month.

Germany voted in favour of resolution 2073 (2012).
My country continues to strongly support the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). AMISOM
carries out its task in very difficult circumstances. It
has been instrumental in securing the progress that
we have seen recently on the ground, and it will be
indispensable for many months to come.

We commend the efforts of the United Kingdom that
guided the Council through very dynamic negotiations
aimed at achieving consensus. We deplore the fact that
it was impossible to achieve such consensus on the first
proposed draft, which contained many positive and
necessary elements. During negotiations, my delegation
supported a provision that clearly addressed the need
for sustainable funding for AMISOM, as requested by
the African Union (AU) in its latest report.

We believe that, politically, AMISOM. is a joint
undertaking between the African Union and the United
Nations, and that the Council shares the responsibility
to secure the sustainabality ofthe Mission. The success
of AMISOM. is in our common interest, and the Council
should not limit itself to calling for new donors when it
comes to the funding of the Mission. We think that an
informed and thorough discussion of the issue, in close
cooperation with the African Union, is overdue.

Furthermore, we should have liked the Council to
repeat and stress its request with regard to a guard force
to be provided by AMISOM. for United Nations and
other international personnel. Such protection is key to
enabling the United Nations and others to engage with
the Somalis in Mogadishu and elsewhere in the country.
United Nations assistance to the Somali authories and
direct interaction with them on the ground are crucial
in order to stabilize the country and to create a peace
dividend for the Somali people. We hope that it will be
possible to include this element in the next resolution on
AMISOM. that will be adopted against the background
of the United Nations and AU assessment of AMISOM
and the future United Nations role in the country.

