Mr. Cevik (Turkey): The Middle East is confronted
with an alarming situation. Sectarian and divisive
policies, brutal oppression of legitimate demands
for democracy, terrorism, and unresolved conflicts
result in humanitarian crises, mass displacements and
feelings of resentment.

The Israeli-Palestine conflict remains the core
challenge and undermines the prospects for lasting
regional and global peace. The increasing number of
crises in the wider region must not distract us from
the urgent need to relaunch the peace process. On
the contrary, failing to address that issue will only
destabilize the region further, deepen the despair and
suffering and lead to more extremism.

The tragedy of Palestinians continues unabated. As
tensions recently escalated in the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in East Jerusalem, we were
reminded once again of how dramatic the situation is
in the absence of any real hope for peace. We are very
concerned about the latest developments although we
are slightly relieved to see that what has been going on
for the last months is finally receiving the attention it
merits.

Our immediate priority should be a rapid
de-escalation of tension. We should not see the current
situation as another in a perennial round of skirmishes
and wait for the situation to calm down. However, at the
same time, we should all be very clear about the root
cause of the problem, which is the illegal occupation
of East Jerusalem and other Palestinian territories by
Israel.

The current escalation began following the entry
of Israeli security forces into Al-Haram Al-Sharif, The
ban preventing Palestinians from entering the Old City
of Jerusalem for two days caused great outrage. It then
spread to Gaza when Israeli soldiers opened fire on
demonstrators and Israeli air strikes once again took
civilian lives. Casualties have been mounting ever
since. We strongly condemn the disproportionate use
of force by Israeli security forces, which inflames the
situation.

Needless to say, at the epicentre of the Palestine
cause lies Jerusalem. Jerusalem matters to all
humankind. A city that is sacred to Islam, Judaism and
Christianity should be treated with utmost respect. The
expansion of illegal settlements, violations targeting
holy sites, and all other provocative activities aimed
at undermining the status and sanctity of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif must immediately and unconditionally stop.
We consider the Jordanian role as the custodian of the
holy sites in Jerusalem crucial for the preservation
of the historical status of Al-Haram Al-Sharif as an
Islamic sanctuary in all respects.

The situation in Gaza also remains worrying. In
addition to eight years of illegal blockade, Gaza has
endured three Israeli military operations in the past six
years. The humanitarian conditions are so disastrous
that, according to the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Gaza could become inhabitable
in less than five years if current trends persist. People
who live in tremendous despair and insecurity lose
their belief in the possibility of a solution and peaceful
coexistence. The international community cannot
afford to stand idle in the face of that tragedy and allow
2 million people to continue living in such isolation.
While the immediate priority must be to address the
grave situation and growing frustration in Gaza, only
long-term solutions can turn the tide with respect to its
reconstruction. In that vein, lifting the illegal blockade
and all other restrictions in accordance with resolution
1860 (2009) is of paramount importance.

The historical injustice against the Palestinian
people, reinforced by Israel's daily illegal practices on
the ground, is fueling hatred, alienation and radicalism
in the region and beyond. Palestinians are still deprived
of their right to a decent life with dignity, respect and
freedom. As the Secretary-General's report rightly
underlines, the Palestinians' hopes for peace have been
dashed countless times.

We all agree that the status quo is not sustainable.
Israel's continuing occupation and its practices in
contravention of international law hamper the efforts
for permanent peace. The need to find a negotiated
political settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
achieving a two-State solution and ending the longest
occupation in modern history in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative, remains an urgent priority.

Palestine's just cause has been once again
confirmed on a global scale by General Assembly
resolution 69/320, which paved the way to the raising
of the Palestinian flag at the United Nations. That was
a significant symbolic step towards full recognition of
Palestine.

On the Palestinian side, the need for Palestinian
reconciliation is more relevant than ever. The consistent
support and encouragement of the international
community is vital in that regard. Once established, the
Palestinian National Unity Government, with strong
and inclusive institutions, should establish control over
the entire Palestinian territory.

The current situation is a sombre image of what is
going to happen if the prospects for a two-State solution
are lost. Thus the international community should
renew its engagement for the solution of the problem
and assume its responsibilities. This is long overdue.
We need to intensify our efforts towards the adoption of
a Security Council resolution that sets a timeframe and
that establishes the parameters for peace negotiations
based on the vision of a two-State peace. The Council
should assume its primary responsibility vis-a-vis
international peace and security.

Turkey's commitment to supporting the Palestinian
people's right to a dignified life will never cease. We
will support efforts to find a just, comprehensive
and lasting solution to the conflict and to establish a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State within the
pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Today, I want to focus my remarks on the alarming
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, which
requires our imminent attention. However, let me say
a few words on the Syrian crisis across our borders,
which has left a nation with severe wounds, with more
than 350,000 lives lost and over 12 million persons
displaced. We see with every passing day that the Syria
crisis continues to be a major factor of instability for
the entire region and beyond, and a collective response
to address it is still lacking.

We continue to assume more than our fair share of
the burden of the ongoing devastation. We are extremely
concerned by the humanitarian and security impacts of
the crisis, which constitutes a major national security
threat to us. The current vacuum created on our southern
borders as a result of the chaos in Syria has played into
the hands ofterrorists, who are targeting our citizens as
well. In addition, we are currently faced with the risk
of a new wave of refugees that has been triggered by
the Syrian regime's most recent offensive on Aleppo,
as well as by attacks by Daesh. It is neither possible
nor just to expect Turkey or any other neighbouring
country to face that challenge alone.

The international community should keep in mind
that the ongoing atrocities and humanitarian disaster in
Syria can be addressed only by tackling the root cause
of the problem: the violent oppression of the democratic
aspirations and legitimate demands ofthe Syrians. That

tragedy will not end until the people of Syria have a
legitimate Government that truly represents their will
and enjoys their full consent. On that score, the Syrian
people have already spoken. They do not want to live
under the authority of a regime that has waged a war
against its people.

The international community and the Security
Council need to address the Syrian crisis through
resolute action. A comprehensive strategy with political,
security and humanitarian pillars is long overdue and
should be established.

First, we need to respond to the needs of millions of
Syrians through the meaningful sharing of burdens and
responsibilities. It is a disaster and needs to be treated
as such.

Secondly, the international community must act
swiftly to provide the Syrians with safety in their
homeland by creating safe areas in Syria, free from
aerial bombardment by the regime and ground assaults
by Daesh. Parallel to those efforts, we must do all that
we can to defeat terrorist organizations, such as Daesh
and the Nusrah Front and others designated by the
Security Council, while keeping in mind that terrorism
is a by-product of the crisis in Syria, The challenge
of countering terrorism should not harm moderate
elements that will play a vital role in the future of Syria
and should not delay a political solution.

Thirdly, we should all work for a solution that meets
the legitimate demands and aspirations of the Syrian
people and ensures a managed and orderly transition to a
real political change based on the Geneva communique
(S/2012/523, annex). The political process that we
should revitalize would lead to a united, democratic,
nonsectarian, secular and multicultural Syria with its
own territorial integrity.

Let me conclude by reiterating our strong commitment
to the peace and security of the overall region and our
full solidarity with the Palestinian people.

