Mr. Auvaart (Estonia): I thank you the Indonesia
presidency for convening today's ministerial-level open
debate on a very timely and critically important topic.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

Today's debate marks the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), adding
the protection of civilians as an item on the Security
Council's agenda. After 20 years of efforts to increase
the level of protection, it is highly concerning to read
the assessment in the Secretary-General's annual
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2019/373) that, despite some progress, increased
awareness and strengthened framework on this topic,
the state ofthe protection of civilians today is tragically
similar to that of 20 years ago. In that light, we need to
ask ourselves if there is anything that the international
community can do differently to ensure more tangible
results on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

From the Estonian side, we would like to highlight
three areas where further progress needs to be made.

First, I would like to emphasize the paramount
importance of conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
More needs to be done in addressing the root causes of
conflict, finding avenues to promote political dialogue
and creating truly inclusive societies. That entails
addressing the root causes of conflict in a holistic
manner and paying attention to possible shortcomings
in good governance, the rule of law and sustainable
development as possible contributors to tensions in
societies. It is important to repeat that it is the primary
responsibility of States to ensure the protection of
their people.

Secondly, let me emphasize the importance of
accountability. Perpetrators must be brought to justice
and States must ensure that those responsible do not
operate with impunity. In that regard, let me also
underline the role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in cases where investigations or prosecutions at
the national level are not possible. We encourage States
to cooperate with the ICC and the Security Council to
refer matters to the ICC. In cases already referred to the
ICC, the further support of the Security Council is of
paramount importance. In general, greater political and
financial investment is needed to ensure more tangible
results in the fight against impunity.

Thirdly, in terms of preparing peacekeepers and
other United Nations staff for deployment in missions,
education and training in international humanitarian
law have an important role to play. Such education
clearly supports efforts to halt and prevent acts of
Violence, attacks and threats against the wounded and
sick, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel, as
well as medical facilities. We see the value in references
to mission-specific legal issues prior to deployment,
and believe that they could lead to better application
of international law, complement the overall training
procedure of troops and raise awareness.

For our part, in Estonia we have ratified the
main instruments of international humanitarian law
with regard to the protection of civilians and have
introduced the necessary domestic regulations for
their enforcement. Every measure has been taken
to ensure that our military personnel do not Violate
international law when carrying out their duties and
that they are trained to comply with the obligations
to protect civilians, as agreed by the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians and stated in the
Declaration of Shared Commitments of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.

Estonia stands ready to work with all its partners to
enhance capacities and work on solutions for conflict
prevention and the protection of civilians, especially
women and children, who often have to endure
disproportionate hardship due to armed conflict. That
is also something that we are prioritizing in our effort
to become an elected non-permanent member of the
Security Council in 2020-2021.

