President Jonathan: I would like to express
Nigeria's appreciation to you personally, Mr. President,
and to the Government of Gabon for this valuable and
timely initiative. The theme for today's debate is well
conceived and should afford the Security Council the
opportunity to examine, within its mandate, the
inextricable linkage between international peace,
security and development. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
insightful briefing and commitment to fight the
HIV/AIDS epidemic. Let me also thank Mr. Michel
Sidibe for his comprehensive statement that we have
just heard.

Our deliberation here today is a declaration of
solidarity with the high-level meeting on HIV and
AIDS that will begin here in New York tomorrow. It is

also a demonstration of the Security Council's
commitment to an issue that is pivotal to the
development and security of Africa in particular and of
the world since the adoption of resolution 1308 (2000)
by the Council in the year 2000.

As the largest contributor to peacekeeping in
Africa and the fourth largest in the world, Nigeria has a
major stake not only in ensuring that our armed forces
are protected against HIV and AIDS but that they are
also given adequate treatment. We remain fully
committed to ensuring that HIV and AIDS prevention,
treatment and care are integrated into the health
services of the country's armed forces.

In our subregion we have taken stringent steps
towards that objective. For example, the Economic
Community of West African States subregional
Transport Corridor project * which encompasses
Benin, Togo, Ghana and C6te d'Ivoire - is designed
to halt and reverse the spread of HIV and AIDS among
various populations, including military and
paramilitary. We are committed to sustaining the
momentum and indeed ensuring that we increase our
level of engagement with the security services in these
countries to reduce the impact of HIV and AIDS in the
region.

We note with concern the consequences of
gender-based violence related to HIV and AIDS,
especially in conflict situations, as expounded by the
Secretary-General and Mr. Sidibe. Nigeria joins the
international community in ensuring that women and
girls in conflict situations are adequately protected. A
significant challenge, however, is the absence of
formal modes of operations in the many
unconventional military compositions, such as militias.
That makes it difficult to mainstream HIV programmes
into those operations and to evaluate progress. For that
reason, among others, we welcome the inclusion of an
awareness programme in the mandates of all United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

Thirty years since the beginning of the AIDS
pandemic, the time is ripe for a final solution. I
reiterate Nigeria's unequivocal support for a global
response to this scourge. As the Secretary-General
recognized in his statement, the prevention imperative
is upon us. The human, social and economic costs of
inaction are too great to contemplate. As a
consequence, it is incumbent upon the Security Council
to set clear, decisive goals so that our efforts to

11-3654]
maintain peace can add to the armoury of weapons
against HIV/AIDS. I pledge my nation's full support in
this endeavour.

