Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your effective ongoing
presidency of the Security Council. Let me also
acknowledge the excellent manner in which your
predecessor, Ambassador Dej ammet of France, performed
his presidential duties last month.

As we are all still in the middle of, and deeply
distressed at, the situation resulting from the strikes by
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on the
Chinese Embassy in Belgrade on 7 May 1999, I cannot
but bring to the Council's attention the position of my
Government, which expresses its shock at the reports of
the casualties and damage suffered by the Embassy. Our
deepest condolences go to the Government of the
People's Republic of China and to the families of those
who were killed or injured.

Though the investigation into the causes of this
grave incident is still under way and its complete and
final assessment is still pending, one immediate
conclusion is self-evident for my delegation: all military
activities in and around the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia should be stopped. In this context, I would
like to stress the words "all military activities", which,
according to the plan formulated by President Kuchma of
Ukraine, implies the end of military actions by the
regular, security and paramilitary forces of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo Liberation Army,
as well as the simultaneous cessation, or at least
suspension, of NATO air strikes on the territory of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

From the very first day, if not hour, of military
activities against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
Ukraine has continuously called for an end to the use of
force and for finding political means of resolving the
Kosovo problem. By so doing, we tried to warn all the
parties involved of the unpredictable and dire
consequences of such a course. It is regrettable that our
concerns, echoed by many other countries, were not
heeded.

 

That is why the delegation of Ukraine would like to
appeal to all the members of the Security Council - the
only United Nations body to bear primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security -
immediately to intervene in order to put an end to the
military actions, which continue to claim more and more
innocent victims and stand in the way of an eventual
political settlement of the Kosovo problem. We fully share
the conviction of the United Nations Secretary-General,
reiterated in the wake of the tragedy of 7 May 1999, that
"an urgent political solution must be found to the present
crisis in the region".

Our delegation is satisfied that after a rather prolonged
period of uncertainty, the Security Council is gradually
returning to an understanding of the urgent need to
undertake every possible measure to put an end to the
hostilities in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and to
avert the impending humanitarian catastrophe in wider
Europe. We consider the resolution just adopted by the
Security Council as a practical step in the right direction.

We believe that quite soon the Security Council will
be adopting a decision outlining the framework of a
political solution to the Kosovo crisis. In this regard, we
welcome the general principles on a political solution to the
Kosovo crisis agreed upon at the recent G-8 ministerial
meeting in Bonn, which are consonant with the Ukrainian
proposals on this issue.

While concentrating our common efforts on the search
for a political solution, we should devote appropriate
attention to the critical humanitarian situation in the region,
which threatens to become a large-scale humanitarian
catastrophe, unprecedented in Europe since the end of the
Second World War.

What should we do to prevent such an unfortunate
development? It is important and urgent to find the right
answers to that question. Let us ponder some simple and
obvious questions regarding the humanitarian situation in
and around Kosovo, such as how and when we can ensure
the voluntary return and life in dignity of the Kosovo
refugees and displaced persons, given that the province's
infrastructure has been completely destroyed. There are
almost no safe houses, hospitals, oil refineries, power
plants, schools or roads left in Kosovo. Since there was no
sowing in the province in spring, there will be no harvest
this fall. What about the approaching cold weather, which
usually comes to the mountainous terrain of Kosovo in
September? What about the humanitarian demining
problem? Ways to address these so-called minor and
collateral problems are not being sought. Instead, one can
see that military activities in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia are not decreasing - on the contrary. Is it not
high time to stop and really look at the critical plight of
the Kosovars and at that of the peoples of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, the Republic of Macedonia,
Albania and of other countries affected by the crisis?

In this context, we welcome the timely proposal by
the Secretary-General to dispatch a humanitarian needs
assessment mission to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. We urge the Yugoslav authorities and NATO
States to ensure the safety of the United Nations
humanitarian personnel involved in that mission and of all
the other international humanitarian workers who are
already doing their noble job in Kosovo. Ukraine also
believes that the two-day high-level meeting on the
Balkan crisis held by the Secretary-General in Geneva on
13 and 14 May 1999 will result in the elaboration of a
more effective and coherent strategy for the United
Nations system's response to the disastrous situation in
the region. We praise the strenuous efforts of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and of all the other international humanitarian
relief organizations currently operating in Albania and the
Republic of Macedonia, as well as those States
participating in the humanitarian evacuation programme
and those providing humanitarian assistance individually.

Notwithstanding its own difficult economic situation,
which, in fact, is complicated by economic losses caused
by the ongoing military actions in Yugoslavia, Ukraine is
contributing to international efforts by providing
humanitarian aid to refugees from Kosovo. In accordance
with the Government of Ukraine's decision of 5 April
1999, a number of Ukrainian transport convoys have been
dispatched to the Republic of Macedonia and Albania to
deliver humanitarian aid. This humanitarian assistance
was offered in the form of food, medicine, bandages and
other first-aid materials, as well as household equipment
totalling about $360,000. A few days ago, the Parliament
of Ukraine adopted a resolution to render humanitarian
aid to the peoples of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Other forms of humanitarian assistance to those affected
by the Kosovo crisis, including the acceptance of a
number of children of refugees, are now being considered
in Ukraine.

In conclusion, I wish to express the hope that
common sense will finally prevail, that hostilities will
cease in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, that a
political solution to the Kosovo problem will be approved

 

by a resolution of the Security Council, and that the severe
consequences of the humanitarian catastrophe in and around
Kosovo will be eliminated. How much longer will it take
for this to happen? What additional price will all of us have
to pay for any further delay in achieving a comprehensive
settlement of the Kosovo crisis? We in Ukraine hope that
this settlement will be achieved as soon as possible.

