Allow me at the outset to congratulate Indonesia on commencing its presidency of the Security Council for the month of August. We thank you, Sir, for presiding over this meeting, which tackles the crucial issue of addressing the linkages between terrorism and organized crime. We are pleased to participate in this year's open debate via video-teleconference after taking part in last year's open debate, held on 9 July 2019 (see S/PV.8569). Egypt has always promoted the adoption of a comprehensive approach to counter- terrorism, one that addresses all of its root causes, impacts and linkages. The link between organized crime and terrorism is not only evident at the normative level in the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, of 2000, and the numerous Security Council resolutions that followed, ending with resolution 2482 (2019), it is also a reality that we continue to see every day in many parts of the world, including Africa. From Boko Haram in the west, through terrorist organizations in the Sahel area, all the way to the Horn of Africa, terrorist groups have been coexisting and partnering with organized crime groups to secure funding and logistical support. The unfortunate result is stronger terrorist groups and an increase in all forms of organized crime, including trade in arms and narcotics, human and organ trafficking and migrant smuggling. This promiscuous, mutually reinforcing relationship between organized criminal and terrorist groups constitutes a destabilizing catalyst for most Governments in conflict areas, thus significantly contributing to the deterioration of peace and security in conflict areas worldwide. A vivid example of this is the current situation in Libya, where fanatic militias coexist and cooperate with organized criminal bands and facilitate human trafficking and illegal migration in exchange for fees from the latter. That is why in recent years, particularly during Egypt's membership in the Security Council in 2016 and 2017 and its chairmanship of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter- terrorism, we have been generally supportive of all initiatives targeting organized crime in the context of counter-terrorism and have played a leading role in adopting many of them. At the national level, Egyptian law enforcement agencies are heavily invested in targeting organized crime syndicates and obstructing any potential partnership between them and terrorist groups in Egypt. In recent years, counter-terrorist financing and anti-money laundering mechanisms have also been further enhanced to achieve that goal. At the regional and international levels, we remain of the view that strengthening State foundations and institutions is one of the most efficient ways to counter terrorism and organized crime in fragile areas. These groups seek to benefit from the power vacuum and the weakness and lack of capacity of national institutions in such areas. Egypt has therefore been providing many capacity-building programmes for its brotherly countries in the Sahel in the areas of military and policing, including through specialized training courses provided by the Egyptian Agency of Partnership for Development. That is why Egypt believes that the long- overdue peace and stability in Libya can be achieved only through strengthening and unifying its national institutions, including the Libyan National Army. Only then can we fill the current power vacuum that armed militias, terrorist organizations and organized criminal groups are abusing. In conclusion, as we approach the seventh biannual review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which was postponed to the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly after Spain and Egypt commenced the co-facilitation process this year, we are looking forward to insightful ideas emanating from this open debate, which could guide further substantive discussion on this crucial issue within the context of the seventh review of the Strategy.
