Major General Obi: I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity. I bring you warm greetings from
my Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

In my briefing this morning, I will attempt to
acquaint the Security Council with an overview of the
military activities of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS). I am the Force Commander of
UNMIS. I will briefly discuss the current situation, our
achievements, the challenges facing us and the outlook
for the future.

UNMIS is in a critical period of its mandate
implementation in the Sudan as the country approaches
the 9 January referendum. The Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) requires that two referendums be
held by 9 January 2011 - one in which the people of
Southern Sudan will vote for unity or secession, and
the other through which the people or the region of
Abyei will remain in Northern Sudan or become part of
Southern Sudan. Although the referendums are to be a
nationally managed process, both parties have called
on UNMIS to play a strong role in support of the
referendums.

The referendums are arguably the most
momentous events to happen in the country since its
independence and, with five months to go until
9 January, time is swiftly running out for the parties to
come to political agreement on a number of issues.
While the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission
has been established, it has yet to become fully
operational and only has until September to supervise
the registration of voters. Worryingly, the Abyei
referendum commission has yet to be formed.

UNMIS planning and preparation are in full flow
to provide support to the referendums. Technical
reconnaissance of the 79 country referendum bases is
complete, and logistical and engineering planning is at
full tilt in an effort to set up the bases ready for
occupation. It is from these bases that United Nations
election teams will operate to support the referendums.
Lessons learned from elections earlier this year are
being applied, but the task is complex because of the
increase of the number of polling sites at the county
level, as opposed to the state level in the previous
election.

In terms of the current situation, most of the day-
to-day violence in the Mission area is primarily in
Southern Sudan and is tribal in nature. Cattle rustling
and abductions are routinely taking place in many parts
of Southern Sudan. Although these are practices that
have gone on for generations among and, at times,
within tribes and in a wider area than Southern Sudan
alone, currently they are often inextricably linked to
minor political players and local renegade actors
posturing for their own benefit.

The emergence of rebel groups in a number of
areas, linked very closely to tribal affiliations and
dissatisfied losers of the last elections, has been the
trend recently. This has manifested itself in clashes
with the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) in
three areas of our sector 3, resulting in the
displacement of the civilian population and human
rights abuses by SPLA elements.

On our flanks, we watch the events in Darfur
unfold and keep a close eye on the analysis that is
available. Of specific interest is where the southern
border of Darfur meets with western Bahr el Ghazal in
Southern Sudan. This is a large expanse of ground that
is not easily covered by UNMIS patrols. We are thus
largely unsighted on activities in this area, and we have
evolved plans to deliberately insert long-range patrols
into this area in order to enhance information-
gathering. This effort has, however, often faced
obstructions from the SPLA.

Regarding the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA),
we receive unconfirmed reports of violent crimes in the
border areas between Western Equatoria and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our concern is that
the LRA activities have an impact on the security of
the population. We are therefore taking this threat very
seriously.

One of the key CPA milestones is the
redeployment of forces across the border line between
the North and the South. The Sudanese Armed Forces
(SAF) have redeployed north of the current boundary
line, which is known colloquially as the 1-1-5-6 line,
as mandated by the CPA, and this has been verified.
Generally speaking, the SAF is compliant with the
terms of the CPA. However, to date, we have a verified
figure of 34.85 per cent of the stated strength of SPLA
that has redeployed south of the current boundary line,
as opposed to 100 per cent of the SAF. It is, however,
possible that the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
(SPLM) may have overstated the numbers of its actual
armed forces to begin with, and thus the percentage of
redeployment may be much higher, as not much SPLA
presence or activity has been visible within the current
boundary line.

I would like to focus now on the achievements of
UNMIS and in particular the UNMIS military force.
Despite the wide gap between the political stance of
both parties, the ceasefire has continued to hold to a
great extent. All the violence in the UNMIS area of
responsibility is triggered at lower levels, either over
resources or because of local political and tribal
grievances.

The Sudanese elections took place between
11 and 15 April without major security-related
incidents. The canvassing and polling periods were
characterized by noticeable restraint in the incidence of
violence across the country, although independent
SPLM. candidates were openly intimidated. Northern
Sudan is outside of our area of responsibility, and we
cannot say what may have happened there. The post-
elections period was tense and not helped by the
delayed announcement of results at the end of April.
Posturing by losing candidates demanding political
accommodation and a significant increase in SPLA
obstruction of UNMIS operations were noticed.

Our primary focus is the protection of civilians,
and we do this in partnership with our civilian pillars,
as well as with the host nation. The provision of safe
and secure areas around the team sites has already been
planned. Currently, the situation across the Sudan, with
the exception of Darfur, has improved on the whole.
However, in particular areas in the South -
specifically Jonglei and Upper Nile states, some areas

along the North-South border and specific districts
along the border between the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Sudan - cases of intimidation and
violence towards civilians continue.

We cannot be complacent and are in the process
of planning operations specifically designed to combat
the targeting of civilians. Operation Safe Refuge is one
such operation, and requires that every team site to pre-
select and plan a refuge for internally displaced
persons (IDPs). The challenge is significant as it
involves coordinating not only military, but also
civilian pillars, and encouraging United Nations
country teams to come on board to provide through
non-governmental organizations the key requirements
of water, shelter and sanitation for a predetermined
number of IDPs.

Permit me to now discuss the key challenges we
face in UNMIS, in addition to the referendums I have
already touched on. Throughout most of this year, we
have seen our ability to operate both North and South
of the 1-1-5-6 line deteriorate because of the
belligerence of both parties. Freedom of movement is a
constant challenge to the force and all elements of the
Mission; incidents range from the deliberate
obstruction of logistical convoys to the feeding of false
information on current situations in the area.

Forceful abuses have happened as well. Two
recent examples are the hijacking of an UNMIS
helicopter and the manhandling of an UNMIS patrol,
including a helicopter crew, in Kodok, Southern Sudan,
in July. This latter case has triggered high-level
political demarches and engagements with the
Government of Southern Sudan, and mechanisms to
prevent such future abuses have been agreed upon. The
issue of freedom of movement and harassment of
United Nations personnel is thus being treated very
seriously, as it could impact on UNMIS mandate
implementation and the credibility of the referendum.

We are constrained by inadequate assets available
to the force to undertake operations. This creates
inevitable drag in our planning and tasking flexibility.
Resources are limited and, given that across Southern
Sudan the rains make movement almost impossible, the
only manner of projecting the force is by air. We
continue to work with the Mission Support Unit to try
to acquire the support necessary for agility and
flexibility in our intended manoeuvres and force
projection.

Looking to the future, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General has developed an
UNMIS/United Nations country team integrated action
plan for the Sudan. The plan has five strategic
objectives, which include the holding of credible
referendums in Southern Sudan and Abyei; fruitful
consultations in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
states; the successful negotiation of post-referendum
engagement arrangements; overall Mission area
stability and protection of civilians; and finally,
improved governance capacity and rule of law in
Southern Sudan.

The military will lead in Mission area stability
and protection of civilians. My plan is to deliver a
more agile and mobile force to achieve Mission area
stability. To this end, emphasis is being placed on
patrolling and use of mobile reserves. In view of the
extensive area of responsibility and the absence of
roads, the demand for air assets is huge. We have also
identified one sanctuary per team site for the protection
of civilians. All pillars of UNMIS and the United
Nations country team are working together in this
regard. In addition to the physical protecting of
civilians, mitigation and deterrent troop patrolling are
also being employed to discourage violence against
civilians.

Finally, I would like to state that the referendums
to be organized in Southern Sudan in January 2011 are
of historic significance. The outcome could have vast
consequences, not only for the Sudan but for the region
and for Africa as a whole. The experience of the last
elections revealed challenges related to the lack of
capacity of local institutions. The challenge for
UNMIS and the international community to ensure
credible referendums is huge. UNMIS is conscious of
this responsibility and all hands are on deck to ensure
successful mandate implementation.

