Mrs. Albright (United States of America): There is
some movement towards peace in the Balkans. The United
States, in full consultation with our Contact Group partners,
the Governments in the region, and the United Nations,
has led a negotiating process in recent weeks that is
producing results. The Geneva Principles which were
agreed to last week provide the basis for a negotiated
settlement to the conflict in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Yesterday, the Bosnian Serbs agreed to
comply with United Nations demands and withdraw their
heavy weapons from the Sarajevo exclusion zone. This,
along with their commitment to allow unimpeded road
access to Sarajevo for humanitarian traffic and to allow
the reopening of Sarajevo airport represents a major step
towards lifting the siege of Sarajevo. The cease-fire
agreement for Sarajevo is a further significant step that
we hope will lead to further progress. We expect the
Bosnian Serbs to turn agreement into reality by fully
meeting their obligations. We note that the United Nations
has already made it clear that failure to comply, or attacks
on the other safe areas, will lead to the resumption of
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) air
operations.

My Government supports extending the suspension
of a limited number of sanctions on Serbia and
Montenegro for six months. We decided to make this
unilateral gesture in the spirit of recent events and in the
hope that the Government in Belgrade will facilitate
continued progress in the peace talks.

We are particularly pleased that the co-sponsors of
this resolution include Russia, which plays such a critical
role in the peace process. We are also grateful to the
President of the Council and the Government of Italy for
their contribution and support in the peace process and in
implementing Council resolutions.

We are under no illusion that continued suspension
of these sanctions is the key to peace. Nor are we under
any illusion that the border between the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully closed. But we are
determined during this critical period of intensive
negotiations to do everything we possibly can to achieve
a lasting peace and restore justice to the region.

I want to underline some fundamental points about
the resolution we have adopted today.

 
First, the sanctions that continue to be suspended are
limited strictly to cultural and sports exchanges, and the
restoration of passenger air transport to and from Belgrade
and ferry service to the port of Bar. There is no suspension
of economic sanctions. In short, we have not increased
sanctions relief; we have simply extended the suspension of
existing relief for six months. My Government continues to
believe that further sanctions relief must follow real steps
towards peace, such as mutual recognition among the
successor States to the former Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

Secondly, the requirements of resolution 988 (1995)
remain in full force and effect, and my Government expects
them to be fully implemented. That includes the
requirement in paragraphs 14 and 15 of resolution 988
(1995) that the Secretary-General report to the Security
Council immediately if he has evidence of non-compliance
with the border closure by the authorities of Serbia and
Montenegro. If we receive such a report, the suspension
terminates. This is not a phantom requirement; it constitutes
a core basis for my Government's original position on
suspension, and our decision today to support this
extension.

In that regard there have indications of shortcomings
in the implementation of Serbia and Montenegro's
commitment to close its border with the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to all but humanitarian shipments. In
particular, efforts by Serbia and Montenegro to assist the
Bosnian Serbs in restoring their military communications
and air defence networks and providing other military
assistance to make up losses suffered in the recent air
strikes would violate their commitment to close the border.
I can assure you that my Government remains focused on
this question.

There is much work ahead to achieve our common
objectives in the Balkans. This resolution is consistent with
those objectives. We expect the Bosnian parties to negotiate
in good faith on the basis of the Geneva Principles. We
recognize that despite the progress made in the past two
weeks, the parties have taken only the first steps on the
road to peace. The United States and the entire international
community will do what we can to help them, but the
ultimate responsibility for deciding between peace or more
war rests with the parties.

