Mr. Takasu (Japan): I thank the Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on Myanmar, Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari, for his briefing on his most recent visit to
Myanmar. Japan welcomes the positive outcome of
Mr. Gambari's visit to Myanmar this time.
20

The statement issued by Daw Aung San Suu Kyi,
read out loud by Mr. Gambari on her behalf, is a clear
indication of her willingness to engage in a meaningful
and time bound dialogue with the State Peace and
Development Council (SPDC) leadership. On the other
hand, the decision of the Government of Myanmar to
allow Daw Aung San Suu Kyi to meet with the leaders
of her party, the National League for Democracy, and
the holding of the second meeting between Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi and Minister Aung Kyi on 9 November
were positive moves by the Myanmar Government.

We owe much of those positive developments to
the efforts of Mr. Gambari and believe that it is
important to continue our support for the good offices
of the Secretary-General and his Special Adviser.

It should be noted that Mr. Gambari could not
meet some of the people he had wished to meet.
Therefore, we strongly call on the Government of
Myanmar to continue to cooperate fully with the
United Nations and its mission and to engage with
Special Adviser Gambari.

As was emphasized by the Special Adviser
himself, the Secretary-General's good offices is a
process and not an event. One mission by itself cannot
solve everything. We therefore believe that it is all the
more important for the international community to
continue to act in concert and support such efforts. We
strongly hope that the Government of Myanmar will
take advantage of the opportunity to realize a genuine
dialogue that includes all relevant parties, in order to
achieve national reconciliation.

Japan is ready to act constructively, in close
cooperation with the Secretary-General and his Special
Adviser, as well as with other interested countries,
particularly those of ASEAN and countries of the
region, in order to improve the situation in Myanmar
and to help solve the issues through dialogue between
and among the parties concerned in Myanmar.

