Mr. Shinyo (Japan): Japan applauds the Security
Council and the United Kingdom Government, in its
capacity as President of the Security Council, for
continuing to accord the highest priority to the plight
of civilians in armed conflict. We also thank Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his report on that issue
and commend the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for its advocacy
activities. I wish to address the Council in order to
make four points about its work on that issue, and to
briefly explain why we regard it as so important from
the point of view of human security.

First, I would like to express Japan's support for
the idea of the Secretariat's giving the Security Council
a timely, appropriate briefing on the subject of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. In the open
debate in November last year, a few countries
expressed concerns about the proposal to establish a
Council working group on the protection of civilians.
We share the View that it is necessary to avoid
duplicating the work of the Council and creating an
additional bureaucratic mechanism. It is essential,
however, that the Council receive the most accurate
information and the best analysis if it is to make wise
decisions regarding the establishment or extension of
mission mandates. There is no question, then, that it
would be beneficial for the expert group to receive a
timely, appropriate briefing on that subject.

Secondly, we request the Security Council to
brief all stakeholders, including countries that
contribute troops or financing, in a timely and
appropriate manner on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Without the effective implementation
of mandates, decisions taken in the Council cannot

have the desired impact in the field. Briefing
stakeholders would contribute greatly to rendering the
Council more accountable and the implementation of
the mandates of peacekeeping operations and other
missions more effective.

Thirdly, Japan continues to regard the aide
memoire on the consideration of issues pertaining to
the protection of civilians as a useful tool to the
Council in its consultations on mission mandates
because it serves as a checklist of references to
relevant areas and the mandates of past operations. We
are therefore pleased that OCHA intends to revise it
this year, and we would like to provide support for that
work, including through financial assistance.

Finally, we look forward to seeing the next report
of the Secretary-General. As the last mandate under
resolution 1674 (2006) to issue a report has been
discharged, a new request is needed from the Council,
and we would expect that it will be accompanied by the
analysis of humanitarian access that Under-Secretary-
General Holmes proposed in the last open debate.

I would like to say a few words about the
meaning of human security in the context of the
protection of civilians. For one thing, human security is
a concept that complements State security and seeks
the protection and empowerment of individuals,
putting the livelihood and dignity of individuals at the
centre of our focus. It is consistent with the letter and
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations and
promoted in full respect of national sovereignty. It does
not in any way suggest military intervention, even as a
last resort, and thus differs from the notion of the
responsibility to protect.

It is a concept that, at its core, is about the
protection of the right of individuals to live their lives
with dignity. It is a useful approach that emphasizes a
culture of prevention in order to achieve freedom from
fear and freedom from want. It asserts the need to
protect and empower individuals, including internally
displaced persons, in armed conflict and early on in the
post-conflict period.

The concept of human security is related to the
activities of the Peacebuilding Commission, with
whose work the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is closely linked. The previous discussion on
internally displaced persons in the Working Group on
Lessens Learned in March this year demonstrated that
the Commission has a keen interest in the issues related
5
to the protection of civilians. The vital role the
Commission has to play is providing a comprehensive
strategy for peacebuilding so as to prevent a recurrence
of conflict and to support related activities on the
ground through promoting the mobilization of the
resources of the international community. The
Commission can continue to play a role in protecting
civilians through activities ranging from the immediate
post-conflict period to the period of reconstruction and
sustainable development.

In order to mainstream human security in United
Nations activities, Japan and Mexico, together with the
Human Security Unit of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, organized a
fourth meeting of Friends of Human Security on the
15 May, at which we discussed issues such as gender-
based violence and protection of children in armed
conflict. And on 22 May the General Assembly had its
first thematic debate on human security. In that debate,
protection of the vulnerable people, including women
and children in conflicts, was also underlined.

Outside the United Nations, beginning tomorrow,
Japan will host TICAD IV - the fourth Tokyo
International Conference on African Development -
in Yokohama, with many African heads of State and
Government participating. The theme will be "Towards
a Vibrant Africa". Again, human security will be one of
the principal topics of discussion, and the outcome of
that discussion will then be reflected when the G-8
summit meeting is held in Toyako, Hokkaido, Japan.

In concluding my statement, I would like to
commend every official of the United Nations and
other organizations, including humanitarian personnel,
engaged in trying to provide protection to civilians
caught in conflicts, often under extremely difficult
conditions. We are very interested in the work that the
Independent Panel on Safety and Security of United
Nations Personnel and Premises headed by
Mr. Brahimi is doing, and we expect that the Panel will
make concrete recommendations on ways to ensure the
safety and security of the personnel.

