Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today the Security Council has adopted a
resolution that once again reminds the Syrian parties of
the need to stop the violence and immediately implement
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and
requires them to complly with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international
human rights.

Resolution 2165 (2014) also expresses deep concern
about the increasing terrorist activity, which serves to
hang a sword ofDamocles over Syria today. Increasingly
violent and senseless terrorist attacks are being carried
out by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, Jabhat
Al-Nusra and the Islamic Front. On 9 July, the village
of Khattab, in the governorate of Hama, was attacked.
There were no military or economic targets there of
interest to the armed opposition. The killers beheaded
14 people, including seven women and a girl. A similar
attack was carried out in the village of Taksis on 10 July,
during which women were violently murdered.

As underscored in today's resolution, it is absolutely
clear that the humanitarian situation in Syria continues
to deteriorate in the absence of a political settlement.
In those circumstances, the Security Council found it
necessary to carefully consider the requests made by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) with regard to possible steps to alleviate the
suffering of Syrian civilians in areas controlled by the
opposition.

The Russiam federation participated actively in the
negotiation of this resolution, given the need to improve
the humanitarian situation in Syria, alleviate the plight
of the civilian population in the country and improve
conditions for the work of humanitarian agencies. We
were able to support the resolution after sponsors took
into account our key priorities.

Resolution 2165 (2014), adopted today, reflects the
main elements of the arrangement for humanitarian
access that we drew up with OCHA and the Syrian
side. It reaffirms the need to adhere to the United
Nations guiding principles for the provision of
emergency humanitarian assistance, as well as a strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria. It also stresses that the
provision of humanitarian aid should not be politically
motivated.

A monitoring mechanism under the Secretary-
General is to be put in place at the border crossings. It
will be responsible for inspecting humanitarian convoys
going into Syria under United Nations auspices. The
functions of the mechanism are carefully spelled out
and time-bound. The Security Council will assess the
effectiveness of the mechanism again in 180 days.

In that connection, we underscore that the resolution
does not provide for an automatic authorization of
enforcement measures. Any additional steps must be
considered under a separate review process by the
Security Council on the implementation of the resolution
on the basis of convincing evidence with regard to the
activities of any party to the Syrian conflict.

Progress in agreeing on the resolution was achieved
as a result of the mutual consideration of the parties'
concerns and interests, which made it possible to reach
a compromise. In that regard, we note the constructive
position of the Syrian authorities, who, on the practical
level, have already taken a number of measures to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance
to people in need. The resolution stipulates that the
monitoring of the humanitarian convoys will be carried
out in accordance with the United Nations guiding
principles of humanitarian emergency assistance,
which will ensure that the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Syria will be rigorously
respected.

We expect that, through its activities, the United
Nations monitoring mission will interact with the Syrian
Government and work objectively and impartially,
and that its composition will be established based on
the principle of equitable geographical representation
and be acceptable to the parties involved. The United
Nations monitors should ensure, as set forth in the
resolution, the effective monitoring of the transportation
into Syria of exclusively humanitarian consignments.
We expect the reports to the Security Council on the
work of the United Nations to be objective and based
on verified information and to cover the activities of all
parties, including those of the armed opposition. There
is a need to ensure that armed opposition groups also
comply with the resolution, which applies equally to all
parties.

The resolution adopted today underscores once
again the importance of consensus with regard to local
ceasefires, which have demonstrated their effectiveness
in ensuring food security and saving lives. They also
demonstrate that, without outside intervention or
attempts to impose solutions or assign victories to
either side, Syrian parties are able to agree on saving
lives and putting an end to the violence.

More broadly, the situation in Syria, including the
humanitarian problem, can be resolved only through a
political and diplomatic solution. Experience has shown
that the piecemeal approach to the situation in Syria
has not been effective. In that regard, we underscore
the need for an early resumption of the inter-Syrian
dialogue on the basis of the Geneva communique of
30 June 2012. We hope that the United Nations Special
Envoy, Mr. Staffan De Mistura, will swiftly engage the
stakeholder parties in communication on that issue.

The Russian Federation underscores its readiness
to work with international and regional partners. Only
a collective - and not a unilateral - course of action
will be effective, as demonstrated by the process of
eliminating Syria's chemical weapons. We hope that
such a constructive and responsible approach, as well
as the consensus of the Security Council, will continue
throughout the ongoing work on the Russian proposal
with regard to the drafting of a presidential statement
on the inadmissibility of any attempt to undermine
State sovereignty over the oil industry in Syria and
Iraq, in particular by terrorist groups.

