The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Finland, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I request the Chief of Protocol to escort His
Excellency Mr. Adnan Terzie, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to a seat at the
Council table.

Mr. Adnan Terzie, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to the Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Adnan Terzie.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Lintonen
(Finland) took the seat reserved for her at the
side ofthe Council Chamber


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Christian
Schwarz-Schilling, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

It is so decided.
I invite the High Representative to take a seat at
the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2006/810, which
contains the text of a letter dated 12 October 2006 from
the Secretary-General transmitting the thirtieth report
on the implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I should also like to draw the
Council's attention to document S/2006/809, which
contains the text ofa letter dated 12 October 2006 from
the Secretary-General transmitting the seventh report
on the activities of the European Union military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Christian Schwarz-Schilling, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. I now give
him the floor.


