Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would first like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura for his very comprehensive and
informative briefing. I would also like to express my
gratitude to the men and women of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), who
have demonstrated a deep commitment to this very
difficult mission. Of course, I also value the presence
and statement of our friend Ambassador Tanin.
At the outset, I wish to express my deep sadness
on the loss of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, the
United States Special Envoy for Afghanistan and
Pakistan. His life-long dedication to the international
community will be remembered. I would like to extend
my most sincere condolences to his family.

Japan welcomes the certification of the final
results of the election for new members of the Afghan
Parliament through an election process managed by
Afghans themselves, although we recognize that the
recent report (S/2010/630) of the Secretary-General
indicates that there was widespread fraud and
irregularities. We praise Afghan citizens for
participating in the elections so that they themselves
could decide their own future. We also pay tribute to
the Afghan authorities concerned, including the
Independent Electoral Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission. We expect the reconstruction
and development of Afghanistan to proceed smoothly
under the newly elected Parliament. We also hope that
the Afghan Government will make the utmost efforts
for longer-term electoral reform to initiate a freer and
more transparent electoral system through strong
support from UNAMA and the international
community.

The Japanese Government welcomes the
significant achievement of the NATO Summit in
Lisbon in November. It was an important step that
NATO allies and partners confirmed their commitment
to creating conditions that would enable Afghan forces
to take the lead for security in the country by the end
of 2014. Japan is determined to provide assistance for
strengthening the capacity of the Afghan National
Security Forces by fully cooperating and coordinating
its work with UNAMA and other international donors.
The Japanese Diet recently passed a supplementary
budget to provide $540 million in assistance as part of
a package worth up to $5 billion over five years. Japan
is providing assistance for the salaries and equipment
of the Afghan National Police. In addition, we plan to
cooperate with Turkey in the training of police and we
will enhance our contribution to the Afghan National
Army trust fund. It is our sincere desire to contribute to
strengthening the security capability of the Afghan
Government. In that regard, Japan has been positively
considering the possibility of sending medical and
sanitation personnel of the Self-defence Force for
medic education and the training of the Afghan
National Army.

At the successful Kabul Conference in July,
important progress was made towards the country's
development when the Afghan leadership presented its
national priority programme, to which the international
community committed to align its assistance.
Improving governance in Afghanistan is essential for
the future development of the country. In that regard, it
is of critical importance that the Afghan Government
tackles corruption.

We welcome the inauguration of the High Peace
Council. It is important that the Afghan peace and
reintegration programme - created at the Kabul
Conference - is steadily implemented by the Afghan
Government in order to achieve tangible results and
further progress in the reintegration process, which
must be led by the Afghan Government with support
from the international community. It is important that
the international community, including Japan, not only
provide the necessary funding to the Afghan peace and
reintegration programme but also concrete ideas and
advice for development projects.

Having entered a new phase in the transition to
Afghan responsibility, UNAMA is now playing an
increasingly significant role in support of the Afghan
Government and people. The coordinating role of
UNAMA is important for progress in the Kabul
process. We highly appreciate the tireless efforts of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura. We will continue to cooperate with
him and with UNAMA.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that even
after we leave the Security Council, Japan's
contribution to Afghanistan will remain unchanged.

