Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to welcome you to New York,
Madame, to preside personally over today's meeting.
Your presence fully demonstrates the great importance
which your country, Chile, and you yourself attach to
the issue of children and armed conflict. Your
commitment will undoubtedly play a very important
role in the efforts of the Security Council, the United
Nations and all countries.

I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on children and armed conflict, as well as
Special Representative Otunnu and Carol Bellamy for
their briefings. They have made most valuable
recommendations that merit the Council's attentive
consideration.

There is a common understanding that children
represent the future of the world. We are duty-bound to
create the best and most conducive conditions in which
they may live, study, develop, grow and succeed.
Regrettably, however, millions of children in today's
world continue to suffer the damage caused by armed
conflict. They live through turbulence and
backwardness, they witness violence and destruction,
they suffer abuse and injury, and they inherit tragedy
and helplessness.

It is therefore a most important duty of the
international community to protect children from the
damage of armed conflict and all countries, especially
parties to conflicts, should make every effort to that
end. We are very pleased to note that, in recent years,
the United Nations has adopted a series of measures to
protect children in armed conflict and achieved
positive results. The Security Council has adopted
resolutions 1261 (1999), 1314 (2000), 1379 (2001) and
1460 (2003), which provide a very important legal
framework for the work of child protection. United
Nations peacekeeping operations in certain areas have
mandated child protection - including the
appointment of child protection advisers and the
recognition of the special needs of children - as a key
task in assisting the countries where they are deployed
to carry out disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement programmes. Some
peace agreements promoted by or achieved with the
assistance of the United Nations also contain child-
protection provisions. All such measures have, to a
certain extent, mitigated the harm caused by armed
conflict to children and should therefore be welcomed.

Although the international community has
attached growing importance in recent years to the
protection of children in armed conflict and has
achieved progress on this issue, we must and can make
genuine efforts to effect real change in the situation. In
this context, I wish to stress the following points.

First, all parties to armed conflict should
implement in good faith their obligations under
relevant international law in order to safeguard the
rights of children. All those who have participated in
killing, abducting or abusing children should be
severely punished according to the law. The coercive
recruitment and deployment of child soldiers must be
stopped.

Secondly, in post-conflict countries and regions,
the authorities concerned must solve the problem of
returning children to their families, schools and society
as a matter of priority and provide adequate and
guaranteed resources to that end. The international
community should also actively provide assistance to
that end.

Thirdly, the Security Council should continue to
intensify its efforts to prevent and put an end to
conflict, in keeping with its responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. The
relevant departments within the United Nations should,
in a timely manner, provide an overview of successful
experiences in protecting children in peacekeeping
operations for use in future operations.

China believes that the United Nations should
play an active role in protecting children in armed
conflict. We agree that the United Nations and the
relevant regional organizations and agencies of the
United Nations system should intensify their
cooperation and coordination efforts with a view to
adopting an integrated strategy so that, working
together, they can help countries in conflict to enhance
their ability to protect children.

China will continue to work together with the
international community to promote the cause of the
protection of children.

