Mr. Sorreta (Philippines): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this very important and
timely debate on the situation in Somalia, particularly
the scourge of piracy that currently plagues the coast of
Somalia. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and the Legal Counsel for sharing their very
useful thoughts on this issue.

Beyond ships and cargoes, there is the crew. In
all, 46 ships with Filipino crew members have been
taken by pirates, with almost 500 Filipinos having been
taken hostage. Many have suffered from prolonged
captivity, some for as long as 10 months. It is
testimony to their courage, clear thinking and fortitude
that they have survived. It is a tribute to their resilience
and that of their families that many have been able to
return to the sea.

The security, protection and welfare of Filipino
seafarers have always been primary concerns of the
Philippine Government - concerns which I am sure
are shared by others with nationals serving on these
ships. The Philippines is the prime source of
international seafarers. Filipinos are on almost every
ship on almost every ocean. They form the backbone of
the international crews of transoceanic vessels.

We believe that broader cooperation is key to
fighting piracy, and it is in this context that we
welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/394). The Philippines works closely with ship
principals and manning agencies to secure the safe
release of Filipino seafarers. We meet regularly with
ship owners and operators to discuss and implement
efforts to protect the crews and ships that ply these
pirate-infested waters. We have reinforced safety and
precautionary measures and crisis management training
for Filipino seafarers. We are engaging in bilateral
cooperation to improve this training capacity.

We are keen to improve cooperation in the
prosecution of Somali pirates. Last year we made
available four Filipino seafarers as witnesses in a
piracy trial in Kenya against captured pirates. We are
grateful to Kenya for accepting jurisdiction over this
crime, as well as to Seychelles and others that are
considering doing so.

We are glad that cooperation continues in terms
of the presence of multinational naval forces that patrol
and assist ships off the coast of Somalia. We are
grateful to the United States, the United Kingdom,
France, Russia, China and other countries that have
sent naval forces to the area to protect ships sailing
through those waters. In several instances, these ships
have helped our merchant vessels and seamen once
they were released, by providing fuel and aiding in
navigation.

The best management practices developed by the
International Chamber of Shipping and the
International Shipping Federation to deter piracy in the
Gulf of Aden and off the coast of Somalia remain the
best proactive measure for merchant ships to adopt
when traversing that area. Notwithstanding the strong
recommendation to adopt the best management
practices, approximately 30 per cent of the world's
fleet continues to disregard it. In our view, the shipping
companies which refused to adopt the best
management practices should be identified in order to
allow Governments like that of the Philippines to adopt
appropriate measures to protect their nationals.

It is in the context of this need for broader
cooperation that the Philippines expresses the hope that
it can play a more meaningful part in the work of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. The
number of piracy incidents, if not restrained, is
projected to grow as the weather improves. Piracy is no
longer confined to the Gulf of Aden, but has extended
to the wider Indian Ocean. Buoyed by their initial
successes and in some cases impunity from
prosecution, Somali pirates have converted their crude
activities into a highly lucrative industry.

Piracy, we agree, is a grave threat to international
security, and we join others in citing the importance of
addressing its root causes through comprehensive
approaches. We are grateful to the many countries
involved in and committed to this task. By uniting our
efforts and intensifying our cooperation, we can make
the Gulf of Aden and the wider Indian Ocean safe
again for navigation.

Even as we sit here and debate, 81 Filipino
seafarers remain in the clutches of Somali pirates. We
pray for their safe release and hope that our actions
today will somehow help and will lead to their freedom
and to preventing others from suffering the same fate.

