Mr. Williamson (United States of America): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Marie Guehenno for his useful presentation.

Before I turn to the proposals we have just heard,
let me say two things. First, the United States adds its
voice to the condolences expressed to the Republic of
Korea over the tragic drowning accident that claimed
the lives of five of its peacekeepers in Timor-Leste last
week. The Korean contingent has done an outstanding
job in the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET), and we mourn the loss of those
good men. Secondly, on a more positive note, we
congratulate the Governments of Timor-Leste and
Australia for successfully concluding negotiations on a
revenue-sharing agreement for gas and petroleum
resources in the Timor Sea. That achievement bodes
well for both countries, and it is a very encouraging
step for Timor-Leste's economic future.

Like our colleagues in this Chamber, the United
States is committed to helping Timor-Leste as it
continues its journey to become a viable, secure,
sustainable and prosperous State. That is why the
United States Government has contributed $82 million
in bilateral assistance to the people of Timor-Leste
over the last three years, and $400 million to the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor and
its predecessor operation in the same period. The
United States wants Timor-Leste to succeed, and the
United States Government is dedicated to doing all that
is required to help that happen. Notwithstanding the
isolated incidences of violence, there has been a great
deal of progress in Timor-Leste, as reviewed in the
Secretary-General's November report (S/2002/1223)
and as noted this morning by Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno. In particular, we note that the growing
cooperation between Timor-Leste and Indonesia is
especially encouraging.

We have carefully reviewed the recommendations
made in the Secretary-General's thoughtful report of 3
March (S/2003/243). We share the concern of others
over the violent incidents that have occurred in the last
three months, and we are saddened by the resulting
deaths of over 10 people. Violence such as that is
always worrisome. We agree that the security situation
in Timor-Leste has changed to some degree. The report
cites two recent shooting incidents, involving a total of
about 40 armed men. Those events are troubling,
though we take some comfort from the fact that they
are relatively small in scale.

We are aware that there are rumours of more
gunmen lurking in the bush, but those reports,
fortunately, seem speculative. We note that
UNMISET'S mandate gives police, not peacekeepers,
the prime responsibility to handle internal security
incidents like those witnessed recently. That is the
proper division of labour. It is the job of the police to
address domestic violence. Peacekeepers can provide
backup to the police, but our goal should be for that to
happen as a last resort, not as a matter of course. We do
not see a compelling case for a peacekeeping draw-
down pause, a pause that would actually add 1,000
peacekeepers beyond current draw-down levels. We
have difficulty seeing why a peacekeeping force of
2,780 - the force level by July 2003, per the current
drawdown - would be incapable of helping the police
to handle small numbers of bandits or ex-militia
members. If a compelling case were made, we could be
open to a more modest adjustment in this area.

It would be welcome if numbers of peacekeepers
alone could solve this problem. It would be nice to
believe that to pause the drawdown would solve the
isolated security incidents. It is tempting to believe that
the prudent answer to the isolated incidents of violent
activity is to be found in numbers. Numbers, however,
do not seem to be the real issue. Recent incidents have
occurred with the present level of 3,900 troops in
place. There is no reason to believe that keeping this
same number will end such incidents. If we freeze
troop levels when incidents occur but incidents are still
taking place in December, will we not hear the same
case made that troop levels should stay at 3,900?

We would support a reorientation of the
peacekeeping force to better meet the current threat.
Units could focus more on tracking down the gunmen
behind recent attacks and could redeploy from low-risk
to high-risk areas. Some efforts have been made in that
regard, but more could be done. Moreover, the United
States believes that greater focus should be given to
strengthening the capacity of the police. The
peacekeepers will ultimately leave Timor-Leste, but the
country's police will stay. Relying on peacekeepers as a
crutch does nothing to directly strengthen East Timor's
own capabilities. It would not be prudent or wise to
pretend otherwise. If the police are considered
incapable of handling their duties, then let us
concentrate on making them capable. That is our
challenge; that is the mission of UNMISET.

We note that the report contains suggestions with
regard to adjusting the timing of the transfer of police
executive authority and to revamping police training.
Another good idea is to consider freezing the
drawdown of the United Nations civilian police
(CIVPOL) contingent. These proposals on UNMISET's
police component are very helpful, but little detail or
explanation has been provided by the Secretariat. It
would be helpful to have further details on what is
wrong with the current CIVPOL programme, on what
would be entailed in a restructuring programme and on
how much changes would cost.

We would like to request that the Secretariat
come back to the Security Council with a revised
proposal that focuses on strengthening the police. The
report could also include recommendations on
reorienting the peacekeeping force and perhaps on a
modest adjustment to peacekeeping troop levels. In
considering any changes to UNMISET's way forward,
we must be guided by the Mission's fundamental
purpose. It is worth reminding ourselves that the goal
of UNMISET is not to ensure that Timor-Leste is
problem-free, but to ensure that Timor-Leste has the
capacity to handle its own problems. Its independence
and self-reliance are a proper objective.

Let me reiterate that the United States strongly
believes in Timor-Leste and its future. The
Government of the United States is committed to
helping the people of that young country enjoy the
privileges and responsibilities of their hard-won
independence. We will continue to support their efforts
to develop a free, secure and prosperous society, and,
among our other contributions, we are committed to
working through UNMISET towards that end. We
share the objectives of the report so thoughtfully
presented by Under-Secretary-General Guehenno
today. The international community, the Security
Council and UNMISET must remain committed to
helping Timor-Leste. Our difficulty is not in the
objectives, but in how to achieve them. We believe that
the best response to recent developments is a greater
focus on strengthening the police.

