Mr. Amin (Bangladesh): It is an honour, Mr.
President, to have Your Excellency presiding over this
meeting. Your presence signifies the importance that
the Council attaches to the United Nations mission in
East Timor and to the future of that country.

We all hail the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for his
outstanding leadership of the United Nations mission in
East Timor. Together with the people and the
leadership of East Timor, he has presented us with a
remarkable success story, as has been mentioned by
previous speakers.

Let me also take this opportunity to pay tribute to
the Chief Minister of the Second Transitional
Government of East Timor, Mr. Mari Alkatiri, the first
elected leader of East Timor to address the Security
Council, as Ambassador Cunningham said earlier. We
also recognize with high appreciation the participation
of the representatives of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and of the World
Bank, vital partners in the United Nations mission in
East Timor.

I shall try to be extremely brief. The presidential
statement that will be issued following this meeting
will broadly reflect our views. I shall speak on five
specific points.

The first, as the Secretary-General underlined in
his report (S/2001/983), is the need for strong regional
relationships. In that context, we pay tribute to
President Megawati Soekarnoputri for her initiative
regarding the meetings held on 12 September. We call
on the leadership of Indonesia and of East Timor to
follow up the meetings of 12 September with a View to
resolving outstanding matters, including border issues,
transit between the Oecussi enclave and East Timor
and cultural cooperation.

Secondly, we stress the need for a strong,
functioning civil administration. This, as the Secretary-
General says, will be key to the fate of the country in
the post-independence period. We in Bangladesh went
through such an experience following our
independence on 16 December 1971. The United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) has made substantive progress in putting in
place the essential elements of an East Timorese public
administration. This needs to be supported and the
progress sustained.

Thirdly, public finances and critical areas of the
civilian administration need the support of the
international community. We are confident that the
United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank are fully seized of the matter. The loss of
revenue, including from service taxes and import
duties, that will follow the downsizing of UNTAET,
should be factored into the planning of support for
public finances.

Special attention will need to be paid to donor
support for the two primary trust funds - the trust
fund for the national budget and the trust fund for
capital investment and recovery. A key element in
ensuring a minimum level of international
backstopping is the provision of assured assistance.
We, like others in the Council, believe that United
Nations support to the East Timorese Government
should be provided through assessed contributions - a
cardinal point in the report of the Secretary-General,
and one that he reiterated to us this morning. At the
same time, the bilateral donors, international financial
institutions, funds and programmes should fulfil their
pledges early in terms of supplementing United
Nations efforts.

That brings me to the specific issue of the
efficient management of public finances. The East
Timorese leadership should be encouraged to pay
particular attention to this aspect. The Security Council
has been grappling with some post-conflict peace-
building situations affected by the management factor.
Employment, especially for young people, is critically
important in a post-conflict scenario. The lack of
employment for young people after independence may
spoil the prospects for success. We have seen the
impact of unemployed youth in our national context;
that is a part of our history.

The independence of East Timor must not be
derailed by a creeping sense of frustration or
disillusionment. As the economy of East Timor is
structured on a new premise, Bangladesh would like to
stress the importance of indigenous solutions in
addressing Timorese socio-economic development. For
our part, the Grameen Bank is already assisting the
Timorese to initiate microcredit programmes for
poverty eradication and empowerment, particularly of
women. Such civil-society-based indigenous
approaches, adapted to the Timorese context, could
yield positive results in other social sectors, including
in areas like basic education and health care. This
would also contribute positively to building East
Timorese capacities, which is a primary objective of
the international community.

We were happy to note the Chief Minister's
statement that legislative issues relating to microcredit
banks are currently being revised. We would appreciate
it if the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General would elaborate on how UNTAET sees the
Viability of such quick impact projects in bolstering
subsistence agriculture in East Timor.

My fifth point relates to transition and the
UNTAET successor mission. Bangladesh endorses the
Secretary-General's recommendations for the transition
and the plan for the successor mission. We are
particularly happy that the Council's stress on a sound
exit strategy has been reflected in the plan presented by
the Secretary-General.

Finally, we look forward to 20 May 2002 - 200
days from now - when we can join the people of East
Timor in celebrating their independence. We look
forward to welcoming them among the community of
nations. Bangladesh remains committed to continuing
to work with the people of East Timor, within our
modest capacity and means, up to that date and beyond.

