Mr. Gracia Aldaz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain associates itself with the statement that will be
delivered subsequently by the observer of the European
Union.

We thank Uruguay for having convened today's
very important debate. We believe that it is extremely
important to promote conflict prevention and
strengthen the United Nations response in addressing
emerging conflicts, as the Organization plays a key
role in settling disputes by peaceful means. The use of
weapons to settle disputes has its most adverse impact
on the weakest in conflict situations. We believe
that mediation is key to maintaining international
peace, and it is a hallmark of our foreign policy.
Banning attacks on civilian populations and the use
of starvation as a weapon of war, protecting medical
and humanitarian personnel and ensuring unimpeded
access for humanitarian aid constitute the very essence
of international humanitarian law.

All parties to an armed conflict, whether States or
non-State actors, whether it is an inter- State or intra-State
conflict, must respect that law. However, today's
conflicts, almost without exception, have exacted a very
high toll among civilians. We are concerned about the
increasing number of attacks on hospitals and doctors
in conflict areas. Such attacks contravene the basic
norms of international humanitarian law. We are all
aware of the very important work being carried out by
organizations such as the International Committee of the
Red Cross and Doctors without Borders. Spain, along
with Egypt, New Zealand and Uruguay, is working on a
specific initiative to provide medical assistance during
armed conflicts, which we will submit to the Security
Council as our contribution to ending such attacks, to
ensuring that medical personnel, facilities and vehicles
are protected and to ensuring access to medical
services in situations of conflict. Spain also welcomes
the adoption, last May, of resolution 2222 (2015), which
took note of the threats and attacks against journalists.
We recognize the very important role that journalists
play in protecting civilians in times of conflict. During
our presidency ofthe Security Council in December we
will be celebrating the tenth anniversary of resolution
1728 (2006), giving us an excellent opportunity to
continue to promote our efforts in this area.

Over the past several years, we have also seen an
increasing trend in the use of explosive weapons in
densely populated areas, such as the use ofbarrel bombs
in Syria, which has resulted in over 30,000 deaths this
past year. Spain categorically condemns those actions.
It is important that States express their support for an
international commitment in order to put an end to the
use of those explosive weapons in populated areas and
better protect civilian populations in the future.

Such attacks against civilians are being carried out
in an atmosphere of impunity, highlighting the absence
of respect for international humanitarian law. Spain has
actively supported the initiative of Switzerland and the
International Committee of the Red Cross with regard
to strengthening compliance with the international
humanitarian law. If the States involved do not want
or are not able to bring to justice those responsible,
we have a very important tool at our disposal - the
International Criminal Court, which can ensure that
those crimes do not go unpunished. The Council has
an important role to fulfil in referring cases to the
Court, but today we are not filling that role. The failure
to refer to the Court the situation in Syria, as well as
to follow-up the two situations referred to it to date,
namely, those in Darfur and in Libya, serve to cast
doubt as to the real scope of our commitment to combat
impunity. With regard to the responsibility to protect,
we agree that protecting civilians falls mainly on the
State. Nevertheless, when a State lacks the ability
or will to do so, that responsibility is also shared by
the international community, and specifically to the
Security Council acting on its behalf.

Recognizing the importance of political solutions
in preventing conflicts does not mean that urgent
attention should not be provided to operational aspects
of protecting civilians, as was highlighted in the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations. In that regard, my country highly
values the fact that the Secretary-General has stated
in his report on the review of peacekeeping operations
that a senior adviser on the protection of civilians
should be established in all missions, with a specific
mandate in that regard and located within the office of
the Special Representative. Spain stands ready to fulfil
its part in thatjoint effort at improving the efficiency of
peacekeeping operations. With regard to the summit that
took place in New York last September on peacekeeping
operations, Spain was among the countries to assume
new commitments to give peacekeeping operations
means, including training aspects.

Furthermore, women and children suffer a
disproportionate impact in conflicts. Spain will never
tire of pointing out that all forms of violence against
women and children increase during times of conflict.
We are also weeing an alarming increase in efforts
to systemize the use of sexual and gender violence in
times of conflict. That is sometimes used not just as
weapon of war, but also one of terror. The fact that, last
June, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
stated that her office had received the largest number
of allegations of sexual abuse in Darfur in connection
with armed groups is but one example. Violence against
women can also constitute a clear early indicator of an
impending crisis. The protection of women depends
on the prevention of conflicts, in addition to being
necessary in stabilizing a country in armed conflict.

The global study on the review of resolution 1325
(2000) that was published last October also calls
attention to the importance of women's participation in
conflict resolution, particularly if a stable and lasting
peace is the ultimate goal. Moreover, the violence
committed against children in armed conflicts takes
on many forms, such as abductions, forced recruitment,
sexual abuse, illegal trafficking, slavery, mutilation and
murder. We will also not tire of repeating the absolute
importance of respecting the most fundamental
rules of humanitarian law. Likewise, it is important
that peace agreements clearly include the needs of
children who are victims of conflicts - in the areas
of protection, rehabilitation and reintegration. With
regard to accountability, we will continue to advocate
for the strengthening of national judicial systems and
cooperation between the International Criminal Court
and the Secretary Council. The fight against impunity
will not only restore dignity to the victims, but it will
also serve as deterrence.

I would like to conclude by thanking the President
for having convened this most important debate, which
adds new impetus to the fight against barbarism,
which affects the most vulnerable populations. Spain
remains resolutely committed to protecting civilians
in particular, as well as to strengthening international
humanitarian law in general.

