The President: I thank Mr. Kim Won-soo for
his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs
of Malaysia.

At the outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his participation today and for his remarks.

Malaysia highly values the Secretariat's role in
facilitating synergies and in coordinating and supporting
cooperation among the various United Nations entities,
Member States and intergovernmental institutions
in preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) to non-State actors. The Security
Council, consistent with its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
and in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations, has a key role to play in this regard.

I wish to also thank Mr. Roux, Mr. Koblenz and
Mr. Kim Won-soo for their respective briefings, which
have shed much light on the different aspects of the
topic under discussion.

We are honoured by the large number of delegations
participating today, attesting to the importance of
concerted international action to preventing WMD
proliferation to non-State actors. It is my hope that our
deliberations today will contribute towards that end.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement of
the Non- Aligned Movement to be delivered by the
representative of Iran.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is admittedly a historic
contribution of the Security Council in the field of
non-proliferation of WMD. We commend Spain,
as Chair of the Committee established pursuent to
resolution 1540 (2004), for its effective stewardship of
the comprehensive review process. My delegation is
of the View that, in so doing and while acknowledging
the threats posed by terrorist groups, the thrust of the
resolution in preventing WMD proliferation by States
and non-State actors should be maintained.

We should acknowledge the equally significant
contributions of several international and regional
arrangements or initiatives in addressing WMD
proliferation, especially by non-State actors.
Collectively and through various national, regional and
international approaches, we have certainly made great
strides and achieved significant progress in responding
to this multifaceted, complex issue. We should move
forward by further strengthening global efforts in
the light of the emerging threats and challenges
in this regard, in particular in the field of science
and technology, information and communication
technologies and international commerce. As such,
we call on the 1540 Committee to regularly review the
scientific, technological and international commerce
advancements on related controls under resolution
1540 (2004). That would ensure synergy in merging
the implementation of States' obligations, taking
into account the exponential risk of the misuse of
these advancements.
I do not wish to repeat here the elements concerning
the purpose, context and challenges that the presidency
has elaborated in our concept note for this debate
(S/2016/712, annex), nor either should I recapitulate
the points that my delegation and other delegations
made at the Council's open consultations concerning
resolution 1540 (2004) in June. Instead and in line with
the action-oriented nature of today's debate, I wish to
offer my observations and proposals.

My delegation believes that States, in accordance
with their international obligations, should strengthen
their respective law enforcement and national
legislation, in particular by enacting effective export
and transshipment controls, which should include
proliferation financing. Due to the fact that many States
have different national priorities and capacities, not
all States have been able to enact such laws, resulting
in a lack of universal control concerning WMD
proliferation to non-State actors. In addition, some
States remain constrained by a severe lack of technical
expertise and resources in ensuring the effective
fulfilment of their obligations. Therefore, the United
Nations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of its Charter
and other relevant regional and international initiatives,
should avoid duplication and instead work in synergy
in rendering the required assistance in all aspects
to States. I believe that such an expedient approach
would optimize the limited resources of the States and
institutions concerned.

The international community has long designated
non-State actors, in particular terrorist groups, as our
number one enemy. However, it is unfortunate that
a central, universal coordination mechanism that is
inclusive of parliamentarians, industry, academics and
the civil society in addressing the challenges they pose
is currently non-existent. This has resulted in numerous
regional and international institutions and initiatives,
with similar or competing interests, pursuing the same
objectives but with different approaches or agendas. That
perplexing situation should be redressed immediately.

Pending the formation of a central, universal
coordination mechanism, States will have to continue
addressing the increasingly complex challenges posed
by non-State actors through various measures peculiar
to their national or regional interests and imperatives.
In that regard, my delegation supports the proposal
for the United Nations to develop a structured track
of dialogue at all levels, including parliamentarians,
industry, academics and civil society, aimed at raising
greater awareness, with a View to generating the
necessary impetus for a solid global movement against
WMD proliferation to non-State actors.

The global security landscape has changed
dramatically. It is evolving rapidly beyond
comprehension, presenting us with a multitude of
new challenges. Today, no nation can claim immunity
to WMD proliferation or attacks by terrorist groups.
Recent incidents concerning the use of chemicals
as weapons against civilian populations by certain
parties in Syria, as well as the acquisition of chemical
stockpiles by terrorists in Libya, which was eventually
addressed through the adoption of resolution 2298
(2016), highlight the real danger and threat posed
by non-State actors to peace and security. These
developments reqire us to respond to the questions of,
not if, but when and where such incidents will recur,
with irreversible consequences, and of what should we
do and how we should do it.

It is indeed unfortunate that geopolitical
considerations at play in certain regions are
compounding the preventive or remedial efforts of
the United Nations and the international community
at large in addressing the challenges posed by WMD
proliferation and their use by non-State actors. There
have been instances where States were allegedly
complicit in this respect, in blatant disregard to the
sacrosanct purposes and principles of the United
Nations. States are duty-bound to avoid complicity in
the commission of such heinous acts.

The first and second preambular paragraphs of the
Charter of the United Nations state, in part,

"[w]e the peoples of the United Nations
determined to save succeeding generations from the
scourge ofwar [and] to establish conditions under
which justice and respect for the obligations arising
from treaties and other sources of international
law can be maintained and for these ends to
unite our strength to maintain international peace
and security".

I am convinced that we remain resolutely cognizant
of our cardinal collective obligations as truly a United
Nations, and therefore are prepared to jointly summon
the courage to ultimately bring forth enduring peace
and security. It is worth recalling that, 20 years ago, the
International Court of Justice, in its Advisory Opinion
on the Legality ofthe threat or use ofnuclear weapons,
handed down on 8 July 1996, unanimously concluded
that

"[t]here exists an obligation to pursue in
good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations
leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects
under strict and effective international control."
(A/51/218, annex, p. 267)

In conclusion, we have to admit that the existence of
WMDs, in particular nuclear weapons, is a threat to our
peace and security and to the survival of humankind.
Ultimately, my delegation looks forward to a WMD-
free world.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Kiyoshi
Odawara, Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Japan.

