Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should like to thank you, Sir, for
your concern and for your prompt response to the call
to convene this urgent meeting to consider the ongoing
crisis and deteriorating situation in our region.

The Israeli escalation, reflected in acts of
aggression against the Palestinian people and its
National Authority, is an abhorrent and criminal act of
hostility. We strongly renew our condemnation of this
aggression and of the war crimes that have been
committed. We remind the Israeli Government that its
actions in the occupied Palestinian territories are
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War, and of
the resolutions of the Security Council. We condemn
the killing and targeting of civilians on both sides. The
time has come for the Israeli Government to realize
that the military option will settle no crisis whatsoever.
Escalation and violence will merely beget more
violence and widen the chasm between the Israeli and
Palestinian sides.

Jordan therefore reaffirms that the political option
is the only way to overcome this crisis. We call on the
Israeli Government to implement Security Council
resolution 1402 (2002), immediately and fully to
withdraw its forces from the lands and cities it has
reoccupied, and to lift the siege imposed on President
Yasser Arafat and the Palestinian people, including on
the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem and all
Palestinian cities and villages. We call on Israel to
begin implementing the Tenet plan and the
recommendations of the Mitchell Committee towards a
resumption of final status negotiations at the point at
which they ended. In this regard, we cannot accept the
convening of any international conference in the
absence of President Yasser Arafat.

My delegation urges the dispatch of an
international fact-finding commission in the light of
statements made by the representatives of humanitarian
agencies, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and non-governmental humanitarian organizations
concerning the events that took place in the Jenin
refugee camp and Israel's attempt to cover up the
massacres there. My delegation supports the Secretary-
General's statement on the need to dispatch a
multinational force to the occupied Palestinian
territories under Chapter VII of the Charter in order to
create the environment necessary to opening the way to
a political and diplomatic settlement.

We cannot fail at this point to convey our deep
thanks to the Secretary-General and to the United
States Secretary of State for their efforts to settle the
crisis and to obtain an Israeli withdrawal from the
occupied Palestinian territories. My delegation renews
its appeal to the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities under the United Nations Charter by
compelling Israel to implement its relevant resolutions,
in particular resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002).

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates the
solidarity of Jordan's King, Government and people
with the elected, legitimate President of the Palestinian
Authority, Mr. Yasser Arafat, and with our brethren the
Palestinian people as they seek to obtain their
legitimate rights and until their just national demands
are met through the creation of their independent State
on all their national territory, with Jerusalem as its
capital.

