Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): My delegation is taking the
floor following the voting on the two draft resolutions
(S/2019/756 and S/2019/757).

Indonesia has always called for unity within the
Security Council for the very urgent task of saving
people's lives. That has always been our priority. We
share the message the Secretary-General delivered
yesterday during the press conference at the outset of
the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly:
"Put people first. Their needs. Their aspirations. Their
rights." That applies to the 3 million people in Idlib;
they need to be protected. Their aspirations are to stay
safe, and their right is to live in peace.

In that regard, it is indeed regrettable that the
Council could not reach consensus. Indonesia voted
in favour of the draft resolution submitted by the
co-penholders, since the draft text contains critical
elements that are necessary to immediately enhance
our efforts in alleviating the suffering of the people in
Idlib governorate and prevent any further deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in the area. The process
of negotiating the text was lengthy and complex, with
many divergences among the Council members. We
therefore thank the co-penholders for their hard work.

While we appreciate the efforts ofRussia and China
in formulating the other draft resolution, we consider
that the potential of the text to address the real situation
on the ground has not been fully explored. The text was
introduced only yesterday, and the Council was not able
to comprehensively discuss it. We also believe that, at
this critical juncture, the humanitarian situation in Idlib
needs a resolution that fully captures the urgent need
to immediately alleviate the people's pain, frustration
and suffering. Indonesia sincerely believes that we
need a breakthrough to save those people's lives. As I
mentioned this morning, the Council needs to ensure
that it is not too late to respond to the humanitarian
situation in Idlib (see S/PV.8622).

It is imperative for the Council to agree to avoid
the politicization of any humanitarian situation. Only
through such a collective agreement will the Council
be able to effectively fulfil its mandate. My delegation
is very hopeful that the Council will continue exploring
ways to address that very important issue in unison.

