Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, please allow me to
thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing today and for his
relentless efforts on this issue. Through him, I would
also like to commend the essential work carried out by
all relevant United Nations entities and staff, both at
Headquarters and on the ground.

The Paris Middle East Peace Conference, in
which Italy took part at the ministerial level, showed
the cohesiveness of the international community in
keeping the Middle East peace process high on the
world agenda. It also confirmed the widely shared
commitment to pursuing the goal of a just and lasting
peace between Israel and Palestine, based on the two-
State solution through direct negotiations.

As indicated by the July 2016 Quartet report
(S/2016/595, annex) and Security Council resolution
2334 (2016), facts on the ground are threatening the
Viability of the two-State formula. Settlements, which
have expanded considerably in the past year, as well as
increased demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian
projects in the occupied territory, including East
Jerusalem, are dangerously imperilling the viability of
the two-State solution based on the 1967 borders.

Settlements, of course, are not the only obstacle
to peace. Let me underline in this regard Italy's deep
concern over the risk of growing terrorist violence and
incitement on the ground. The recent murderous attack
in Jerusalem reminded us of the extreme fragility of
the situation and that immediate steps are required to
prevent such acts, which must be condemned by all
parties, including with active rejection of incitement.
If not properly addressed and reversed, those facts on
the ground may deepen the political stalemate and lead,
both in Israel and in Palestine, as well as in the region,
to growing risks of further hatred, intolerance and
Violent extremism.

The erosion of the two-State solution may leave
room for a sort of dangerous one-State illusion, plagued
by insecurity and continuous tension. That is neither
the end state in which the international community
has invested so many political and financial resources
nor what Israeli and Palestinian citizens deserve.
We think that the parties must take substantial steps
to demonstrate their genuine commitment to the
re-establishment of a political horizon leading to the
resumption of direct negotiations, which shall be the
aim of every international effort, bearing in mind that
peace cannot be imposed from the outside.

We also believe that the impact of our endeavour
will be measured by our capacity to bring the parties
back to the negotiating table, to defuse mistrust and to
clearly highlight the many dividends of peace. In this
vein, I wish to express our appreciation for the work put
forward by the outgoing United States Administration
in the pursuit of a just peace. We are particularly
appreciative of John Kerry's relentless efforts during
his tenure as Secretary of State. We are confident that
the next Administration of the United States will invest
the same political capital and deploy the same efforts
for a resolution of the conflict based on the two-State
formula. Italy appreciates and further encourages
the efforts of the Middle East Quartet, whose
recommendations are still fully valid and underscore
the importance of the ongoing efforts to advance the
Arab Peace Initiative.

Despite some recent encouraging signals,
Palestinian national reconciliation remains
unaccomplished. Let me underline that the Palestinian
reconciliation process is an important element
for reaching the two-State solution. Poverty, high
unemployment rates 4 especially among young
people - and persisting stagnation of the economy are
some of the indicators that show that the daily life of
Palestinians is characterized by countless emergencies.
As Minister Alfano recently stated in the Council (see S/PV.7857), it is only by addressing the root causes of
instability that we can build the peace of tomorrow.
There are priorities for socioeconomic development
that can no longer be deferred, such as access to water
and energy resources. This underscores the urgency
of dialogue and concrete cooperation in these fields
between Israel, Palestine and relevant neighbouring
countries, beside and above political considerations.

The dire humanitarian situation in Gaza must
also be concretely and effectively addressed. The
reconstruction of the Strip and the improvement of the
living conditions of its people cannot wait any longer.
In the Council and in other relevant forums, Italy is
committed to playing its role to finally and fully put
in practice the framework outlined in Oslo more than
20 years ago. There is considerable work to be done in
order to rebuild trust between the parties, including by
their respective civil societies, and to rehabilitate the
vision of two States living side by side in peace and
security.

I also wish to mention another country that we
consider crucial to regional stability - Lebanon. Italy
welcomes the recent election of President Aoun and the
formation of the Government led by Prime Minister
Hariri, whose declared objective is to restore trust. In
the light of our substantial contingent of peacekeepers
within the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), we remain strongly committed to upholding
stability in Lebanon and will work within the Security
Council in order to ensure the broadest international
support for the current positive cooperation between
Lebanese political forces. UNIFIL's strategic review is
also a key opportunity to ensure the effectiveness of the
mission, including its essential civilian and maritime
components. Weakening them would create dangerous
voids.

In this respect, we hope that parliamentary
elections in 2017 will mark a significant step forward in
strengthening Lebanese democracy and consolidating
State institutions. All countries, especially countries of
the region, must shoulder their responsibilities in this
regard.

