Mr. Van Tongeren: I am honoured to be invited
to this meeting, and I thank the representative of the
Philippines very much for this invitation to address the
Council today.

Promoting peace and security in the twenty-first
century requires a fundamental shift in how we respond
to the challenge of violent conflict. It is intolerable that
millions of civilians die from violent conflict at a time
when the international community has the knowledge
and resources to prevent it. As described in the Human
Development Report 2005, "Violent conflict is one of
the surest and fastest routes to the bottom of the
[Human Development Index]", and it endangers the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.

In response to the recommendation on the role of
civil society in the Secretary-General's 2001 report on
the prevention of armed conflict (S/200l/574), civil
society organizations from around the world organized
themselves and formed the Global Partnership for the
Prevention of Armed Conflict. After three years of
dialogue, consultation and research all over the world,
15 regional action agendas and finally one global
Action Agenda on conflict prevention and
peacebuilding were formulated. These action agendas
were presented at the Global Conference on the Role of
Civil Society in the Prevention of Armed Conflict and
Peacebuilding, which took place in July of this year,
here in this building. In the global Action Agenda, we
call for a fundamental change in dealing with conflict:
a shift from reaction to prevention. We believe that this
shift is not only possible but that it is much more cost-
effective.

Prevention is at the heart of the United Nations
mission and was the founding purpose of the United
Nations 60 years ago. Still, this is not reflected in the
current design of the United Nations. As stated in the
report of the Secretary-General entitled "In larger
freedom", peacebuilding is still a "gaping hole in the
United Nations institutional machinery" (A/59/2005, para. 114).

Following the two high-level reports of 2004, we
propose that the United Nations take up a stronger
steering and catalyzing role, and act as a convener in
the field of peace and security. We recommend that the
post of Under-Secretary-General for Peace and
Security be created.

Regions or countries prone to conflict should be
better monitored. Better early warning indicators and a
peacebuilding infrastructure should be developed,
based on local capacities for peace.

We believe that it is very important that an update
of the 2001 prevention of armed conflict report be
released soon. The progress report planned for 2004 is
still on hold. We hope, however, that now that the
summit is over, that report will be published soon.

In addition, we propose a more in-depth review
of the role of the United Nations in the field of conflict
prevention and peacebuilding be undertaken in 2010,
by organizing a multi-stakeholder conference on
conflict prevention and peacebuilding, aiming for a
coherent and integrated approach on prevention and a
mid-term review of the Peacebuilding Commission,
with input from regional organizations and civil
society.

Due to time limitations, I cannot reflect too much
here on all the different important roles of civil society,
so I will simply say that we strongly support Kofi
Annan's conclusion in the Security Council debate on
the role of civil society in post-conflict peacebuilding
just last year (see S/PV.4993), when he stated that the
partnership between the United Nations and civil
society is not an option, but a necessity.

The Security Council should reform its working
methods to increase legitimacy, inclusiveness and
representativity by implementing the recommendations
of the Panel of Eminent Persons on United Nations-
Civil Society Relations - the Cardoso panel - to
strengthen the Council's engagement with civil society
and by deepening and improving the planning and
effectiveness of the Arria formula meetings by
lengthening lead times and covering travel costs to
increase the participation of actors from the field.
Security Council field missions should meet regularly
with appropriate local civil society leaders. Further, the
Council should support the establishment of an
advisory or expert group on conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, to consist of practitioners, academics
and representatives of civil society organizations.
Within the United Nations country teams a focal point
for prevention and peacebuilding should be appointed.

Finally, we support the creation of a
Peacebuilding Commission and believe its
effectiveness would be enhanced through cooperation
with civil society with peacebuilding experience. It
should report to the Security Council and to the
General Assembly. We ask the Council to support
proposals to include in the mandate of the
Peacebuilding Commission the establishment of formal
country-level mechanisms such as civic forums to
ensure that local civil society is a key partner in its
efforts.

