Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing today's meeting. The Irish delegation sees
it as a welcome opportunity and a continuation of the
high-level debate at this year's General Assembly.
Indeed, as your very useful concept note (S/2018/982, annex) points out, Mr. President, the vast majority of
Member States at the General Assembly spoke up in
defence of multilateralism - and many did so with
great passion. Ireland was one of those.

Against the background of increasing international
instability and uncertainty, Ireland's Deputy Prime
Minister described his concerns for the future
effectiveness of the United Nations (see A/73/PV.13).
He insisted that the Organization's work simply
cannot be replicated by transactional and selective
bilateral engagement in which the powerful dominate
and decisions are no longer based on the strength of
argument and the need for fair outcomes. It might seem
at this hour on Friday afternoon a bit cliche'd to say it,
but it is true that our challenges are too great and too
global for anyone to take a unilateral approach in the
long run. History shows us that those who took such
a path have had to return to the multilateral family to
share burdens and look for shared solutions.

One of the many Member States that expressed
worry in the general debate about the current trends in
global governance was China. We took particular note
of two questions posed by China's Foreign Minister:

"Should we stay committed to multilateralism or
let unilateralism have its way? Should we seek to
uphold the architecture of the world order or allow
it to be eroded and collapse?" (A/73/PV12, p. 17)

We must be very clear in our answers to the choices
offered as we seek to strengthen multilateralism and
the role of the United Nations. In doing so, of course,
we must defend the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. At the same time we
must recognize that there are new and very different
threats to international peace and security, to the very
survival of the planet and to the stable development of
our societies. In some respects, the debate is no longer
about effective multilateralism, but about saving the
multilateral system.

As the concept note for this debate rightly states,
we must grapple with the intertwining of traditional
and non-traditional security issues. Collectively,
we must acknowledge the pivotal nature of new and
different factors, such as climate change and migration.
Who could not have been convinced by the statement in
the general debate by the Prime Minister of Barbados,
in which she described the impact of flooding on her
island State (see A/73/PV.13)? Who could have been
left in any doubt upon hearing the words of the Prime
Minister of Lesotho about the unprecedented magnitude
of the challenges facing migrants and the implications
for us all (ibid.)?

Time today is very brief, and I cannot hope to detail
how we can strengthen the overall system of the United
Nations. But there are a few things that are obvious,
if not easy. We need to simply implement multilateral
agreements that we have signed on to, such as the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change and the Sustainable
Development Goals. That will give credibility and
strength to our system. We need to make the multilateral
agenda relevant by ensuring that key constituencies,
such as women and youth, are centrally included and
involved.

We must enhance our partnerships. Today, no one
can go it alone. The United Nations must strengthen
its capacity to engage locally, nationally and regionally,
and with international partners. We see a role for
regional and subregional organizations, civil society
actors and the private sector. We must communicate our
own successes. International organizations are doing
great work in many areas such as health, education and
child advocacy. We should not let that go unnoticed or
unreported.

Ireland believes that we need to press for change, not
simply for reform of the administrative and budgetary
structures of the multilateral institutions. We need
simple, straightforward, hard-nosed political reform
at the United Nations - none more necessary than
here in the Security Council. Political reforms at the
United Nations, in particular in the composition of the
Council, would give an increased sense of ownership
and participation on the part of Member States, our
general public, and would strengthen its standing. We
believe in particular that the anachronistic injustice in
relation to the underrepresentation of Africa needs to
be corrected, and soon. We also believe there should
be consideration for a designated seat for small island
States, but it goes beyond the question of composition.
We would like to see an end to the use of the veto
in this organ. In the meantime, we fully support the
Franco-Mexican initiative to limit the use of veto in
cases of mass atrocities.

My country, Ireland, is convinced that we need
to combat the narrative that collective engagement
somehow diminishes our sovereignty. A transactional
diplomacy of the strong against the weak represents the
real threat to our standing as independent nations.

As the concept note points out, the most basic
principle of multilateralism is that matters in the
international arena must be dealt with in a fair and just
manner. For a small State like Ireland, that means that
every State is given an opportunity to have its voice
heard and to have its concerns objectively weighed.
As an aspiring member of the Security Council for the
period 2021-2022, we say that with sincere conviction.

As we commemorate the centenary of the end of
First World War, we are very much reminded of the
high costs of unilateralism and unchecked nationalism
and the wars that it engendered. The ruinous fighting
of 100 years ago is the hard evidence of our need to win
today's battle for multilateralism.

