Mr. Licharz (Germany): Ijoin others in thanking
the Chinese presidency for convening this open debate
on peace and security in Africa. I also join others in
paying tribute to the peacekeepers from Malawi and
Tanzania who lost their lives recently in a heinous attack.
We also thank the Secretary-General and the African
Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and Security for
their briefings. We commend the engagement of our
African partners expressed in their statements during
this open debate.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union (EU).

I will focus on three points: first, the support of
the United Nations and the international community
for African countries; secondly, efforts by the United
Nations and the international community to help
African Union-led peace operations obtain more
predictable and sustainable financing; and, thirdly,
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union on peacekeeping;

First, Germany was among the first countries
to endorse the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on Peacekeeping Operations, put forth by the
Secretary-General in August. We are committed to
its implementation. We take the shared commitment
of improving cooperation with regional organizations
very seriously, in particular with the African Union.
It is important to strengthen regional organizations
to enable them to secure peace and stability in their
own regions. Throughout the past years, Germany has
already stepped up its contribution to crisis prevention
efforts and peacekeeping on the African continent. We
support capacity-building for the African Peace and
Security Architecture, provide training and specialized
equipment to a large number of African troop- and
police-contributing countries. We are also contributing
to the Africa-wide roll-out ofbest practices in controlling
small arms and light weapons by United Nations
peace missions in order to stop their proliferation and
prevent them from falling into the hands of non-State
actors. In addition, we support the ongoing process of
enhancing the performance and effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping operations through bilateral
and multilateral programmes. For instance, Germany
provides mobile training teams for predeployment
training in the area of improvised explosive devices to
troop- and police-contributing countries in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. We have already trained troops from
Egypt, Guinea and Senegal. We also provide in-mission
training to further increase command capabilities
in high-risk missions in Africa, and we support
peacekeeping training institutes in Mali, Ghana
and Kenya.
Moreover, in the context of the EU, as will be
highlighted by the observer of the European Union,
Germany is actively engaged. The EU currently
supports seven African missions. Germany is the
largest contributor to those projects. For instance, in
the case of Mali, in the context of the EU Training
Mission, currently led by a German Force Commander,
we provide training for the soldiers of the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel and deploy personnel
to two civilian missions - the EU Common Security
and Defence Policy (EUCAP) Sahel Niger and EUCAP
Sahel Mali - which advise their host countries on
security sector reforms.

Let me now turn to the question of financing.
While Germany recognizes that financing is an integral
aspect of any peace operation, we would like to the see
a broader debate on performance and human rights
compliance, as well as the nexus of peace operations
involving prevention and peacebuilding activities. It is
important to take a holistic approach involving civilian
and military means and addressing all phases of a
conflict from the outset.

At the same time, there is a need to enhance
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing for AU-led peace operations authorized by
the Security Council. We believe that establishing a
mechanism through which AU-led or AU-mandated
peace operations could be partly financed through
United Nations assessed contributions should be given
further consideration, on the understanding that such
funding would be on a case-by-case basis, complement
African contributions and respect the primacy of the
Security Council.

In addition to the aforementioned, we would
be reassured if two aspects received due attention:
first, the establishment of a robust accountability
and compliance framework to ensure strategic and
financial oversight; and secondly, a human rights
and conduct-and-discipline framework in accordance
with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. While there can be no doubt that the
United Nations and the international community must
help provide the resources peacekeeping missions need
to deliver on their mandates, we also commend the
AU's ongoing efforts to enhance self-reliance and the
financing of its activities.

In conclusion, the African Union is undoubtedly
one of the United Nations most important partners in
peace and security on the African continent. Germany,
jointly with our African partners, is committed to
supporting and further developing the United Nations-
AU partnership, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. Based on the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, we would like to see
this partnership develop even further and to address
all phases of a conflict, from prevention and peace
operations to post-conflict peacebuilding. We are on
a good track. We should sustain that momentum and
maintain the political will to take the next step, with a
View to sustaining peace.

