Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): At the
outset, may I thank you, Mr. President, and the
Algerian presidency for convening this meeting and for
choosing this particularly important subject. We are
honoured to have you with us here today.

I would like to associate myself with the remarks
to be made subsequently by the Dutch presidency of
the European Union.

Allow me also to thank Under-Secretary-General
Egeland for his comprehensive and powerful briefing. I
would like now to respond to some of the points that he
made.

First, humanitarian access lies at the heart of the
protection response. The inability to deliver
humanitarian relief to victims of conflict directly
concerns this Council. We therefore concur with Mr.
Egeland's encouragement that the Council use its
authority where necessary to facilitate assistance and
protection. We need to strengthen the overall response
capacity of the humanitarian community.

Secondly, in order to do that we must reduce the
delays in humanitarian financing for the provision of
that assistance and protection. Donors must do better in
that regard and disburse funds more quickly, including,
upon request, to regional organizations, which also
play an important part in protecting civilians. The need
for a quick response to an individual crisis should not
be delayed by tardiness in producing a response to a
special dedicated appeal.

Thirdly, there is an urgent need to strengthen the
collaborative approach to protection, especially at the
field level, between humanitarian and human rights
actors. We note a serious lack of results-based
reporting on protection objectives in humanitarian
programmes. This could perhaps be considered along
with the Secretary-General's proposal for a mechanism
to provide better facts and statistics on protection.

Fourthly, threats to humanitarian staff threaten
the viability of humanitarian operations. We must find
creative ways to address that problem, using
humanitarian and political diplomacy, recognizing that
the relationship between humanitarian action and the
objectives of political and military activity is more
complicated than was suggested by the Under-
Secretary-General. In Iraq, the recent abduction of
Margaret Hassan provides a chilling reminder of the
dangers faced by humanitarian personnel in the field,
and we take this opportunity to pay tribute to
Margaret's tireless efforts to help those in need.

Fifthly, we need to address sexual and gender-
based violence in a more systematic way, perhaps
through the International Criminal Court. We agree
with Mr. Egeland that there can be no impunity for
such acts and that the Council must press for
accountability. That must apply, in particular, to the
behaviour of personnel working in the field under the
flag of the United Nations. We all have an obligation to
ensure strict adherence to the standards of conduct that
the Secretary-General has set out in his bulletin.

Sixthly, this wide-ranging debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is very
welcome. It demonstrates the Security Council's
interest and competence in the subject. However, in the
view of the United Kingdom, we must adopt a more
proactive stance. Jan Egeland has suggested some areas
for follow-up, but there are more, including the need to
look at situations in which the difficulty of
humanitarian access portends potential conflict. The
United Kingdom believes that a stronger role by the
Council throughout the conflict spectrum is overdue.
The Council therefore should engage more directly in
the commitment to prevent and in the responsibility to
protect. The follow-up to the report of the high-level
panel gives us the opportunity to move that agenda
forward.

The situation in Darfur exemplifies why these
points are important. Six months ago, in his last
briefing to the Council, Mr. Egeland expressed deep
concern about attacks on civilians in Darfur. Sadly, that
situation has improved little. The recent escalation of
violence and the continued breaches of international
human rights and humanitarian law underline the
failure to protect civilians in Darfur. Unless all parties
abide by their commitments, halt hostilities
immediately and agree on a political solution to the
conflict, the international community, including this
Council, will need to take more decisive action. The
United Kingdom welcomes the text of the proposed
presidential statement and, like Ambassador De La
Sabliere, we would like to see a resolution adopted
soon in this area.

Finally, by way of an advertisement, I would like
to announce that the British Government will host a
Wilton Park conference on the protection of civilians in
February 2005. The conference will examine the
definition of "protection", as well as the protection gap
between the legal framework and the realities on the
ground. We are in the process of finalizing the details
of that conference. My delegation will be happy to
provide more concrete information in due course.

