Ms. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland is encouraged by the measures announced
by Israel to ease the blockade against the Gaza Strip, as
well as similar measures taken by Egypt. Those
measures are a first step towards a predictable, lasting
opening of crossing points between the Gaza Strip and
the outside world for the passage of goods and persons,
in accordance with resolution 1860 (2009).

Gaza's social fabric and economy have been
severely damaged by the hostilities and by the
blockade, to the particular detriment of the civilian
population. The objective we must all pursue must be
allowing the civilian population of Gaza to lead a
normal life. The revitalization of the private sector and
the resumption of exchanges between the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank are imperatives.

My country already raised the urgency of this
question in the open debate held in July 2009 (see S/PV.6]7] (Resumption 1)) and has in the meantime
drafted the outlines of a mechanism to allow
sustainable, predictable and regular access to Gaza
while respecting the security needs of Israel.
Switzerland therefore welcomes the efforts of Council
members towards improving the situation and reiterates
its readiness to support such efforts.

Switzerland notes the continued violations of
international law by all parties to the conflict. The
recent announcements of the resumption of
construction activities in the Israeli settlements in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem are cause for serious
concern. Those settlements have been established in
violation of international humanitarian law.
Switzerland calls upon Israel to renew the freeze on
construction activities in the West Bank and to extend
it to East Jerusalem for an indefinite period of time.

My country also calls upon the Israeli authorities
to rescind the expulsion orders for the East Jerusalem
parliamentarians, which are contrary to human rights
law and international humanitarian law.

Switzerland wishes also to denounce arbitrary
detentions and intimidation of political opponents in
the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. We call on the
authorities to respect the rule of law and civil liberties
and to continue the intra-Palestinian reconciliation
process. This is necessary for the establishment of a
Palestinian State serving the entire population and for
the negotiation of a lasting settlement of the conflict
with Israel. That conflict must come to an end: it is not
only the security of Israel and of the Palestinians that is
at stake, but also the credibility of the international
security system.

The Clinton parameters, the Taba talks and the
Geneva initiative are some of the promising efforts that
indicate the outlines of a lasting solution. The State of
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization have
reaffirmed on many occasions that their goal is the
birth of a Palestinian State. Hamas too has declared its
acceptance of the 1967 borders. Switzerland counts on
the support of Security Council members to ensure that
those declarations are treated with seriousness. The
Council should display continued determination to
overcome the obstacles which, to date, have prevented
this vision from becoming a reality.

