Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
wishes to thank all the members of the Security
Council for their constructive engagement in dealing
with one of the most important issues in the Arab
world, namely, the Syrian crisis. We also wish to pay
a special tribute to both the Russian Federation and the
United States of America for their efforts that led to the
announcement of the cessation of hostilities in Syria,
which represents progress towards a ceasefire. This
initiative has been strongly supported by Egypt in the
framework of the International Syria Support Group.
Resolution 2268 (2016), adopted today, provides it with
a legal framework and support.

We stress the need for all parties to the conflict on the
ground - Syrian and non- Syrian alike, be they involved
either directly or indirectly in the conflict - to cease
their hostilities at the time specified in the resolution.
We also stress that any party that chooses not to abide
by the cessation ofhostilities agreement or the Council's
resolution, or would violate that agreement, should
alone bear the grave consequences of that action.

Egypt welcomes the cessation of hostilities
agreement and today's resolution. We welcome their
stress on the need to improve the humanitarian situation
in Syria and to combat terrorist organizations. In that
context, we affirm that a political solution that meets
the aspirations of the Syrian people to freedom and
democracy and maintains the unity, sovereignty and
institutions of Syria, in line with the communique's of
the International Syria Support Group and resolution
2254 (2015), is the only way to an end the humanitarian
suffering of the Syrian people and enable Syrian State
institutions to eliminate terrorism.

Egypt therefore welcomes the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, which have just begun
through proximity talks with the Syrian Government
and opposition groups in Geneva. We call on the Special
Envoy to resume those talks as soon as possible and to
finalize the arrangements for the resumption of United
Nations-facilitated formal negotiations between the
Government and the broadest possible spectrum of the
Syrian opposition, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015),
which provides for a clear plan of action that is binding
for all parties. All partners present on Syrian territory
and all parts of Syrian society must participate in that
process in order to maintain Syria's unity.

We therefore reiterate the need for the entire Syrian
opposition to be represented at the formal negotiations,
as set forth in resolution 2254 (2015). Those must
include the Arab and Kurdish groups engaged in
combating terrorism, especially the terrorism of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra
Front in northern Syria. It is important to underscore
that those groups have already made significant gains
by liberating large areas from the grip of terrorists.

The armed conflict in Syria has assumed
unimaginable dimensions. The Syrian people have
been bearing the unbearable. Now is the time to put
intentions to the test. It is time for accountability. I call
on all parties without exception to stop attempting to
please the warring parties at the expense of the Syrian
people. I call on all parties to work to empower the
Syrian people to take control of their future without
foreign intervention.

