Ms. Wronecka: In accordance with paragraph
3(a)(iv) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have the honour to
brief the Security Council on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, covering the period
from 14 March to 14 June. During this period, the
Committee met twice in informal consultations.

At the outset, I would like to recall that following
the approval of the nominations of the Sudan Panel
of Experts by the Committee, the Secretary-General
appointed four members of the Panel of Experts on
14 March, while the fifth expert was appointed by the
Secretary-General on 9 May, after three members of
the Committee had lifted their holds on the nomination
on 2 May.

On 16 January, the Committee received a letter from
the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts recommending
that the Committee consider updating the list entries
of Musa Hilal Abdalla Alnsiem, Adam Yacub Sharif
and Jibril Abdulkarim Ibrahim Mayu. On 30 January,
the Panel informed the Committee that the proposed
amendments to the entry of Adam Yacub Sharif had
inadvertently omitted some identifier information
and provided the Committee with revised proposed
amendments. Accordingly, on 14 March, the Committee
approved the revised proposed amendments to the list
entries. A corresponding press release and note verbale
to all Member States were issued on the same day.

In informal consultations on 12 April, the
Committee heard a presentation by the Coordinator of
the Panel ofExperts on the Panel's programme ofwork in
accordance with the mandate as extended by resolution
2400 (2018) until 12 March 2019. In this connection,
Mr. Bifwoli Wanjala told Committee members that the
Panel would continue to monitor Darfuri rebel groups,
most of whom were now in Libya and South Sudan, and
militia groups in the Sudan. The Panel also intended
to identify those who impeded the peace process and
therefore met the designation criteria.

The ongoing arms collection campaign by the
Government of the Sudan and its implications for the
arms embargo on Darfur would be another focus area of
the Panel during its current mandate. The Panel would
also continue to monitor violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, including sexual and
gender-based violence and violence against children, as
well as the travel ban and the asset freeze. Committee
members welcomed the Panel's work and travel plan. A
summary of the meeting was made available in a press
release issued on 18 April (SC/13305).

Now, let me turn to my visit to the Sudan from
13 to 20 April. The purpose of the visit was to obtain
information on the state of implementation of the
sanctions measures by opening channels of dialogue
to see the precise facts on the ground, towards
feeding into the Security Council's review of the
sanctions measures on the Sudan. The representative
of Kuwait accompanied me from New York and the
representatives of China, France, the Netherlands,
the Russian Federation, Sweden, the United Kingdom
and the United States joined me in the Sudan from
their respective embassies in Khartoum. I was also
accompanied by three members of the Panel of Experts
and one staff member from the Secretariat.

During our stay in Khartoum and El Fasher, we
met with a wide range of Government interlocutors,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur and the foreign diplomatic corps. We also
visited two internally displaced persons (IDP) camps,
the Abu Shouk Camp near El Fasher and the Hesahesa
Camp near Zalingei, where we interacted directly
with IDPs. I would also like to note that I received
the full support of the Government of the Sudan and
United Nations personnel throughout the visit. In my
forthcoming letter to the Permanent Representative of
the Sudan to the United Nations, I will encourage the
Government of the Sudan to continue to build on the
existing cooperation with the Committee and the Panel
of Experts.
On 1 June, the Committee received the first
quarterly update of the Panel of Experts, which focused
largely on the Panel's visit to the Sudan from 14 April
to 7 May. In the update, the Panel also reported that all
members of the Panel received single-entry visas for
their upcoming mission to the Sudan from 18 June to
7 July.

On 6 June, I submitted my visit report to the
Committee, in which I observed that while the
situation in Darfur had significantly improved since
the imposition of the sanctions regime in 2004,
many challenges remained, especially regarding the
humanitarian and human rights situation, as well as
the political process. Moreover, the root causes of the
conflict should be further addressed. After my visit, I
believe the Council would be justified in reviewing the
sanctions regime.

My report also contained four
recommendations - three addressed to the Committee
and one to the Council. The Committee discussed the
report and its recommendations during its informal
consultations yesterday. All three recommendations
addressed to the Committee were supported by its
members with some additional input, and the Chair
will proceed accordingly in consultation with the
Committee. The recommendation I have addressed to
the Council reads as follows:

"That the Council pursue its intention, as
expressed in paragraph 3 of resolution 2400 (2018),
to review the measures on Darfur in light of the
evolving situation on the ground. As part of the
aforementioned review, the Council could consider
setting solution-oriented parameters of the eventual
termination of the measures in the long term,
which might serve as a vehicle for positive change
in the Sudan."

I am sure that the forthcoming reporting of the
Panel of Experts will provide Council members with
useful information to be taken into account when
drafting the next resolution dealing with the Sudan
sanctions regime.

The Committee will continue to support the Council
in its efforts to facilitate an end to the protracted
conflict in the Darfur region of the Sudan and by doing
so contribute to peace and stability in a very fragile
region of the African continent.

