Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): Mr. President, I
would like to commend you at the outset for having
convened this meeting, which offers the Council an
invaluable opportunity to undertake an assessment of
the agenda item under consideration, and for your
effective steering of the affairs of the Council this
month.

The Security Council, in conformity with its
Charter mandate, has considered and authorized United
Nations peacekeeping operations. That responsibility
has been discharged commendably, given the United
Nations success story in such operations. Despite the
accomplishments registered, there is no doubt that the
peacekeeping story has not been wholly glorious - a
manifestation of the fact that this organ has on certain
occasions failed to carry out its responsibilities
effectively.

It is in this regard that my delegation welcomed
the reports of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change and the report of the Secretary-
General and their identification of the fact that there is
a fundamental institutional gap within the United
Nations system with respect to forestalling a State in
crisis from plunging into war or to assisting it in
ensuring that the transition is made from war to peace.

My delegation also concurs, in principle, with the
Panel and with the Secretary-General's recommendation
that a Peacebuilding Commission be established to
effectively address that gap. It is heart-warming to
recognize that the proposal enjoys widespread support
among Member States. That positive reaction is a clear
testimony of Member States' recognition of the need to
address the shortfalls in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, particularly during the post-conflict period.

Peacebuilding has in recent years emerged as an
increasingly indispensable aspect of the various
elements that constitute international peace operations.
It is now widely acknowledged that, to achieve genuine
closure of violent conflict situations, concerted efforts
need to be made to put in place structures that would
effectively dissipate lingering tensions. In this
connection, it has been rightly observed that there is a
need to ensure, right from the outset of peace
initiatives, effective coordination, coherence and
continuity among the various elements of the overall
strategy of such operations - in particular between
peacekeeping operations on the one hand and possible
transitions into peacebuilding operations on the other.

Since attempts to secure a lasting peace in the
aftermath of most violent conflicts around the globe
necessarily requires sustained support from the United
Nations and its development and humanitarian partners,
efforts should be enhanced to encourage closer
cooperation among all relevant United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, regional and subregional
organizations and the private sector to achieve the desired
objectives.

In our opinion, the idea of the creation of an
authoritative intergovernmental mechanism capable of
establishing a substantive link between security and
development and of ensuring the development of an
integrated mission plan, with adequate coordination
among the various intergovernmental and national
donor agencies, warrants universal support, as it would
buttress efforts towards optimizing synergies for
recovery and reconstruction.

The intricate link between development and
security has been generally acknowledged. In that
connection, given the development and security
components of all post-conflict peacebuilding efforts,
we cannot but concur with the proposal to place the
Peacebuilding Commission under the joint authority of
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council but to establish it by the authority of the
General Assembly. For us, whatever decision is taken
on the location of such a body should take into account
all of the development and security elements, as well
as the need for inclusiveness, maximum participation,
genuine partnership and a balanced assessment of the
security and humanitarian dimensions of post-conflict
situations. In that connection, we support the
Secretary-General's view that the mandate of the
proposed Commission should be mainly focused on
post-conflict peacebuilding. Also, for the Commission
to achieve general acceptance, it should be of an
advisory nature and not have decision-making powers.

Furthermore, my delegation endorses the
Secretary-General's proposal that, in the event of the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Commission should report to the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council sequentially, and not
jointly, to avoid duplication and confusion.

In terms of the Commission's composition, my
delegation would prefer equal regional representation
from the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. In addition, officials from the relevant United
Nations departments, agencies, funds and programmes, as
well as representatives of national authorities and regional
or subregional organizations could be invited to
participate in its meetings and activities. Given the
developmental role of the Commission, the involvement
of regional and international financial institutions is also
an imperative.

In fairness, we would like to note that the
acknowledged gap between relief and development has
been to a degree narrowed down, albeit modestly, by
the recent inclusion of funds for disarmament and
demobilization as part of the assessed budget. That
notwithstanding, serious gaps continue to impede
efforts aimed at the reintegration of ex-combatants and
displaced persons, the training and deployment of
indigenous police forces, judicial reform, and other
essential elements of peacebuilding.
Thus, in view of the fact that it usually takes
some time before resources can be mobilized for
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration (DDR)
programmes at the end of a conflict, the proposed
institution of a peacebuilding fund could play a crucial
role in post-conflict peacebuilding and assist in the
implementation of DDR programmes.

My delegation would further like to recognize the
gender perspective in peacebuilding. The vital
contribution of women in promoting peace, and their
role in peacebuilding processes in particular, should
not be overlooked. We wish to encourage all relevant
initiatives geared towards the full participation of
women in all stages of peace operations as part of the
requisite gender mainstreaming. This would ensure that
all policies and programmes adopted in peacebuilding
would promote the full interests and participation of
women, gender equality and respect for women's
human rights.

I would like to recall that our experiences in West
Africa reveal that certain sister States such as Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau could have benefited
from the existence of an effective institutionalized
peacebuilding mechanism. We share the Council's
belief, stated in its presidential statement
(S/PRST/2005/9) of 25 February 2005 in connection
with its consideration of the agenda item entitled
"Cross-border issues in West Africa", that action on
cross-border and subregional issues should take place
as part of a wider strategy of conflict prevention, crisis
management and peacebuilding in the subregion. We
add our voice to that of the Council in calling for the
further promotion of an integrated approach in that
regard with the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union, as well as other key
international partners and civil society organizations.
The establishment of a Peacebuilding Commission is,
therefore, of paramount importance to Africa. Ghana's
strong support of the proposed Commission was
reflected in its decision to jointly host, with the Danish
Government, a recent meeting in Accra to deliberate on
the concept.

We cannot overemphasize the need for concerted
international action to strengthen the enfeebled
capacity of Governments and ensuring security sector
reforms aimed at improving civil-military relations in
countries emerging from conflict situations, with a
view to creating a culture of peace and stability and
promoting the rule of law. In this regard, another issue
which merits serious consideration by the proposed
Peacebuilding Commission is the need for the
expeditious granting of assistance for reconstruction
processes to meet the immediate requirements of
deprived populations. A major inhibiting factor over
the years has been the lack of early access to
substantial development aid, with its attendant adverse
effect on long-term reconstruction and development.
Such situations invariably undermine the objective of
promoting sustainable security.

Against that backdrop of an imperative need for
concrete peacebuilding measures in contemporary
peace operations so as to mitigate costly relapses into
cycles of conflict, my delegation associates itself with
the emerging consensus within this Organization to
effectively and coherently put in place an institutional
remedy to assist in ensuring a seamless transition from
war to lasting peace. The ultimate goal should be to
move beyond the simple extension of temporary relief
to traumatized populations to meeting their expectation
of an enabling environment for the attainment of
sustainable peace.

