Mr. ngowe (Botswana): The delegation of Botswana
has carefully studied document S/ 1995/631, which contains
a letter from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council and the report of Dr.
Pedro Nikken on the proposal to establish an international
commission of inquiry to investigate the facts surrounding
the October 1993 coup attempt in Burundi and the
massacres that followed it. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General and, through him, to Dr. Nikken for the
excellent report, which constitutes a solid basis for the
deliberations of the Council.

We would have wished that, where atrocities had
occurred such as those in Burundi in 1993, concerted
efforts had been made to deliver justice swiftly. Failure to
deliver justice on time has now resulted in a
self-perpetuating situation. We are deeply distressed by the
politically motivated killings that have become a feature of
life in Burundi. We fully share the frustration and deep
concern of many delegations which believe that the
creeping culture of killings which threatens to take root in
Burundi must be stopped and reversed.

It is a matter of paramount importance that the
Commission should be international, independent and
impartial if it is to be credible and successful. The report
before the Council underlines, for a good reason, the
importance of proceeding urgently but cautiously in
establishing the commission. The perpetrators of the coup
attempt of October 1993 and the massacres which
followed must be brought to justice. At the same time, we
must be careful in dealing with this matter lest we open
old wounds in our zeal to bring the perpetrators to book
and find ourselves in a much worse situation when the
commission leaves Burundi than when it came in. In
other words, the work of the commission should at the
end of the day help foster national reconciliation and
political stability in Burundi.

The draft resolution before the Council addresses the
pertinent issues contained in the report of the
Secretary-General. Needless to say, the cooperation of the
Government of Burundi is not only vital but the key to
the successful outcome of the work of the commission
and the follow-up mechanisms. It is the Government of
Burundi which will have to implement the
recommendations of the Commission. Operative
paragraph 1 (a) and (b) and operative paragraph 5 (a) to
(f) constitute the spirit and the very essence of the work
of the commission. It would be an exercise in futility if
the Security Council were to establish a commission
which could not work freely in Burundi nor have its
recommendations implemented. In this respect we urge
the Government of Burundi to extend its full cooperation
to the commission which it itself has invited.

My delegation is particularly attracted to what ideas
and recommendations on

"measures of a legal, political or administrative
nature, including measures requiring legislative or
constitutional reform..." (S/1995/724, para. 1 (b))

the commission might come up with, because we firmly
believe that such an approach is forward looking. Of
course such recommendations would be subject to the
acceptance or otherwise of the Burundi authorities. We,
however, find this idea attractive because in a highly
polarized society such as that of Burundi today it is only
institutions based on justice, the rule of law and
democracy that can guarantee protection of the rights of
all individuals irrespective of ethnic origin. If the
commission could come up with clear-cut
recommendations relating to these measures which could
be acceptable to the Burundi authorities, a cornerstone
would have been laid in establishing impartial institutions
that could address all issues or respond to all situations
without fear or favour. It is, after all, the duty and
responsibility of the people of Burundi themselves to
bring an end to the vicious cycle of impunity. This can
occur only if all citizens are fully aware that they will be

 

held personally responsible and accountable for their actions
in accordance with the law of the land and before their own
institutions and people. The international community can
only support and assist them in this difficult task. The draft
resolution before us crystallizes the revulsion of
international public opinion and the overwhelming
consensus on the need to eradicate impunity in Burundi. It
is time that the people of Burundi did everything possible
to assign impunity to its rightful place: the relics of their
past unhappy history. Nobody can do that for them.

In short, the Government and people of Burundi have
an opportunity to make a clean break with their dark past
and to create decent standards of behaviour and civilized
conduct with institutional guarantees. It is an opportunity
they cannot afford to miss.

