Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2385 (2017), which
renews the sanctions regime for Somalia and Eritrea,
as well as the mandate of the Monitoring Group on
Somalia and Eritrea associated with it.

With respect to Somalia, sanctions, specifically the
arms embargo, remain an important and constructive
tool in the face of the continued threat of Al-Shabaab
to the country and the ongoing presence of Da'esh. In
this regard, I would like once again to extend France's
condolences to the people and the Government of
Somalia for the horrific attack on 14 October in
Mogadishu. Furthermore, with respect to the arms
embargo, France underscores the fact that the stipulated
exemptions help to safeguard the Somali authorities'
capacity to access the equipment they need to defend
themselves against terrorist groups.

With respect to Eritrea, France is of the view that
the Security Council should adopt a balanced position
and especially a realistic position. For the fourth
consecutive year, the Monitoring Group has found no
conclusive evidence of Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab
in Somalia. This is a positive point. However, France
is of the view that it remains necessary for Eritrea
to cooperate with both the sanctions committee and
the Monitoring Group and, more broadly, with other
United Nations mechanisms prior to initiatives being
undertaken by the Security Council.

The Council demonstrated a degree of openness
last year with the adoption of resolution 2317 (2016)
and with the consultations held this spring. However,
the cancelling of the visit to Asmara by the Chair of the
sanctions committee in this context was disappointing.
Furthermore, Eritrea should commit to addressing
the issue of Djiboutian war prisoners once and for all
and to supporting active mediation with a view to a
resumption of dialogue with Djibouti and in general
there should be a cessation of any support for armed
groups in the region. The door remains open, but we
await tangible gestures of cooperation.

