After nine years of conflict, the onset of the pandemic makes the outlook for Syrians ever grimmer, as this virus has the potential of inflicting further loss of lives, especially in zones of high vulnerability. Tunisia, which has called for international and regional cooperation and solidarity, and coherent and resourced governance of the COVID-19 crisis, appreciates the efforts under way by the United Nations in Syria in this context, along with the ongoing provision of life-saving assistance cross-border and cross-line to those in need. COVID-19 prevention and response measures are being faced with multiple dilemmas and challenges that are putting the right to health and the right to life in jeopardy, particularly in north-west and north-east Syria. In this regard: ¢ Voluntary self-isolation is being challenged by forced displacement; * Social distancing is technically impeded by overwhelmed shelters; ¢ Hygiene is imperilled following the disruption of water supplies or destruction of water and sanitation facilities; ¢ Medical infrastructure is largely decimated and unable to deal adequately with a surge of the virus. Tunisia believes that, in the current circumstances, a set of measures that are respected by the relevant parties on the ground and implemented in good faith is critically needed to best cope with a potentially catastrophic outbreak of the disease in Syria. First and foremost, an immediate, sustained, nationwide ceasefire respected by all: ending hostilities should restore calm, thereby enabling better focus on mitigation of the spread of the disease. Tunisia echoes, in this regard, calls by the Secretary-General and Special Envoy Pedersen to silence the guns in Syria and beyond, and expresses hope that the 6 March ceasefire in Idlib will better hold over time. Second, full respect by all parties on the ground for their obligations under international humanitarian law and international human rights law must be upheld, most notably in north-west and north-east Syria. Safe, swift and unhindered cross-line humanitarian access, in particular for medical items, must be ensured by the relevant parties. Additionally, water must be kept flowing in the north-east. This is a lifeline for more than half million persons in the region, with their increased needs for sanitation and hygiene. Third, cross-border assistance in the north-west remains a lifeline for those in need in the area. Monitoring should be enhanced to prevent any risks. The sense of urgency brought about by the coronavirus pandemic warrants the urgent reinvigorating of the Syrian-led, Syrian owned political process, in accordance with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015) and under the auspices of the United Nations. The coronavirus crisis should act as a stimulus for the relevant parties to leave their fight behind, reunite their efforts and re-engage constructively and without preconditions in the Geneva talks of the Constitutional Committee. Tunisia welcomes additional confidence-building measures, including a large-scale release of detainees on humanitarian grounds, and calls on all parties to focus on saving the Syrian population. A lot of empathy with the Syrian people has been expressed by this Council over the past nine years. Syrians will be testing how this empathy is going to affect their lives in these exceptionally difficult circumstances. The Council should therefore rise to the moment and set the tone for joint and genuine international efforts. Its unity in this regard is paramount.
