Let me first thank the German presidency of the Security Council for convening today's timely and important meeting. We concur with what Ambassador Matjila of South Africa said yesterday at the Nelson Mandela commemoration, when he reminded us once again of Mandela's message of freedom. I also thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov and the other briefers - Mr. Daniel Levy and Mr. Khalil Shikaki - for their important and insightful contributions. We are gathered once again to express our great concern about the situation in Palestine and Israel's formal annexation plan. This concern is being loudly expressed by various members of the international community, including parliaments, civil society and The Elders. These voices are united in denouncing the Israeli plan, which would destroy the fundamentals of the peace process, inflict adverse impacts on millions of Palestinians and destabilize the region and beyond. The voice is clear, and the message is explicit. For now, the implementation of the formal annexation may seem to be on pause, but the occupation continues. Nonetheless, the Palestinian suffering is real and deep, and it is never on pause. On that note, let me focus my statement on three pertinent points. First, we urge Israel to abandon its annexation plan. The pause in formal annexation is not good enough. With the uncertainties surrounding the annexation plan, one thing remains certain: any form of annexation is illegal and harmful. Annexation is an act that flagrantly violates international law, including the Charter of the United Nations, the Fourth Geneva Conventions and various United Nations resolutions. Israel's continued pursuit of such a policy is a direct challenge to the very principle of the international rules-based order that the United Nations was founded on. Annexation is also harmful. It destroys any prospect for peace. It will put millions of Palestinian families in peril, further destabilize an already volatile region and create an unpredictable future, not only for the Palestinians but also for the Israelis. Mr. Levy reflected on five important elements, and I would stress that the current situation reflects the permanent denial of freedom, rights and equality for Palestinians. Secondly, we call for all parties to restart the negotiations process. The outpouring of support for the Palestinians and the condemnation of Israel's annexation plan need to be translated into action, because words without actions bear consequences and will neither prevent annexation nor end the occupation. We would like to echo Special Representative Mladenov's points on restarting diplomacy. Indonesia urges the international community to mobilize support for a resumption of credible multilateral negotiations, guided by the internationally agreed parameters, with the aim of implementing the two-State solution. We welcome every effort initiated by the Secretary-General, together with the Special Coordinator, towards engaging and opening talks and finding a fair and sustainable solution to the Israeli- Palestinian conflict. Thirdly, we call upon all parties to ensure access to humanitarian assistance. Our fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is far from over. The number of positive cases and casualties is surging, including in Israel and in the occupied Palestinian territories. The looming annexation and the COVID-19 pandemic add significant burdens to Palestinians, who have suffered decades of occupation, increasing demolitions and displacement, as well as constant deteriorating living conditions. The uncertainties surrounding the annexation do not change the fact that all parties need to ensure access to humanitarian assistance in the occupied Palestinian territories, as well as health services and the movement of goods and people. In this regard, I appeal for continued support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. It is now more important than ever for the international community to fully deliver on its commitment to supporting the Palestinian people and bring their suffering to an end. I would like to add what Mr. Mladenov mentioned in his briefing (annex 1), namely, the need for unity of effort, strength of purpose and a clear understanding of the multifaceted risk. The risk, peril and suffering of the people of Palestine and their children make the possibility of a grand future seem bleak. My country's support of the Palestinian cause has been consistent and an integral part of Indonesia's foreign policy. We will continue with our policy position until Palestine establishes a contiguous independent State within the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. We reiterate that it is the obligation and solemn duty of the Security Council not only to stop Israel's vicious annexation plan but to ensure that Palestinians receive the justice that is their right and for which they have suffered and waited for so long.
