Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (Spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation did not prevent the
adoption of resolution 2292 (2016). When we began
working on the draft, we had the impression that this
initiative was supposed to bring order to the illicit
trafficking in weapons in Libya. That is why our
delegation joined the discussions, intent on creating an
additional effective filter in international waters of the
Mediterranean.

But we were totally disappointed by the approaches
of some colleagues when working on the document.
When matters of principle had to be addressed, which
requires diplomacy, they instead relied on ultimatums.
Indeed, some partners decided that they wanted to
see the Brussels decision to broaden the mandate of
the military maritime Operation Sophia approved at
any price. Furthermore, we saw unilateral, one-sided
approaches put forward regarding the key issue of a
political settlement in Libya that did not abide by the
provisions of the Skhirat Agreement, which is the core
of the inter-Libyan agreement and the joint Vienna
Communique.

This is a very dangerous trend because, in this
context, the undermining consequences of NATO's
actions are being overlooked as even as they negatively
impact stability in the Mediterranean basin, North
Africa and in the Middle East as a whole. But we are still
disentangling the violations and broad interpretations
of resolution 1973 (2011) and the violations perpetrated
by NATO members in 2011.

Our decision not to hinder the adoption of the
resolution was based on two ideas. First, the resolution
sets forth procedures that do not go beyond the
framework of those agreed earlier by the Security
Council, namely, resolution 2182 (2014) on Somalia and
resolution 2240 (2015) on combating illegal migration.
We hope that approaches to obtaining the agreement
of flag State for planning inspections will indeed be
upheld in full, and not just in words. We are guided by
the clear provision of international maritime law that
only the flag State has jurisdiction in the high seas.
This reflects one ofthe most important freedoms of the
high seas - the freedom of navigation.

Secondly, we believe that requests for exemptions
from the arms embargo, in particular with respect to
the provision of lethal weapons, will be submitted for
review to the Sanctions Committee, which applies the
principle of consensus. We shall scrupulously follow
the content and review of such requests most carefully.
With respect to the provision of lethal weapons for the
needs of the Government of National Accord of Libya,
we would welcome the establishment of viable national
armed forces with a central chain of command. However,
such forces do not exist today in Libya. Nevertheless,
due to the position of some delegations, the resolution
does not stress the goal of establishing united security
forces, which is of critical importance to restoring the
unity of the country and its State institutions. Everyone
knows how the United Nations is working towards
these ends.

Creating united forces is reflected in the joint
Vienna Communique, of 16 May, and is enshrined in
resolution 2291 (2016), of 13 June, which extended
the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya. Without an effective central Government, a
loyal army and police, Libyans will be unable to deal
with all of the challenges ahead.

The position adopted by the Security Council as
it drew up today's resolution leads one to believe that
there is a hidden agenda behind the resolution that
will not unite long-suffering Libya. It is possible that
somebody is seeking a carte blanche so as to manage
the weapons flow into Libya as they see fit. Today,
that means helping some Libyans against others, which
makes a peaceful settlement to the crisis even more
remote. That is demonstrated, inter alia, by evidence
of a foreign military presence in Libya not approved
by the Security Council, as well as the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters into the country.

We need to find our position in this context. Are
we going to work together or not? Let us not forget that
there are forces in Libya that are loyal to General Haftar
which are effectively pushing back against the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other armed
terrorist groups. It is inadmissible to ignore this fact.

The general philosophy of the resolution leads
us to believe that the sponsors are, frankly, not being
very sincere in their fight against ISIL and the terrorist
presence in Libya. We underscore that we are fully
committed to the full implementation of the Skhirat
Agreement. However, we must remember that this
document plans for the approval of the composition of
the Government of National Accord and the Parliament
in Tobruk. Unfortuantely, in spite of our multiple
requests, that was not reflected in the resolution and
was simply ignored.

We call on all Member States to come together
in an effort to resolve regional conflicts and combat
terrorism and avoid trying to implement their own
agendas. We call on Member States to be united rather
than divided.

