Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I would like to thank
Ambassador Peter Wittig, Ambassador Hardeep Singh
Puri and Ambassador Baso Sangqu for their briefings
today. We appreciate the coordination among the three
Committees and their efforts in promoting greater
transparency and dialogue with Member States
concerning their respective areas of activities.

We share the view of the Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities that the threat of
terrorism is evolving, that the mechanism for the
implementation of sanctions measures needs to be
tailored to the threat, and that fair and clear procedures
have been introduced by the Ombudsperson, at least in
the de-listing processes, if not in all processes of the
Committee.

We are of the view that the evolving threat of
terrorism has taken new forms, such as individuals
radicalized by Internet and extremist websites in
various parts of the world. In this context, it is
important to ensure that the list of targeted individuals
sufficiently reflects the changing nature of the threat
posed by Al-Qaida. We agree that the list needs to be
accurate, up to date and user-friendly if the
implementation of the sanctions is to be successful. We
have noted the efforts of the 1267 Sanctions
Committee to bring clarity to its working methods and
to improve its guidelines. We hope that the Committee
shall continue to bring greater transparency to its work.

Pakistan appreciates the fact that the role of the
Ombudsperson has been enhanced by resolution 1989
(2011). Since November 2011, four individuals and 23
entities have been de-listed on the recommendation of
the Ombudsperson. We hope that a similar role will
also be devised for the Ombudsperson in the listing
processes. We also expect that the demonstration effect
of the Ombudsperson's positive contribution will lead
us to introduce this institution into all other sanctions
regimes in order to ensure due process and
transparency in their work.

We feel that visits to States by the Monitoring
Team and expert groups should be used to foster
cooperation by facilitating the provision of technical
assistance and promoting constructive dialogue. We
hope that post-visit briefings and reports shall continue
to be made on a regular basis. These have been useful
in enhancing the Committee's understanding of issues
and promoting transparency.

The biggest challenge to the sanctions regime,
however, comes from the increasing number of court
cases. For example, A number of listings have been
challenged in Pakistani courts. The decisions of
domestic and international courts and tribunals on the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime have not only gained
publicity but brought to the fore the legal challenges
faced by the sanctions regime. It remains to be seen
whether new changes will satisfy courts around the
world, because the legal community is more inclined to
welcome verifiable evidence that could be acceptable
in a court of law. The questions of due process and
effective remedy should therefore be at the heart of the
Committee's work.

Terrorism has become the bane of all countries
alike. Resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) have
no doubt created equal obligations for all of us.
Terrorism is not a localized or region-specific problem.
The modern manifestations and mutations of terrorism,
which range from the radicalization of individuals to
financing of well-known groups from various parts of
the world, endanger the peace and security of the entire
world. The measures to combat this problem should
therefore be based on equality of obligations and
international cooperation and coordination.

Global cooperation against terrorism has been
highly successful. Determined and collective action has
contained and disrupted the violent agendas of the
terrorists. The immediate and short-term anti-terrorist
response must, however, be accompanied by a clear,
long term strategy for success in ensuring an end to
this murderous tactic. Such a strategy must include the
following elements: addressing the root causes of
terrorism, including, inter alia, delegitimizing the
terrorist's cause; we must do more to address issues
such as the denial of the right to self-determination,
military intervention, and the use of force; addressing
broader and structural issues, including political and
economic injustices; and ensuring that counter-
terrorism activities are in full conformity with
international law and respect the sovereignty of States
and fundamental human rights.

We support the Counter-Terrorism Committee's
efforts to promote and facilitate the implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We have
noted the global survey of the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005). The issue of the prohibition of
incitement to commit terrorist acts is very complex. On
the one hand is the imperative of preventing incitement
to terrorist acts, while, on the other is the challenge of
ensuring freedom of expression, and hence the need to
maintain the delicate balance. Besides, all efforts to
counter incitement must be undertaken in the light of
the agreed principle that terrorism and extremism
cannot and should not be associated with any religion,
race, ethnicity, faith, value system, culture or society.

The delegation of Pakistan supports the activities
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), particularly in the area of
capacity-building. CTED's regional workshops in Asia
and Africa on specific topics will go a long way
towards enhancing the capacities of States to
effectively counter terrorism. Pakistan has been
regularly participating in regional workshops organized
by CTED. Pakistan participated in the fifth regional
workshop in New Delhi in March 2012. We are
planning to hold the sixth regional workshop for police
officers, prosecutors and judges in South Asia on
counter-terrorism, in Islamabad later this year.

Pakistan shares the global concerns over the
possibility of non-State actors acquiring weapons and
materials of mass destruction, as well as their means of
delivery. At the national level, we have undertaken
several legislative, organizational and administrative
measures to address those potential challenges. We
have filed four comprehensive reports on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The 1540
Committee and the experts assisting it play an
important and complementary role to the established
treaty regimes and international organizations in the
area of weapons of mass destruction. We will continue
to support all international efforts to promote fair and
equitable solutions to non-proliferation and
disarmament challenges.

Coordination and cooperation among experts of
the three Committees is a useful mechanism to assist
Member States in the implementation of Security
Council resolutions. In undertaking those efforts, the
Committees and their respective experts work towards
the shared objective of preventing terrorist activities
and addressing illicit trafficking in weapons or
materials of mass destruction and the means to deliver
them. There are areas of synergy in their work, such as
supporting States in building their capacity, law
enforcement and border controls. Yet the Committees
have distinct mandates and focus. This differentiated
nature of mandate and focus needs to be adhered to.
The duplication and overlap of activities and mandate
is best avoided.

The composition of experts in the Committees
needs rationalization and reform. With the shift in the
core area of work of these Committees from
establishing frameworks to implementation,
particularly through assistance and capacity-building, it
would be prudent to diversify the pool of experts from
diverse geographic areas. Such an effort would also
help advance an even better level of understanding and
ownership of those important issues to a large number
of Member States.

We value the information exchange among the
experts and their efforts to save costs by representing
alternatively at outreach events and joint meetings
within their respective mandates. We look forward to
receiving their joint feedback and assessment on areas
of overlap and synergies in their work, mandate and
activities.

