Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his comprehensive and detailed briefing.

Over the past two weeks, the Council has conducted
two urgent series of consultations on the crises in Gaza
and Jerusalem. The crises are localized, but they are
not local. Each threatens to unleash a new escalation of
violence in Israel and Palestine, as well as beyond the
region. These acute crises only confirm the warning
that many of us have regularly delivered to the Council.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict will not resolve itself.
Let us be fully aware of the fact that the solution to
the conflict does not lie in the principal actors acting
on autopilot, on the basis of outdated software, nor
on delusional shorcuts. There is no alternative to the
difficult path to peace based on respect and negotiations.

Time does not make the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
less dangerous. The rise in regional crises has neither
normalized nor marginalized it. On the contrary, the
lack of a solution to the conflict, which is particularly
serious in and of itself, constitutes an ongoing threat to
international security. Given its gravity, its symbolic
dimension and its place in the collective imagination
of the parties involved, the impact of this unresolved
conflict has structural dimensions and goes beyond the
borders of Israel and the Palestinian territories. Any
escalation in the conflict carries with it uncontrolled
regional destabilization. For that reason, we cannot
resign ourselves to a false status quo that conceals a
daily regression, both on the ground and in peoples'
minds. The end of the current path is clear. The idea of
a two-State solution will disappear like a mirage in the
desert. That would represent a leap into the unknown
and the risk of a worst-case scenario.

The crisis in Jerusalem shows that a surge in
violence can occur at any time in the region and
beyond, given the spiritual, religious and symbolic
weight of the Temple Mount. In the light of the alarming
rise in tensions and violence in recent days, France
has expressed its extreme concern and stressed the
imperative for a return to calm. In that regard, we have
taken note of the removal of the metal detectors, which
is an encouraging signal. We hope that it will open the
way to a lasting settlement of the situation. France also
recalls that such appeasement requires respect for the
historical status quo of 1967 and cooperation among the
Israeli, Jordanian and Palestinian parties. We continue
to monitor the situation with the utmost attention
and reiterate our call for the utmost restraint. As
Mr. Mladenov rightly stressed, there is a need to avoid
transforming the political conflict, which can and must
be subject to agreement and compromise, into a religious
conflict that would make any compromise impossible.

In Gaza, the continuing humanitarian crisis for
2 million Palestinians has suddenly deteriorated due to
cuts to the electricity supply, that have lasted more than
three months. The inhabitants of Gaza live today with
two to three hours of electricity per day on average.
The energy crisis is paralysing medical, sanitary and
water treatment infrastructure. It strikes the weakest in
Gaza, not the leaders of Hamas. If nothing is done, the
ongoing tensions could lead to a new deadly conflict of
the sort seen three times in the Gaza Strip in less than
a decade. That would be unacceptable. Israel must fully
assume its responsibilities as the occupying Power by,
inter alia, alleviating restrictions on the movement of
goods and persons to and from Gaza. It is also critical
that the Palestinians reach a reconciliation agreement.
We know that there can be no viable Palestinian State
without Palestinian unity, based on the principle of the
two-State solution. More critically, a lasting political
solution must be found for Gaza, predicated on the
lifting of the blockade and robust security guarantees
for Israel.

The crisis calls for an urgent response, both
from the parties involved and from the international
community. But beyond that immediate demand, we
must restore the prospects for a just peace, in which
Palestinians and Israelis are ever less inclined to
believe. Violence is proliferating in the current political
vacuum, and that violence is unacceptable. The recent
deaths of 10 people in attacks and clashes in Jerusalem
and the Palestinian territories serve as a new tragic
illustration of that. We condemn all violence, and the
well-known, horrendous murders of three members of
an Israeli family in a settlement in the West Bank, must
be firmly repudiated.

In that context, it is essential to return to the
negotiating table. Such negotiations are of course
incumbent on the parties, but their outcome must
not be pre-empted by faits accomplis. Settlement-
building, which is illegal under international law,
directly threatens the preservation of the two-State
solution on the ground and the prospect for a fair and
lasting peace for both the Palestinians and the Israelis.
The announcement at the beginning of the month of
the construction of 1,500 new housing units in East
Jerusalem is unprecedented. It is a very bad sign and
will only fuel tensions on the ground.

It is therefore necessary to provide a genuine
political horizon to both Israelis and Palestinians.
France welcomes and encourages all initiatives
undertaken to that end, in particular by the United
States. It also recalls the fact that all attempts to
partially address the conflict have failed. Economic
development and security arrangements can make sense
only in the context of a comprehensive agreement.
The path to achieve that is not easy; sacrifices will be
required on both sides. However, there is no alternative
to internationally agreed parameters: two States living
in peace and security along secure and recognized
borders, based on the 1967 lines, with mutually agreed-
upon territorial exchanges, with Jerusalem as the
capital of the two States.

France is a friend of both Palestinians and Israelis.
That is why we will speak truth and steadfastly call
for a return to the negotiation table. We will never
throw in the towel. Faced with the temptation to put
off addressing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict or to
lose sight of the need for a final status agreement, it
is essential to reaffirm the two-State framework. As
President of the Republic, Mr. Emmanuel Macron,
said to the Palestinian President and to the Israeli
Prime Minister, whom he hosted in Paris in recent
weeks, France will remain firmly committed to this
issue and will fully contribute to the efforts, which
are more necessary than ever, to restore a credible and
dynamic policy.

