Mr. Lacroix: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the joint African Union-United Nations
high-level visit to South Sudan, which we undertook
from 7 to 9 October. That was the first joint visit that
also included UN-Women and focused on strengthening
the partnership between our two institutions to achieve
inclusive and gender-responsive peace and security in
South Sudan. The African Union (AU) was represented
by its Commissioner for Peace and Security, my friend
and colleague Ambassador Sma'il Chergui; former
Vice-President of Uganda, member of the Panel of the
Wise and co-Chair of the Network of African Women in
Conflict Prevention and Mediation, or FemWise-Africa,
Dr. Specioza Kazibwe; and the Executive Director of
UN-Women, my colleague Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka.
I represented the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

As the Council knows, the revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan had just been signed on 12 September,
and while it is pivotal to the peace process, scepticism
about its ability to deliver a sustainable peace this
time around remains a concern. Our objective was to
express support for the revitalized peace agreement
and to encourage its full and timely implementation,
while emphasizing the importance of the representation
and meaningful participation of women in the peace
process and the need for the Government to ensure
a protective environment for civilians, in particular
women and girls.

I wish to again commend the mediation efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), which was supported by the African Union and
international partners and was critical in securing the
revitalized agreement. The agreement provides a road
map for an inclusive political settlement of the conflict,
but its signature is only the first step in a process that
still has many challenges ahead. The pre-transitional
period is critical and will require the South Sudanese
leaders to assume their responsibilities and pave the
way for the full implementation of the agreement.
Honouring the provisions for women, in particular the
guarantee of their 35 per cent representation across
the executive arm, the IGAD Council of Ministers and
the pre-transitional institutions will be of particular
importance to achieving an inclusive and durable peace.

Our consultations in the country were telling in that
regard. While hopeful, the confidence of the women
we spoke to in Bentiu - both from the town and the
protection-of-civilians site - was low. They noted
that, despite the agreement, their families were still
falling victim to the violence. They stressed that this
is not their war. They appealed to us and their leaders
not to forget them, to create a protective environment
and to ensure that women are included as key actors in
the full implementation of the agreement. The women
representatives from civil society and the Government
in Juba echoed similar sentiments and stressed the
need to respect the cessation of hostilities and to
prioritize women's engagement in monitoring the quota
implementation. They also called on the African Union
and the United Nations to use all avenues to encourage
their leaders to implement the agreement. It is
imperative that women be represented in the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism, the Strategic Defence and Security Review
Board and the transitional justice and reconciliation
mechanisms, as stipulated in the agreement. At the
local level, mechanisms enabling their voices to be
heard would also be critical.

Turning to developments in South Sudan, although
slow, the parties are taking initial steps towards the
implementation of the agreement. Since our visit on
15 October, the transitional national legislature has
ratified the revitalized agreement, paving the way for
its incorporation into the Transitional Constitution. On
21 October, the National Pre-Transitional Committee
held its first meeting to begin coordinating activities
for the pre-transitional period. The participation of
Mr. Riek Machar and other opposition leaders in the
peace celebrations on31 Octoberin Juba, PresidentKiir's
apology to the people of South Sudan for the immense
suffering exacted by the conflict, and the release
of political prisoners - including two high-profile
political opposition detainees - are all positive gestures
towards confidence-building and reconciliation.

During the peace celebrations, President Kiir and
Riek Machar had a face-to-face meeting that served
as a confidence-building event in itself and paved the
way for the National Pre-Transitional Committee and
the reconstituted National Constitutional Amendment
Committee to hold meetings in Juba. To that end, on
5 November the National Constitutional Amendment
Committee drafted a constitutional amendment bill,
incorporating the agreement into the 2011 Transitional
Constitution of South Sudan. In addition, the National
Pre-Transitional Committee convened its second
meeting on 7 November.

We have also observed some specific localized
confidence-building measures in recent weeks between
the South Sudan People's Defence Forces - formerly
the Sudan People's Liberation Army - and the Sudan
People's Liberation Army in Opposition (SPLA-IO),
indicating some efforts to open lines of communication.
The first was a meeting between the two sides in Pagak,
Upper Nile, in October, at which the South Sudan
People's Defence Forces and SPLA-IO negotiated free
movement in the town. Over the past two weeks, there
have been reports of similar discussions in multiple
locations across Unity, Jonglei, Western Bahr el-
Ghazal, Eastern Equatoria and Central Equatoria. We
are hopeful that those initial signs of goodwill are a
demonstration of a stronger commitment to the current
process than that which was seen in 2015.

Notwithstanding those developments, I must
continue to stress that there can be no viable or
sustainable peace unless the parties adhere to a
permanent ceasefire, silence the guns, disengage forces
and include women as key players. While significantly
reduced, there are still continued reports of fighting
between the South Sudan People's Defence Forces
and opposition forces, and between the SPLA-IO and
various break-away factions of the opposition groups in
Central Equatoria. Sporadic clashes have also occurred
between the South Sudan People's Defence Forces and
SPLA-IO in various areas of southern Unity, and road
ambushes and attacks between the two groups have
continued in the Baggari area of Western Bahr el-
Ghazal.

Those incidents, together with the continuing
intercommunal violence in parts of Jonglei and Lakes,
continue to take a toll on civilians and exacerbate
displacement and humanitarian needs. Reports of
recruitment, including of children, by the parties in
several parts of the country also betray our confidence
in the parties to implement the agreement in full. The
country's leaders and the parties will have to demonstrate
their genuine commitment to making difficult decisions
and compromises for its effective implementation. In
that respect, I cannot overemphasize the crucial role of
the Security Council, the African Union, IGAD and the
region to continue to hold the parties accountable and
ensure that they abide by their obligations under the
Agreement. It is clear that the solution to the conflict
in South Sudan can only be political and not through
military action.

The United Nations stands ready as a continued
partner of peace in supporting South Sudan. The
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
will continue to provide support, performing tasks
within the bounds of its mandate. With respect to any
possible evolution of the UNMISS mandate, including
the Regional Protection Force, it will ultimately be for
the Security Council to decide. However, the following
principles would need to be applied: first, a continuing
priority of the protection of civilians in the mandated
tasks of UNMISS; secondly, the need to preserve a
single peacekeeping force with one unified command
and control structure; and thirdly, that any addition to
the force would have to be carried out consistent with the
principles of peacekeeping and the standards to which
we hold all troop- and police-contributing countries.

We encouraged the parties, as well as IGAD, to
engage with us and with Security Council members
on these matters. In this vein, during the IGAD chiefs
of defence staff/forces meeting held on 22 October
in Khartoum, they mandated an assessment team
to explore the possible addition of contingents from
countries in the region to the Regional Protection Force.
We understand that the assessment team concluded its
one-week visit to South Sudan on 10 November.

Consolidating this hard-won peace will be our
foremost challenge in the weeks and months ahead, and
time will be our greatest enemy. We are all too familiar
with the consequences of delayed implementation
timelines or realization of peace dividends for the
people of South Sudan, who have suffered for far
too long.

During our visit, our advice to the authorities
was to concretely demonstrate, without delay, their
commitment to working together with all stakeholders
to develop a detailed plan of action to implement the
various aspects of the agreement, including security. A
demonstration of such commitment would encourage
international partners to play their role. In this regard,
we stand ready to engage with the African Union, IGAD
and our subregional partners, including with the AU-
led African Women Leaders Network and FemWise, to
continue to support the implementation of an inclusive
and durable peace in South Sudan.

