The President (spoke in Arabic): As the
representative of China was the last speaker on the list,
I will make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, which is an
explanation of Syria's position on resolution 1500
(2003).

The Syrian Arab Republic abstained in the vote
on the resolution just adopted by the Council. We did
so to reflect the Arab position endorsed by the Foreign
Ministers of Arab States members of the Arab follow-
up committee that met in Cairo on 5 August 2003 on
the question of fraternal Iraq, and in keeping with
Syria's responsibility as the Arab representative on the
Security Council. Syria and all Arab States support the
need to end the occupation of Iraq and to form a
legitimate national Iraqi Government, as soon as
possible and within a clear and specific time frame,
based on equal rights and justice for all Iraqi citizens
and free of ethnic, gender or religious discrimination,
so that the world will be able to deal with a legitimate
Iraqi Government.

Today Syria reiterates to the Council its support
for the position adopted by the Foreign Ministers of
Arab States members of the follow-up committee, who
stressed that the formation of the interim Governing
Council of Iraq is a beginning that will gain credibility
from the fact that it is paving the way for the formation
of a national Government that represents the full
spectrum of Iraqi society and is capable of fulfilling the
aspirations of the Iraqi people. Hence, only the Iraqi
people can lend legitimacy to the Governing Council.

Syria reaffirms its commitment to support the
central role of the United Nations in Iraq, be it terms of
the political process or reconstruction. We also support
the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative in Iraq.

We regret that the sponsors of the draft resolution
did not take into account a number of important
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report in document S/2003/715, of 17 July 2003, which
were Widely supported by members of the Council. We
deeply regret that the consultation exercise, which was
conducted outside of Security Council Chamber in a
format that lacked transparency, did not include the
input of rotating members of the Council, including
Syria, in the substantive part of the draft resolution.
That resulted in the sponsors maintaining the text and
not accepting proposals for logical amendments, which
narrowed the options available to us and made the text
available to us on a "take it or leave it basis".

Syria hopes that in future discussions and
resolutions pertaining to Iraq, the Security Council will
comprehensively address all aspects constituting the
genuine concerns of the brotherly people of Iraq. We
also hope that the Council will work to bring about a
resolution of all such concerns in order to ensure the
end of occupation and to enable the people of Iraq to
restore national sovereignty over their territory and, as
soon as possible, to establish an elected national
Government that enjoys the support of the Iraqi people
and is recognized by the international community.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 2.20 p.m.
