Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to express my thanks for the Syrian presidency of
the Security Council this month. I commend you, Sir,
for your serious and effective work, as well as
Ambassador Mekdad and the entire Syrian delegation.
On a sadly personal note, I very much regret your
imminent transfer to Geneva. While you will remain
within the United Nations, working on behalf of Syria
and the Organization in an important post, we will
sorely miss your candour, earnest approach and skills.
Geneva's gain is New York's loss, and I regret that.

The Brahimi report was issued three years ago. It
considerably improved the United Nations capacity to
address the first of the charges established by the
Charter: the maintenance of international peace and
security. Today, the Organization has greater resources
for planning, deploying and managing peace operations
and can do so more professionally, promptly and,
undoubtedly, effectively. Much remains to be done, but
the advances that have been made in only three years
are certainly remarkable.

Very little can be said that is not already in the
Brahimi report, but today's meeting offers an excellent
opportunity to underscore certain fundamental points.

First, it is important that work in the conception,
design and preparation of a mission be coordinated and
effective, because without proper planning a mission
cannot succeed and the lives of the local population
and of international personnel are put at risk. Proper
planning means awareness of developments on the
ground. The Secretariat needs enhanced capacity to
compile and analyse existing information, as well as
the ability to transmit it in a coherent manner to
decision-making bodies, this Council in particular, so
that the purpose and objectives of the operation may be
clearly understood. In this regard, it remains necessary
for the Council to strive to ensure that the mandates it
adopts are clear, convincing and backed by adequate
resources.

Secondly, once the concept and planning have
been appropriately developed, United Nations missions
must be able to deploy rapidly. We are aware of the
serious and significant efforts being made by the
Secretariat to generate a genuine rapid-deployment
capacity.

Thirdly, the Secretary-General has demonstrated
his ability to select the appropriate competent people to
manage missions in the field. The appointment of
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello in Iraq was undoubtedly the
best such example. This is critical. Management in the
field must make the crucial decisions that ensure a
mission's success day after day.

Fourthly, a peace mission nowadays is of
necessity multidisciplinary. In its mandates the Council
must incorporate fundamental elements to ensure that
peace missions are effective and that they can really
make a contribution to securing peace in a country or a
region. Elements such as disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, mine clearance, electoral assistance,
promotion of human rights, gender issues - the presence
and the role of women are often overlooked - all these
must of necessity be included in these mandates.

Fifthly, those elements are in themselves an
advance, or, better, a bridge towards what will have to
be the future of peace-building activities. Although
they are tasks that often fall to other funds or
programmes, the Council should not fail to ensure that
the transition is sufficiently smooth so as to make
possible an effective follow-up. A peacekeeping
mission that transfers its activities smoothly to the
peace-building operations coming afterwards is in itself
a success.

Lastly, I would like to refer to the question of the
continuum established in the Brahimi report. I refer to
conflict prevention. Effective prevention of armed
conflicts will very often make it unnecessary for the
United Nations to commit itself to the maintenance of
peace and security. Of course, the best way to resolve a
conflict is to prevent it from arising. The General
Assembly is making progress in equipping the
Organization with serious capacity in this regard. The
Council can only welcome that.

