The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

First, I would like to thank the Israeli Ambassador
for responding to the question that I put to him in
our most recent meeting (see S/PV.8489). I listened
very carefully to the four pillars that he outlined as a
basis of Israeli policy. I also positively noted that he
included international law among them. I think that
is very important. I noted a certain selection among
international law. He heard our British colleague
speaking with regard to the Balfour Declaration, I also
missed referrals to resolutions 478 (1980), 497 (1981)
and, in particular, 2334 (2016), which is the most recent
and a very comprehensive resolution. With regard to
what the resolution says about settlements and so on, I
refer to what my French colleague has said previously.
But I would also remind the Israeli and Palestinian
representative that resolution 2334 (2016) condemns all
acts of terrorism, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric
and calls for such acts to stop.

Like others, I would like to recommit and state that
Germany supports a negotiated two-State solution and
is against any annexation. At the same time, Germany
is committed to Israel's security as a democratic Jewish
State. I noted that democracy was not mentioned among
the four pillars.

I share my Indonesian colleague's frustration
about the inaction of the Council. Also following our
last meeting, I took up the suggestion of the Israeli
Ambassador to have a closed meeting of the Security
Council with the representatives of Palestine and Israel.
I was not able to accomplish that. While it was not much
of an issue with regard to substance, I was not able to
reach agreement on the formalities for such a meeting.

Given the lack of progress that we have achieved,
we took the initiative to try to break out of the ritual
repetition of known positions. We wanted to put a
glimmer of hope into the Chamber, and we invited
representatives of EcoPeace Middle East to present
what they are doing in a political landscape that
undermines the prospect of a two-State solution and
where developments contribute to the entrenchment of
a one-State reality.

Let me briefly return to the briefing by the
Co-Directors of EcoPeace Middle East. I thoroughly
enjoyed what they said and they demonstrated that
cooperation was possible. I thank them for their
engagement and for the fact that, as civil society, they
can play a very important role in building trust and
confidence, including regarding the mayors jumping
into the Jordan river. That trust that they have built is a
prerequisite for a solution that is based on negotiations
and cooperation, which we desperately need.

The second point that I wanted to make is that water
is not an esoteric issue. It is part of the Oslo Accords
and a final-status issue.

Let me conclude with a general point. Humanitarian,
resource and water issues are key insofar as they have
implications for security. Germany will continue to have
the relationship between climate change and security
on its agenda. I thank the briefers again in that regard.

On the topic of climate change, I would also add my
voice to those who expressed their condolences to the
victims of the terrible disaster that we have seen for the
second time in Mozambique.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Kiyoto
Tsuji, Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Japan.

