Judge Meron: I would like first to correct one of
my earlier comments. Since we have just started the
Limaj case at The Hague, there have in the past few
days been not four, but five, ongoing trials, in addition
to the two cases that are in the judgement-writing
stage.

I will begin by responding to the questions put by
the representative of the Philippines. He asked why the
financial problem exists and why the financial freeze
continues. The freeze imposed by the Secretariat in, I
believe, early May 2004, resulted from the fact that
many countries - far too many countries - were in
arrears with regard to their past and current budget
obligations to the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.

During the past few weeks I have spent a lot of
my time approaching individual Governments and
urging them to pay their debts as soon as possible -
right away, if possible. That fund-raising campaign has
met with significant success. We have also approached
smaller countries, which owe less money to the
Tribunal but whose support is, I think, as important
morally and politically as that of the major
contributors. I am happy to report that in terms of
arrears, the financial situation of the Tribunal today is
better than it was in, say, mid-November one year ago.

I believe that we have reached a stage at which
continuing the freeze would cause havoc in the very
efficient and very intensive work that we are trying to
accomplish in the Tribunal. It would result in much
greater expense. The leadership of my Tribunal - the
Prosecutor, the Registrar and I - have appealed to the
Secretary-General to reconsider the freeze. Given the
better financial situation, I hope that the freeze will
be - as it should be - lifted soon.

I was asked by the representative of the
Philippines when we can expect cases of intermediate
or low-level defendants to be transferred to the area.
As I mentioned earlier, six motions presented by the
Prosecutor are already before the Trial Chamber, and
she told us today that she will be presenting additional
motions. Under our rules of procedure, the
determination as to whether a case should be sent on
for trial to competent national jurisdictions is in the
hands of the Trial Chamber. I would prefer not to
second-guess my judges, but I would like to say that I
am quite hopeful that in early 2005 we will see some
movement of cases - certainly to the Sarajevo special
chamber, but not only there. So we are really on track.
The Trial Chamber is also considering those motions
that have been submitted, and I am sure we will,
equally expeditiously, consider motions to be
submitted in the future.

The representative of Spain asked what we could
do with regard to ad litem judges in order to avoid
disruptions to trials. As the Council knows, the
mandate of all of the ad litem judges will expire in
June 2005. As I mentioned in my earlier remarks today,
I have already written to the Legal Counsel of the
Secretary-General asking him to do what is necessary
in order to advance elections of a new group - a new
slate - of ad litem judges as early as possible in 2005.
I am confident that the Legal Counsel will consider
that request soon.

In order to avoid disruptions, the mandates of
individual ad litem judges who will be involved in
trials that will not have been completed by June 2005
will also need to be extended, and the ICTY will be
approaching the Security Council in due course to
request extensions for individual judges.

I would like to draw the attention of the Council
to one policy question that is not for the judges but for
the Council to decide on. This relates to whether it
would not be wise to lift the ban that exists under the
current statute on the re-election of ad litem judges.
That is a question of policy that is for the Council to
consider.

Spain also asked for more information regarding
States which have concluded - or with which we are
in contact concerning - additional agreements on the
enforcement of sentences. We now have 10 agreements
of that kind with 10 countries. But as the number of
people convicted grows as our docket becomes more
and more impressive, we need more States to conclude
such agreements with us. In this context, we also need
more States to conclude agreements with us on the
relocation of witnesses. Protection is needed because
of the testimony given - sometimes very bravely -
during our proceedings.

Our Registrar is therefore very actively involved
in trying to enlarge the circle of States with Whom we
have agreements, and I would like to make a personal
appeal to Governments to be sympathetic towards
those requests and approaches, because we need that. It
was the representative of Spain who asked that
question, and I would like particularly to salute Spain
not only for having such an agreement with us, but for
the fact that four convicted persons are now serving
their sentences in Spain. We understand the cost; we
understand the burden; we understand the sacrifice;
and we are extremely grateful.

France made the point that the transfer of cases to
national jurisdictions should occur only where we can
expect fair trials - trials without intimidation or
ethnic or religious bias. I would like to assure the
Government of France that the leadership of the
Tribunal fully shares those views. We have rules of
procedure that in fact make the transfer of cases to a
particular jurisdiction dependent upon fairness and due
process.

I would now like to conclude by making a few
general comments. First, allow me to say how grateful
I am to the permanent members and to the entire
Security Council for the overarching message of
support for the work we are now doing to try to end
impunity, establish the principle of international
criminal justice in a very concrete and credible way,
and foster justice and reconciliation in the former
Yugoslavia.

I also heard comments suggesting that the
completion strategy should not be an excuse to create
an impunity gap. That is very much our belief as well.
We are gratified by the acknowledgement of so many
members of the Council of the more efficient measures
we have adopted and the reforms we have and are
continuing to undertake in order to make trials as
efficient and as cost-effective as possible, while
ensuring that they respect human rights and
international due process.

I am also very grateful to all the members of the
Council for the concern they have expressed about the
continuing freeze that has been imposed upon us, the
continuation of which can only be disruptive to the
goals of the Security Council and the prospects for the
completion strategy.

Finally, with regard to the Security Council's
Working Group to review the operation of the
Tribunals, which was mentioned by Germany and
Spain, I have had the pleasure of working with the
Group twice and I very much look forward to working
with it in the future. I am sure that I speak on behalf of
the Prosecutor and the Registrar when I say that the
Group would be very welcome to hold its meetings in
The Hague.

