Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We, too, begin by thanking
the Secretary-General for his insightful remarks this
morning. We also appreciated the focused briefings
this morning of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, and Mr. Mubin Shaikh. We
commend Ms. Gamba's efforts and determination to
protect innocent children caught up in armed conflict.

As highlighted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/821) and his briefing earlier this morning,
children continue to be killed, maimed, abducted and
subjected to sexual violence in conflict situations.
Unfortunately, that disturbing trend shows no
sign of abating. Denial of humanitarian access to
refugees fleeing conflicts makes matters worse. Just
yesterday, a UNICEF report warned that two thirds
of unaccompanied refugees and migrant children in
Greece were in need of proper care.
Over the past two decades, the United Nations has
taken a number of initiatives, including "Children,
not soldiers" - a campaign that emphasizes priority
activities, road maps, benchmarks, deadlines and
review. Such efforts have contributed to the emergence
of a global consensus that no circumstances justify the
recruitment and use of children in conflict. Of course,
that does not mean that our work is done. On the
contrary, the plight and suffering of children in armed
conflict remains an issue of deep concern. A multitude
of prolonged and increasingly complex conflicts
continue to have a devastating impact on children.
In a number of situations, a shocking disregard for
international law is in evidence and impunity prevails.

Let me make three specific points in that
regard. First, the strengthening of compliance and
accountability mechanisms and their application to all
parties, conflict States and non-State armed groups is
essential to stopping violations of children's rights and
preventing their recurrence. Secondly, the perpetrators
of violence against children need to be identified and
brought to justice through national judicial systems and,
wherever applicable, international justice mechanisms.
The establishment of appropriate legal frameworks
with investigative and prosecutorial capacities
remains central for that purpose. Above all, the goal of
protecting lives is intrinsically linked with the goal of
preventing conflict. It is therefore essential that the root
causes of conflict be addressed and inclusive political
solutions found.

My Government remains fully alive to its
commitment in that regard. Pakistan was one of the
earliest signatories to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography. In
November 2016, Pakistan also ratified the Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. We have established a national commission
for child welfare and development, which coordinates,
monitors and facilitates the implementation of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols. The National Assembly also approved a 2017
bill on a national commission on the rights of the child,
which will work to promote, protect and monitor the
rights of children.

Pakistan supports the mandate of the Special
Representative, which it believes cannot afford
accretion. The legal parameters of the mandate,
as provided for by the relevant Security Council
resolutions, must be respected. In that context, my
delegation wishes to state for the record that references
to Pakistan in the Secretary-General's report are not
within the purview of its established mandate. We hope
that this principle will be kept in mind in future.

