Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this open debate, which gives
an opportunity to States Members of the United
Nations to participate in the deliberations on the work
of the three counter-terrorism-related Committees.

I would like to thank the Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), Ambassador Heller, for the joint statement, as
well as Ambassador Apakan and Ambassador Mayr-
Harting, the Chairmen of the two Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1267 (1999), respectively, for the work of their
Committees and the respective expert groups.

The activities of the three Committees are
valuable to the work of the Security Council.
Coordination in counter-terrorism-related efforts is
important, and we therefore commend the Committees
for developing common strategies and organizing joint

workshops and country visits. These activities create a
synergy that is key to improving areas of
implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions. We are encouraged that this coordination
and cooperation have provided Member States with
information, thus enabling a clear understanding of the
peculiar situations that Member States face.

Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-State actors are continuous
threats to international peace and security. The threat
from terrorism, including from nuclear, chemical,
biological and other weapons, is real. Al-Qaida, the
Taliban and other groups continue to pose a serious
threat. We believe that the recent events in New York
City in the United States of America attest to this. This
is a reminder of the need for a common strategic
approach to counter-terrorism.

The consolidated list remains a critical tool for
the United Nations as a counter-terrorism measure.

We commend the 1267 Al-Qaida Committee for
having concluded the first phase of its review of 488 of
the names on the consolidated list. We support efforts
to have the review of the other names conducted in
good time.

We welcome the new standard forms posted on
the website that provide procedures for the inclusion of
individuals and entities on the consolidated lists.

Uganda also welcomes the establishment of the
office of the ombudsperson. We believe that it will
offer individuals and entities subject to sanctions
measures an opportunity to present their cases to an
independent body.

We commend the 1540 Committee for the work
done in the comprehensive review. The
recommendations on cooperation with international,
regional and multilateral institutions, and the capacity to
gather information on the status of implementation are
critical to the overall mandate of the 1540 Committee.

We commend the Committees and their
respective expert groups for their outreach activities.
These outreach activities are useful in promoting
dialogue with Member State and facilitating the
sharing of additional information with the Committees.
Uganda reiterates the importance of closer
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in counter-terrorism activities. To this
end, we welcome the visit by the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee to the African Union in
March. We are convinced that cooperation between the
United Nations and other international and regional
organizations is an essential and necessary approach to
developing more effective counter-terrorism measures.

We have noted with concern in recent times the
link between the illegal trade in drugs and terrorism. In
that respect, we salute the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and Interpol for their role
in reinforcing global counter-terrorism efforts.

One of the greatest challenges of our times is how
to successfully prosecute terrorism suspects. It is
imperative that Member States strengthen law
enforcement and domestic security in their
jurisdictions. There is a need to strengthen cross-
cutting regional criminal justice strategies and action
plans to cover such issues as witness protection,
extradition, capacity-building in forensic science and
suppression of terrorism financing.

We recognize that most Member States have
inadequate capacity to confront these terrorist
activities. These are gaps that need to be addressed
collectively. In this regard, we are encouraged by the
efforts of the expert groups and the Monitoring Team
in identifying and facilitating the delivery of necessary
technical assistance to Member States. The planned
seminar on bringing terrorists to justice, to be held in
mid-July in New York, is a welcome development. We
are encouraged that the seminar will target national
counter-terrorism prosecutors in regard to their
respective jurisdictions.

Finally, we commend the Committees and their
respective expert groups for their work on counter-
terrorism, which continues to contribute to efforts to
secure a peaceful and secure world.

