Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting.

It is important that the Council again take up the
situation in Venezuela in the light of recent events.
In particular, we deplore and are concerned about the
deteriorating conditions in the country, which have
exacerbated the humanitarian crisis affecting millions
of Venezuelans and which continues to drive many
of them to leave their homeland in pursuit of better
livelihood opportunities.
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, 11.7 per cent of Venezuela's
population are undernourished. The proportion of
people living in poverty has also increased dramatically
in recent years. Every day, millions of Venezuelans face
unprecedented challenges in obtaining supplies and
accessing basic services such as health care, medicines,
vaccines, water, electricity and education. Diseases
such as tuberculosis, diphtheria, measles and malaria
have re-emerged throughout the country.

In recent weeks, the situation has been further
complicated by power outages in most of the country,
which lasted for several days. The results have
been devastating.

We have seen tragic situations in hospitals, where
the lack of electricity forces medical personnel to often
work without the minimum conditions of hygiene and
tools. The lack of water is another tragic consequence
of those outages.

In the same way, in many places school and work
activities have been temporarily suspended, which
impacts the productivity of the country and contributes
to the economic deterioration. Given that outlook, no
significant improvement in the situation is envisaged in
the short term.

The crisis in Venezuela cannot be solved by
humanitarian assistance alone. It is urgent to find
the conditions to conduct concrete negotiations that
lead to a solution to the crisis through a fair, free and
competitive electoral process with guarantees for
all political groups and actors and the support of the
international community in a climate of respect for
human rights. We also call for that to be a solution
led by the Venezuelans themselves and achieved in a
peaceful manner.

I reiterate our strong determination to work together
with the international community to help Venezuela
to find a response to the crisis that is democratic and
adheres to the law, both internal and international and
that, above all, paves the way for the reconstruction of
Venezuelan society in a spirit of unity and a vision for
the future.

Aware of the central role of States in humanitarian
action and in order to achieve a substantial increase in
humanitarian assistance for the country, we make an
urgent appeal to the Venezuelan authorities to recognize
the serious situation in which the country finds itself.
In that direction, we encourage them to establish spaces
for coordination and humanitarian action with actors on
the ground, supported by the humanitarian principles
of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence,
to reach the most needy and vulnerable populations.

We acknowledge the work carried out in the context
of the cooperation and assistance coordination team to
assess the existing needs. We urge all actors, including
the Government authorities, to continue working towards
a people-centred humanitarian action. All actions must
address the priority needs of the Venezuelans, with an
approach that lays the foundation for redirecting the
country towards sustainable development and enables
the return of the 3.7 million who have been forced to
leave their homeland.

We believe that the recent agreement reached by the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies to expand its humanitarian actions in the
country is an encouraging step despite the fact that the
650,000 people in need are only a fraction of the total
that requires immediate assistance. We are confident
that that is only the first step towards new initiatives
and measures that have a positive impact on the lives
of Venezuelans. We also wish to emphasize the need
to speed up the mechanisms for authorized personnel
to enter the country and for them to have unhindered
access to the most vulnerable areas. We support the
expansion of the United Nations presence on the ground
and appeal to the international community to make
the necessary financial resources available for much-
needed humanitarian assistance in Venezuela.

In conclusion, we urge the members of the Council
to remain focused on improving the humanitarian
situation in Venezuela, promoting the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and in
international humanitarian law and strengthening the
role of the United Nations in negotiating a solution to
this very serious crisis.

