Mr. De Mistura (spoke in French): I congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of your
important role this month. Please allow me to say a few
words. My statement will be a bit long because, as you
know, this will be the last statement I shall make under
my current mandate.

(spoke in English)

I thank you for this opportunity to deliver my
monthly briefing for the final time under this mandate. I
am circulating the full written statement to the Council.
I pray the Council will forgive me for the length of this
statement. It is longer than usual, but there is a reason
for that.

I have served as Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria for four years and fourmonths - almost
exactly the length of the First World War. The Syrian
people have been enduring a conflict for seven and a
half years - longer than the Second World War. This
conflict has been and remains a tragedy for the Syrian
people. It has been a dirty, brutal and horrific war. It has
seen all the faultiness within Syria, the region and the
world prevail over the will of the Syrian people, Syrian
unity, regional stability and international cooperation.
No effort - not mine nor that of the Council or of
anyone else - has been able to completely stop the
logic of war from prevailing. However, we hope that we
are getting close to that point.

In spite of several ceasefires and some moments
of real hope, the battlefield has all too often prevailed
over peace talks. There have been constant shifts. Now
is the time to look even more closely at the ultimate
question: Will peace be won? We believe that it should
and it can. Will it be sustainable? We believe that it can
and it should be. That is why a real political process is
required. The Security Council outlined the elements
for the political process in resolution 2254 (2015).
The Council exclusively mandated the United Nations
to convene the parties, facilitate the political process
and finalize participation, with full respect for Syria's
sovereignty and the ability of the Syrian people to
choose their own representatives, with the purpose of
enabling the Syrian people to determine independently
and democratically their own future - all while
stressing the vital, parallel importance of a nationwide
ceasefire.

With this mandate, I believe that we have made
some difference. To be frank, it is not enough, but we
have made some difference - together. We have saved
lives with some ceasefires and de-escalations; albeit
limited in scope and in time, they did save lives. We
stimulated humanitarian access to places that were
not getting it, although nowhere near what civilians
desperately needed and asked for.

We have convened the Government and the
opposition and assisted in the process of uniting the
opposition, although we must admit that we have
not yet had the parties really recognize each other as
interlocutors with whom they must do business and
actually negotiate, let alone reach agreements. We have
elaborated with the parties key principles for a common
future and settlement, but we have not yet turned these
into real mechanisms for implementation. We have
identified a clear agenda accepted by the parties that
would facilitate negotiation, but we have not yet been
able to tap into its potential.

We have with determination promoted the
involvement of Syrian women in the search for a
peaceful settlement to the crisis. They know what their
country is facing; they constitute more than half of the
population, even though their participation is constantly
challenged. We have with equal determination promoted
the meaningful inclusion and substantive participation
of civil society; but this, too, is constantly challenged.

We have nearly completed the work of putting in
place a constitutional committee to draft a constitutional
reform, as a contribution to the political process, but
there is an extra mile to go. We know what is needed
for a safe, calm, neutral environment in Syria and for
United Nations-supervised elections of the highest
international standards pursuant to a new, reformed
constitution, but we have not been able to begin the full
work required to make that a reality.

I deeply regret what has not been achieved, and
I am sorry that it has not been possible to do more. I
think we in the Security Council should share in that
regret. I know we do. However, we have identified and
put in place some of the crucial foundation on which
the future process can build. My successor has all
the skills and ability to work out what combination of
continuity and change is required. He was my successor
in Lebanon. He did better than I did. He is a friend
and someone we all respect. He has been tested and is
someone that many Council members know. For that
reason, I am very confident about what I am saying.

However, let us make no mistake, and here please
allow me to pay deep respect to Kofi Arman and
Lakhdar Brahimi. As with my own predecessors and
me, the success of my successor will depend on the
Council's unity and determination to empower and
support the United Nations and to pressure all parties to
begin real dialogue, negotiate and compromise with a
view to addressing the grievances of the Syrian people
and implementing resolution 2254 (2015).

Following the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015),
we did see serious attempts to put in place a ceasefire
and to cooperate in countering terrorism, which is and
will continue to be the priority of all ofus because it has
been threatening everyone in this Chamber and beyond.
We also saw serious attempts to support the Geneva
talks on a political transition via the International Syria
Support Group. However, that promise has not yet
been fulfilled. The unity here is not yet strong enough,
and the forces that have been trying to complicate
peacemaking have at times proven to be stronger.

By the start of 2017, in Astana Iran, Russia and
Turkey committed to cooperating on de-escalation and
confidence-building. Jordan, the United States and the
Russian Federation began to work on de-escalation in
the south-west later in the year. Although the results
were mixed, but lives were saved. Sadly however, three
of the four de-escalation arrangements that did stand
came to an end. There were also lives lost. One ofthose
areas - Idlib, where there are more than 3 million
civilians - did hold and is still holding and we all
support that arrangement.

In the meantime, despite the establishment of
a working group in December - which, we must
recognize, is always better than nothing - results on
detainees, abductees and missing persons fell short of
hopes. It did, however, produce initial concrete, albeit
modest movement recently. From the point of view of
the Syrian people, however, it is unacceptable that tens
of thousands languish in detention, remain unaccounted
for amid fear, torture or death, or being unaccounted
for.

We have never had a so-called nationwide ceasefire
for any length of time or the real confidence-building
that resolution 2254 (2015) envisaged, alongside the
Geneva political talks. However, we did often get close.
Despite that, the United Nations-facilitated Geneva talks
identified a clear agenda of four baskets of issues based
on resolution 2254 (2015). Members are very familiar
with them, but we should recall them because we do
not want to lose what has been achieved. Those baskets
produced 12 Living Intra-Syrian Essential Principles,
developed with the extensive input of the Government
and the opposition and through consultation with a
broad cross-section of civil society and Syrian women.

The 12 Principles are a foundation on which my
successor can work. They provide a vision for the
future of Syria that can be shared by all, as well as
carefully crafted formulas on key issues that can
be the basis for future work. Those issues include
sovereignty and unity; governance and democracy; the
separation of powers and human rights; religion and
the State; decentralization; measures against terrorism;
respect for all components of Syrian society; the full
participation of women; the right of refugees to return
to their homes and land and so on.

Logically, a Syrian-owned and Syria-led political
process, facilitated by the United Nations, must ensure
the genuine realization in practice, not only in words,
of the Principles through agreements, mechanisms
and concrete steps, guided by resolution 2254 (2015).
As was recognized at the presidential level between
the United States and the Russian Federation in Da
Nang in November 2017, constitutional reform and
United Nations-supervised elections in a safe and
neutral environment open the way for the concrete
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).

As I indicated a year and a day ago when I briefed the
Security Council on 19 December 2017 (see S/PV.8142),
the United Nations has identified, through baskets 2
and 3 of the Geneva process, 11 parameters - these
are set out in the written briefing that I will circulate
to members - for a constitution-making process and 6
insights on United Nation-supervised elections. In my
assessment, those are broad commonalties that could
guide the parties and that would, in any case, guide the
United Nations and my successor as a facilitator.

By the end of 2017, Russia, Turkey and Iran were
preparing to convene a gathering of Syrians in Sochi.
I attended the Sochi meeting on the guidance of the
Secretary-General in the light of the understanding
reached by the Secretary-General and myself in Vienna
with diplomats of the Russian Federation that the Sochi
meeting would make a contribution by enabling the
United Nations to establish under its auspices in Geneva
a key element in the architecture of the broader process
that the realization of resolution 2254 (2015) requires.

The Sochi final statement, which the Russian
Federation circulated to the Council in the Chamber
as an official document, affirmed the 12 Principles
as the basis for the political settlement. It called for
the formation of a constitutional committee with
the purpose of drafting constitutional reform as a
contribution to the political settlement under the
United Nations auspices, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015). I underline the word "contribution". The
constitutional committee can thus be a key building
block in a real political process - an important entry
point so to say - but certainly not the only one. Syrians
know that, and Council members and I know that.

In Sochi it was agreed that such a committee
would at the very least comprise Government and
opposition representatives in the intra-Syrian talks,
Syrian experts, civil society, independents, tribal
leaders and women; that care would be taken to ensure
adequate representation of Syria's ethnic and religious
components; and that "final agreement" is to be
reached in the United Nations-led Geneva process on
the mandate and terms of reference, powers, rules of
procedure and selection criteria for the composition
of the constitutional committee. To that end, the
Sochi final statement appealed "to the United Nations
Secretary-General to assign the Special Envoy for Syria
for the assistance of the constitutional committee work
in Geneva".

Russia and the United Nations clearly understood
that the Special Envoy was to facilitate that process and
enjoyed the prerogative of finalization in the formation
of the constitutional committee. The Special Envoy
would be able to identify members of that committee
from a Sochi pool of candidates, as well as to draw
on other people from outside that pool, if required, to
ensure a credible and balanced committee. The United
Nations facilitation of that process was the clear basis
for moving forward.

Since the Sochi meeting, over the course of
almost a year, I have been undertaking a marathon of
consultations with Syrian and international stakeholders,
in particular the conveners of the Sochi meeting, to
enable the establishment of a Syrian-owned, Syrian-
led, United Nations-facilitated, balanced, inclusive and
credible constitutional committee in Geneva. I will not
recount all the steps of that diplomacy. However, let me
reiterate the key points so that we know where we stand
before I pass the issue on to my successor.

The Government and the opposition have conveyed
50 names each and agreed not to question the 50 names
of the other side. It was accepted that there should be
50 names on a middle third list, meeting the criteria
of the Sochi final statement. It was accepted that that
would therefore form a constitutional committee of
150 members. It was accepted that a drafting body of
a maximum of 45 people would be identified, with 15
from each of the three groups. It was accepted that
conducive chairing and decision-making arrangements
needed to be clearly identified. It was affirmed that
the constitutional committee would be convened under
United Nations auspices in Geneva.

Five months ago, the United Nations put forward
a consolidated proposed middle third list, based on
credibility, balance and inclusivity, including aiming
at an overall minimum of 30 per cent women on the
constitutional committee. The opposition did not
entirely like that list but agreed not to question it in the
spirit of moving forward. The Government had strong
objections to the list and indicated that it would work
with the conveners of the Sochi meeting on a different
list and that the United Nations should wait for that
input.

On 27 October in Istanbul, the leaders of
France, Germany, Russia and Turkey agreed that
the end of December should be a target, considering
the circumstances, for the establishment of the
constitutional committee. The Secretary-General
tasked me, before moving on, to verify whether it was
possible to establish a credible, balanced, inclusive,
Syrian-owned, Syrian-led, United Nations-facilitated
constitutional committee to draft a constitutional
reform for popular approval and to fundamentally
advance that objective.

To overcome the Government's concerns, while
not losing the engagement of the opposition and
maintaining the quality and legitimacy of the overall
package, I indicated that the United Nations would be
receptive to modest, credible and balanced proposals,
while bearing in mind its mandate and responsibilities
in the context of the need to finalize the package. We
understand that it is a great responsibility for the United
Nations because it is to exercise its mandate and it is
expected not to accept any kind of diktat with regard
to convening the constitutional committee or finalizing
the package.

In recent weeks, diplomacy beyond the United
Nations Secretariat has intensified, leading to a meeting
that I hosted in Geneva on Tuesday with the Foreign
Ministers of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Russian
Federation and the Republic of Turkey. The Secretary-
General was closely involved throughout. The three
Foreign Ministers provided the United Nations with
significant joint input regarding the constitutional
committee. That significant joint input comprised 50
names, drawing partly on my own suggestions, as their
proposal for the middle third list for the constitutional
committee.

Having examined the names, the Secretariat
assessed that it would not yet feel fully comfortable in
giving the United Nations stamp of legitimacy to all 50
names as meeting the necessary criteria of credibility
and balance; hence, at our suggestion, the need to go the
extra mile. We have seen the loss of some experienced
experts of excellent credentials, who would also have
been natural bridge-builders. We know that no list will
ever be perfect, but in our assessment the list needed a
further review and some extra miles to be put in.

There is also a need to identify with greater
precision the remainder of the package with the parties
on board so that the constitutional committee - when it
meets - can effectively function, delivering outcomes
in line with its own mandate as a genuine instrument
within a larger political process towards sustainable
peace. In that respect, my consultations leave me
confident that it should be possible to agree on a 75 -per
cent voting threshold and balanced co-chairmanship
arrangements. I should like to add, if I may, that
regardless of who the co-chairs are, if one is from the
Government then the other should be a member of the
opposition, and one of them should be a woman, given
that women represent some 51 to 55 per cent of the

population.

My consultations also leave me confident that it is
understood that the constitutional committee will draft
a constitutional reform and that the United Nations will
have the crucial role of accompanying and facilitating
this Syrian-owned process. It is also crucial to identify
how the smaller drafting body would be selected and
begin to work. The parties therefore need to buy into
those key details. Let us be frank. I know that we always
tend to look at the glass as either half full or half empty,
but there has been real progress made. We nearly have a
list. The rules ofprocedure have become a little clearer,
but we need to go that extra mile.

If a constitutional committee is established, it will
of course be done with the blessing of the Security
Council. That would have to happen in any case. It will
be vital for the Council to support regular reviews of the
progress of the committee's work and any adjustments
required along the road in order to help a Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led constitutional committee, in accordance
with the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).

The United Nations alone has the legitimacy and
mandate to bless - at least at the initial stage - the
constitutional committee, given the circumstances in
Syria. That is the role that the Security Council can play.
That must be accompanied by parallel efforts to ensure
a full ceasefire, see detainees and abductees released at
scale, build confidence, create a safe, calm and neutral
environment with reforms of governance, and lay the
ground for United Nations-supervised elections, as per
resolution 2254 (2015).

In that regard, and contrary to the spirit of building
mutual confidence, we have been very concerned at
times by the recent and credible reports of some type of
intimidation and coercion of persons reportedly on the
list for the constitutional committee and their family
members inside Syria. Those reports have become
more frequent in recent days and, frankly, we consider
that very worrisome. This is therefore a fundamental
reminder of the need for concrete steps towards what
we call a safe, calm and neutral environment. That
is also one of the things that refugees and internally
displaced persons have been telling us in no uncertain
terms. They want a safe and neutral environment.

People will consider returning when they feel safe;
if their fundamental rights are protected; if they can
reunite with their families in the areas they came from;
if their property and other legal rights are preserved and
institutions of the State protect such rights; and if basic
social services are delivered without political prejudice
or bias. The list of legitimate questions does not end
here. All of those and other questions are key to the
establishment of a calm, safe and neutral environment.

If we are able to start a constitutional committee, it
will be a new test ofpolitical will. Will the Government
engage seriously and show a willingness to address
rea1 grievances - grievances that have been present
since the very origin of this horrible conflict? Will the
opposition engage seriously and realistically, realizing
that the process of change in Syria will not be an easy
one, but that it also needs it to be pragmatic? I urge
them both to do so. There is no other way out of the
Syrian conflict.

Let me commend the voices of the Syrians beyond
the Government and the opposition who are working
for peace against all odds. Many of them participate in
the Civil Society Support Room, which we created in
partnership with Syrians who committed to the value
of peace. Indeed, many are meeting with my team
this week in regional capitals. I must therefore urge
members of the Council, the international community
and Syrian parties more broadly to listen to those voices,
even when I am no longer there. They are important.
They should be protected and involved meaningfully
on the long and challenging road ahead. I salute those
Syrian civilians and thank them for their efforts and
willingness to engage with us and with the Council.

Let me also once again stress the crucial role of
women in the Syrian political process. This is not lip
service. I have seen them; they have had enormous
influence. They were given a chance and can be given
more chances to do so. I have done everything I could
to promote this, both with the delegations and within
civil society. I have also been assisted by the Women's
Advisory Board, the membership of which has recently
rotated and been renewed. The Women's Advisory
Board is a model for what is possible when Syrians from
different backgrounds come together to accompany the
mediation process. I can see that that has now also been
replicated in the Yemen file.
Women in Syria have continued to remind me
of what is possible and to plea for a process that is
fully inclusive of all of Syrian society, with the full
participation ofwomen and everyone else. I have fought
and will continue to fight to ensure at least 30 per
cent representation of women in the constitutional
committee. I hope to see that realized, which is why I
have also put emphasis on the co-chairmanship.

This is the Security Council, so let me stress one
point above all. The United Nations as a facilitator and
mediator can create every sort of mediation process
and every sort of dialogue - whether secret talks,
backchannels, proximity talks, technical talks, working
groups, direct talks, multi-party talks, constitutional
committees, national dialogue and so on. I have sought
to bridge international divides with ideas, messages,
channels and meetings and by framing a way forward
that all could sign on to in order to consistently support
our mandate. I have also sought to speak publicly and
clearly about the shocking violence and abuses against
civilians, the need for humanitarian access and the
need to counter terrorism, as well as the fundamental
importance of respecting international humanitarian
law. But that is no substitute for the genuine efforts
of influential countries to talk to each other and work
constructively within the Council and beyond in
support of a United Nations process that is Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned.

It is the Council - and the Council alone - that
is responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security. It has mandated the United Nations
to facilitate the intra-Syrian political process for the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). That is the
only way to enable Syrians to determine their own
future. And we need a renewed sense of common
purpose and concerted action in the Council if 2019 is
to be the real turning point for Syria.

In closing, I would like to thank our Secretary-
General, Antonio Guterres, for his trust, advice and
encouragement, as well as my own team, which, over
the past four and a half years, has worked tirelessly
to keep the talks process alive and moving forward,
albeit sometimes incrementally, but never giving up. I
owe them an enormous gratitude. I am convinced that
the tenacity and ingenuity of United Nations staff can
make a fundamental difference for Syria, and I wish my
successor every success in his vital work.

It has been a real privilege and an honour to work
with each and every member of the Council. In spite
of the Council's own divisions, it has always had one
line, which I have constantly felt. It has consistently
supported our complex mission and me, and I want to
thank it very warmly for that. And since that this is my
last briefing to the Council in this capacity, let me to
go beyond protocol, since members and I have actually
developed individual friendships, and I have felt that.

So beyond just a formal greeting - since we were
together and they have accompanied me during this
journey, which has not been an easy one - I should like
to warmly shake the hand of each one of my friends.

