Switzerland thanks the Niger for organizing this debate and the speakers for their contributions. As a French-speaking country and as a member of the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF), Switzerland underlines the importance of the cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF. The multilateral system stands to benefit from the complementarity between the two organizations and the comparative advantage of each. Cooperation is particularly important in areas such as the promotion of democracy and conflict prevention. Strengthening that cooperation is therefore in the interest of the Security Council. Switzerland would like to highlight two important areas of action to deepen the cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF. First, free and fair elections are essential to peace and security. All too often, violence, including by Government entities, still occurs and hinders full participation. The inclusion of all groups is key to preventing the violence that tends to erupt when stakeholders question the integrity of the process. Special attention must be given to minorities, and the inclusion of women and youth is also essential. Civil society also plays an important role in all stages of the electoral process. Through their technical expertise and political monitoring, the OIF and the United Nations play a key role in supporting elections. With several elections approaching in OIF member States, particularly in West Africa, good collaboration between these two organizations can support promote democratic gains and stability in the region. Secondly, the United Nations must protect and promote multilingualism and multiculturalism within the Organization. Our own experience in Switzerland, with four national languages and different cultures, demonstrates the value of diversity in the maintenance of peace and security. We welcome efforts to increase the number of French-speaking staffmembers, particularly in peacekeeping missions in francophone contexts. We invite the United Nations, including the Council, to further integrate the francophone expertise of the OIF in its work. A good example of the added value of the OIF is the work of the Boutros-Ghali Observatory. Through its support for the Observatory's research activities, Switzerland contributes to improving the representation of francophone countries in United Nations peacekeeping operations. Fifty years after its creation, the OIF plays an important role in ensuring strong and effective multilateralism. The Council must continue to recognize the OIF's key role in maintaining peace and security. Switzerland welcomes the continued cooperation between the OIF and the United Nations with regard to conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
