Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/772*) and
welcome the presence here today of Mr. Jawed Ludin,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan. I
would also like to congratulate Mr. Jan Kubis on his
appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We
hope that he is able to swiftly take over his new duties
and reiterate that he can rely on France's support. I
wish, of course, to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his
work and again express to him our strongest friendship
and esteem.

I endorse the statement to be delivered by the

observer of the European Union and will limit my

statement to three points: the deteriorating regional

environment, our shared objectives and the role of the
United Nations in achieving those objectives.

First, with regard to the deteriorating conditions
in the regional environment, it is paradoxical that the
regional climate has deteriorated in an alarming
fashion, while progress has been made in Afghanistan.
For example, the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board met after a one-year hiatus, a Peace Jirga was
held in an atmosphere of calm, Parliament resumed
activities after several months of stalemate and the
transition process continued, with many municipalities
and districts having been selected for the second
tranche of that process. Another example of progress is
the recapitalization of the Kabul Bank, which meant
that the International Monetary Fund could resume its
country programme.

Notwithstanding that, the regional climate has
deteriorated. Since 2008, France has championed
efforts to enhance regional cooperation, for example by
holding the ministerial meeting in La Celle Saint-
Cloud. Afghanistan must again become a centre for
productive trade, as it had been in the past. The States
of Central Asia understood that, as did the countries
that met in September in New York to discuss a vision
for the New Silk Road. The region needs a collective
security system to fight the scourge of terrorism and
establish specific confidence-building measures
between Afghanistan and its neighbours.

During the Istanbul Conference, which also dealt
with regional security and cooperation, Afghanistan
and its neighbouring countries stated that they were
willing to work on confidence-building measures to
bring about peace and security in Afghanistan and in
the region. The countries of the region must make
specific and binding commitments in preparation for
the meeting to be held in Kabul in June 2012.

Secondly, with regard to our objectives, the goal
of the international community and Afghanistan will
continue to be the country's lasting stability and the
Afghan people's ownership of their national destiny.
Transition is already a reality for half of the country's
people. The foreign presence in Afghanistan will
evolve so as to support the build-up of the Afghan
National Security Forces. France, for its part, will
reduce and redeploy its contingent in consultation with
our allies and the Afghan authorities.

A cooperation agreement between France and
Afghanistan, which is being concluded, will address
the build-up of the civilian component of our work. In
Bonn, on 5 December, we entered into mutual
agreements for the 2015-2024 Transformation Decade,
which will follow up on the transition process and be
consistent with the commitments made in Kabul in
2010. I should like to congratulate Germany and
Afghanistan for the success of that important event and
support the statement to be made in that regard by the
President of the Security Council.

We remain determined to prevent Afghanistan
from again becoming a haven for international
terrorism. The real but residual presence of elements
linked to Al-Qaida in Afghanistan and in the Pakistani
tribal areas is a reminder that the danger still persists,
even though it is nothing like it was 10 years ago. The
perpetrators of the recent attacks, in particular on the
Day of Ashura, and the killers of Professor
Burhanuddin Rabbani must be condemned and brought
to justice. There is room for those who wish to lay
down their arms and rejoin the Afghan constitutional
framework. For a lasting and fair peace, inter-Afghan
reconciliation must be inclusive, offer an equitable
place in Afghan society to its various components, and
respect human rights.

Thirdly, with regard the role of the United
Nations, we firmly believe that the Organization in
general and UNAMA in particular have a major role to
play in Afghanistan in the years to come. The success
of the transformation depends to a large degree on
UNAMA's success. We therefore await with interest
the results of the current review. The United Nations
must continue to support democratic governance,
particularly in the areas of support for the electoral
process and for strengthening the rule of law and
respect for human rights. It must also support the
national and regional aspects of the peace process and
coordinate the work of the United Nations with the
assistance provided by the international community.
The fight against drug trafficking should remain central
to the work of specialized entities, particularly the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, with
support from UNAMA.

We cannot expect everything from the United
Nations after 2014, but, given the challenges that await
Afghanistan, it is essential that we reaffirm our support
for a strong Mission in order to sustain the
transformation towards a peaceful, stable, prosperous
and regionally integrated Afghanistan.

