Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to begin by congratulating you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. You can count on the full support of
the French delegation. I would also like to pay tribute
to the excellent manner in which the United Kingdom
presided over the Council during the month of March.

I also wish to join others at this very difficult
time in condemning the terrorist attack that took
place in Saint Petersburg yesterday. As my President
did yesterday, I too express our solidarity with the
Russian people.

I also wish to thank Joint Special Representative
Kingsley Mamabolo for his briefing, as well as to
congratulate him on his appointment to the helm of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). My delegation wishes him every
success in his new post. He can count on our continued
and determined support.

This July it will have been 10 years since the
Security Council established African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, which took over
from the African Union Mission in the Sudan with the
task of helping to restore peace and stability in Darfur
following the atrocities that took place in the region in
the early 2000s.
The Council must regularly assess the results of the
operations it deploys. It is in that spirit that I visited
the Sudan last week. I thank the Sudanese authorities
for their welcome, and UNAMID for its support. The
meetings I conducted in Khartoum and El Fasher, as
well as visits to two camps in Darfur for displaced
persons, were very useful for me to better understand
the complex reality of the region, which the Sudanese
authorities, along with UNAMID, face today.

My visit to the Sortony camp in particular enabled
me to better understand the challenges in protecting
civilians in Darfur. There has clearly been a decrease in
the level of violence in some areas of Darfur, as noted
in the recent reports of the Secretary-General. The
decline in the intensity of fighting between rebel groups
and Government forces is obviously encouraging news,
and we welcome the decision made by the Sudanese
Government in January to extend the ceasefire by
six months. We again call on the rebel groups to do
the same.

What is striking is that the displaced persons who
found refuge at Sortony, in the foothills of Jebel Marra,
are now facing a different sort of threat. Following the
aerial bombardments in January 2016, and in the face
of attacks by armed groups and militias, people had to
flee their villages, settling around a UNAMID camp
in a valley. The vast majority of them tell us they want
to return to their lands but cannot because they are
harassed by members of the militias and armed groups,
who continue to commit abuses against civilians who
leave the camp. On far too many occasions, women
fall victim to rape as they collect firewood. As some
of the displaced persons said clearly, they would have
died if they had not been able to find refuge near the
UNAMID camp. I would like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to the men and women of UNAMID who are

implementing the mandate to protect civilians. Their
work is decisive in a place like Sortony. The more than
20,000 displaced persons in Sortony represent only a
small percentage of the 2.6 million displaced people
in Darfur. With a population of 7 million, that means
one out of three people in Darfur are displaced. What
we are seeing and hearing in Sortony should lead us to
reflect on what action the United Nations should take
on the ground.

The challenge in terms of security and protecting
civilians from the armed groups and militias is
certainly one of the main challenges faced by the
Government of the Sudan and UNAMID. The return
of displaced persons to their villages will be possible
only when their security is assured in those areas. The
Government ofthe Sudan must fully play its role in that
regard, in accordance with its primary responsibility
for protecting civilians, as has been consistently
reaffirmed by the Council and earlier this morning
by the Joint Special Representative. The international
community, through UNAMID, can be a partner in
that effort. To do so, UNAMID must be able to operate
under good conditions. It must be able to benefit from
the sound cooperation of the Sudanese Government in
the exercise of its mandate.

During my visit, it became clear that the stability
of Darfur, and more broadly that of the region, requires
addressing the root causes of instability. We have all
spoken of this in our statements up until now, but I wish
to recall that among the causes are the proliferation of
weapons, the plight of displaced persons, the handling
of the issue of land and natural resources, the need to
strengthen the rule of law and, of course, combating
impunity, whether at the local and national levels or
at the international level through the International
Criminal Court. The country team contributes to
promoting development in Darfur, often under difficult
conditions, but it is clear that it cannot be the only
partner of the Sudanese authorities in responding to
these complex challenges.

From my discussions with the Sudanese authorities,
both in Khartoum and El Fasher, and with the displaced
and UNAMID, disarmament emerged as one of the
most important current challenges. There is in fact a
proliferation of weapons in Darfur. It is said that there
are as many weapons in Darfur as there are inhabitants.
Again, the international community can partner
with Sudanese authorities to take a step in the right
direction where the issue of disarmament is concerned.

We therefore need to move forward in our collective
thinking in order to find solutions that respond to
these challenges.

We are committed to the effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping, which is an essential tool for
maintaining international peace and security. In View
of the evolving challenges in Darfur, UNAMID will
certainly need to evolve to provide the best response. In
that context, we support the initiative of the Secretariat
and of the African Union Commission to conduct a
strategic review of UNAMID. That work should assess
the effectiveness of UNAMID with regard to its goal of
contributing to sustainable peace and stability in Darfur.
We therefore look forward to the recommendations
that will be made by the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, which
will be based on the review assessment. It is on that
basis that we can consider what adjustments can be
made to UNAMID to allow it best to respond to the
current peace and security challenges in Darfur.

