Mr. Nambiar (India): India welcomes this
opportunity to participate in an open debate of the
Security Council on United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We were happy to see the Foreign Minister
of Pakistan presiding over the morning segment of this
meeting.

The first question we ask concerns the
appositeness of the present debate and the Council's
precise locus standi in it. While the role of the Council
is indubitable in the setting up and running of
individual peacekeeping operations, we are not
convinced that it is the most appropriate forum to
discuss policy or even general operational issues
related to peacekeeping. These have traditionally been
vested with the General Assembly, and specifically
with the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations. Even as member States consider the
question of United Nations reform and delegations
bemoan the erosion of the role and activities of the
General Assembly, my delegation notices a strange
inability on the part of the Assembly to withstand the
steady acquisitiveness of the Council in areas such as
this. This is all the more disturbing when combined
with the tendency in some quarters to View the whole
process of coping with complex emergencies from a
proconsular or even a mission civilisatrice perspective.
Such an approach needs to eschewed, equally in the
Council as elsewhere. It should clearly not infect the
attitude of the Secretariat. We strongly urge that the
constitutional separation of powers between the
Council and the Assembly be respected.

Peacekeeping operations are mandated to perform
specific tasks. They are not meant to be missions in
perpetuity. Upon the completion of these tasks, they
must be drawn down and eventually wound up. The
missions in Rwanda and Angola provide important and
useful examples where the Governments concerned
decided at a certain point of time that the peacekeeping
operation had served its purpose. They welcomed the
continuing United Nations presence, but not in the
form of peacekeepers. Admittedly, the exit of
peacekeepers cannot be allowed to take place in a hasty
or injudicious manner, as that could jeopardize the very
gains achieved. We are all aware of the case of Haiti in
the mid-1990s. Missions could face premature
termination when a ceasefire unravels, the pre-existing
political will disappears or the Council refuses to
recognize changed realities on the ground. At the same
time, rebns sic stantibus cannot be characterized as a
failure of the United Nations or its mission.

As more and more demands are made for United
Nations intervention in complex situations, diverse sets
of actors are increasingly seen in theatres of conflict.
Some demarcation of functions and responsibilities
would therefore be useful for clarity. We should be
conscious that there are limitations to the capacity of
the United Nations in terms of material, personnel or
financial resources. The United Nations cannot be
everywhere.

When considering the scope of peacekeeping,
there is often a tendency to confuse peacekeeping with
post-conflict peace-building. Approaches that involve
an understanding of local ground realities and that are
evolved with the participation of the Governments
involved are likely to be more successful than those
seen as imposed from outside. Post-conflict peace-
building cannot be achieved through peacekeepers, the
majority of which are groups of observers or formed
contingents with no knowledge, experience or mandate
to take on economic, social or other tasks associated
with post-conflict reconstruction. While, perhaps,
peace-building elements need to be integrated into the
overall approach from the outset, peacekeeping can
only lay the ground for post-conflict reconciliation,
reconstruction and development. This further
responsibility is best left to the funds and programmes
of the United Nations system and, in the final analysis,
must be locally owned. Indeed, as long as major
contributors remain unwilling to pay for such activities
through assessed contributions, such examples of
mission creep would continue to be viewed with
suspicion.

Nor do we believe that peacekeepers have any
intrinsic role in conflict resolution or in addressing the
underlying causes of conflict, especially where these
are largely socio-economic in nature, such as poverty
and deprivation. A peacekeeping operation is an
interim measure and of limited duration. It is part of a
broader international engagement. It is not a substitute
for the task of nation-building, economic development
or international cooperation. It cannot be a stand-in for
a negotiated political settlement. Peacekeeping
mandates cannot and should not be intrusive or
interventionist.

There has been a predilection of late to lean
towards regional solutions in peacekeeping,
particularly in the context of Africa. While recognizing
this reality, we must guard against such operations
becoming franchised or subcontracted to a degree
where the Security Council is perceived as using
regionalization as a device to shirk the exercise of its
global responsibility for peace and security. Further,
there are those who advocate the transfer of the
specialized assets and even the troops of a contributing
country from one mission in the region to another. We
regard such solutions as self-serving and contrary to
the practices and provisions allowed under the Charter.
Every mission is unique, established in pursuance of a
specific Security Council mandate. We see a risk,
sometimes, in regionalization in the peacekeeping
context and feel there can be no confederacy of
peacekeeping missions.

For similar reasons, we see limited utility and a
degree of risk in encouraging coordination among
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General in a
region. While some sharing of experiences, lessons
learned and resources in a regional context might be
useful, it must be remembered that Special
Representatives are not free agents. Each is appointed
for a specific mission, for a specific purpose and must
operate within mission-specific mandates. Too much
cross-feed can cause diffusion and even distortion of
focus. Sharing of experiences must be done, where
necessary, at United Nations Headquarters, Heads of
Mission conferences or when senior officers of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations visit the
region.

With respect to increasing the effectiveness of
Headquarters support, we stress the need for greater
synergy in effective utilization of capacities already
existing within the United Nations system. Where that
does not happen, the systemic problems involved need
to be addressed. The mere infusion of extra personnel
or the creation of new divisions will not work.

Other important issues include the continuing
commitment gaps in the contribution of personnel and
equipment to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
the strengthening of existing mechanisms of
cooperation with troop-contributing countries and
problems concerning the safety and security of United
Nations peacekeepers. On the issue of commitment
gaps, we need only recall the fact that almost 80 per
cent of the troops deployed in United Nations
peacekeeping operations are contributed by developing
countries. There is also a perceived imbalance between
the roles and the responsibilities assumed by the
United Nations in different regions and those assumed
by non-United Nations operations.

The recent activation of the mechanism of joint
meetings between the Security Council Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations and troop-contributing
countries is a welcome step. We look forward to more
such meetings concerning individual operations in the
future and to greater interaction with Council members
in those meetings in such a manner that the Council
takes cognizance of the views of the troop-contributing
countries, thereby contributing to the outcome of
decisions in the Council.

India's performance in the field of peacekeeping
under the United Nations flag is well recognized
around the world, and I shall not dwell upon it in
detail. We fully subscribe to concerns about the safety
and the security of peacekeepers and associated United
Nations personnel. This must, in all instances, receive
the very high priority it deserves. Ultimately, however,
the best guarantee of the safety and the security of
peacekeepers is a properly planned and mandated
mission, comprising well-trained, equipped and
disciplined contingents, in which troops are not
deployed in a void or in situations where the political
process is either non-existent or compromised. It must
express the priorities of the larger community of
Member States and not those of a select few.

In conclusion, we trust that today's deliberations
in the Council will help to improve the quality and
content of decision-making in the General Assembly
on policy and operational aspects of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

