Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to join my colleagues in welcoming Prime
Minister Bellerive to the Security Council today and to
extend again the United Kingdom's sincere
condolences to the people of Haiti for the loss of over
200,000 lives in J anuary's devastating earthquake.

I also welcome Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, to this
meeting and thank him for his briefing today. I would
like to express our ongoing support for the United
Nations efforts in assisting the Haitian people.

Mr. Mulet and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) are making an
invaluable contribution to the post-earthquake recovery
effort, which is particularly commendable given the
very challenging circumstances that the Mission is
working under, including dealing with the loss of so
many United Nations lives, including among
MINUSTAH's leadership. Mr. Mulet and his team have
worked tirelessly to rebuild the lives and hopes of the
Haitian people.

A productive partnership between the Haitian
authorities and the international community is vital to
achieving progress. We underline the significant
contribution that international donors continue to make
to improving Haiti's economy, and stress the
importance of well-organized donor coordination. In
this regard, we welcome the pivotal role that former
President Clinton is playing as United Nations Special
Envoy for Haiti in overseeing this work, including in
preparing the March conference, which showed the
international community rallying in support of the
people of Haiti.

Before January's devastating earthquake, the
Security Council discussed the need to establish a clear
strategy for international engagement in Haiti, setting
the country on the path to lasting stability so that its
economy could grow and broader development needs
could be met. It is even more important now that we
pursue this strategy. That includes ensuring that those
donors, international organizations or parts of the
United Nations family that are best placed to provide
support are engaged and able to help Haiti to deliver.
We are confident that MINUSTAH's current mandate
enables it to play an important role in supporting the
wider reconstruction efforts, while ensuring that its
core duties are maintained.

In our view, MINUSTAH's primary focus should
remain the provision and maintenance of a peaceful
and secure environment. The aftermath of January's
earthquake has seen the emergence of new security
challenges, such as the need to protect the vulnerable
inhabitants of displacement camps, recapture escaped
criminals and combat an increase in drug trafficking.

Haiti remains dependent on MINUSTAH to
maintain law and order. We agree that MINUSTAH
should continue to play this role for the immediate
future, and we shall look carefully at the Secretary-
General's proposals for further enhancements in this
light. MINUSTAH should also continue to aid the
rehabilitation and development of local policing
capabilities, which will be key to MINUSTAH's
meeting its goal of establishing a secure environment.
We are committed to the long-term engagement
of the United Nations in Haiti. We must ensure that, if
we are to help Haiti through this challenging period,
we have the right people with the right skills for the
tasks at hand. We support the efforts of MINUSTAH
troops to maintain a secure environment. We also wish
to ensure that the longer-term reconstruction effort is
performed by those best qualified in the wider United
Nations family and beyond.

