Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank the briefers for their statements. I
would like to underscore three points: first, the need
for a credible and inclusive transition in the Sudan;
secondly, the situation in Darfur; and thirdly, the
importance of fighting impunity.

First, the situation in Darfur must be considered in
the broader context of the whole country and cannot
be seen in isolation. Belgium is concerned about the
current situation in the Sudan. We reiterate our call for
showing restraint in the use of force, avoiding violence
and ensuring full respect for human rights, including
freedom of assembly and freedom to demonstrate.
Belgium welcomes the 15 April communique of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
(AU), which emphasizes the importance of arriving
as soon as possible at a solution to the current crisis
that is based on respect for the constitutional order
and reflects the aspirations of the Sudanese people.
The communique also requires the Sudanese military
to hand over power to a civilian-led transitional
political authority, in accordance with the will of the
people and the constitutional order. A consultative and
inclusive process that involves all political actors and
stakeholders should ensure consensus on a transition
led by civilians and lead to the holding of free, fair and
transparent elections as soon as possible.

Belgium has noted the announcement of the release
of political prisoners, an essential measure that will
help to establish a climate of mutual trust with a view
to reconciliation.

At this fragile moment, it is important that in
recognition of the crucial role of the AU and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Security Council should back their efforts to find a
peaceful solution, and we support the efforts of the
Secretary-General in that regard.

Secondly, the situation in the Sudan has an
undeniable impact on the issue of Darfur and the peace
process. The Council should therefore continue to
monitor the situation in the rest of the country closely
and assess its effect on the drawdown and exit process
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. In that regard, we look forward to the joint
report of the United Nations and the African Union
on the strategic review. In any case, we must take a

cautious approach to the withdrawal that ensures that
the continued United Nations presence in Darfur is
adequate. In general, establishing the rule of law and
ensuring a fundamental respect for human rights
are key elements for Darfur's future. The protection
of civilians, an improved humanitarian situation,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security-sector reform remain essential to a lasting
solution to the crisis.

Finally, combating impunity is at the heart
of the protesters' demands in the Sudan. Human
rights violations are among the root causes of the
conflicts there, and we have not forgotten the issue
of the outstanding arrest warrants of the International
Criminal Court. As we know, the Security Council
referred the situation in the Sudan, or more precisely in
Darfur, through resolution 1593 (2005). Based on that,
the Court issued arrest warrants for five individuals.
Belgium would like to point out that resolution 1593
(2005) stipulates that the Sudan and all other parties
to the conflict in Darfur have the obligation to
cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court
and its Prosecutor and provide them with all necessary
assistance. It is essential to ensure accountability for
past actions.

In conclusion, I would like to express Belgium's
solidarity with the people of the Sudan and their desire
for a peaceful solution to the situation in their country.

