The President (spoke in Russian): Pursuant to
the invitation extended at the 6121st meeting, I invite
the representative of Chad to take a seat at the Council
table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Allam-mi
(Chad) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns the
renewed military incursions in eastern Chad of
Chadian armed groups, coming from outside.

"The Security Council stresses that any
attempt at destabilization of Chad by force is
unacceptable. It recalls the terms of the
declarations of its President dated 4 February
2008 (S/PRST/2008/3) and 16 June 2008
(S/PRST/2008/22). It reiterates its commitment to
the sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and
political independence of Chad. It demands that
rebel armed groups cease violence immediately
and calls on all parties to re-engage in dialogue in
the framework of the Sirte agreement of
25 October 2007.

"The Security Council calls on Sudan and
Chad to respect and fully implement their mutual
commitments, in particular in the Doha
Agreement of 3 May 2009 and the Dakar
Agreement of 13 March 2008, and to engage
constructively with the Dakar contact group and
the good offices of Libya and Qatar, to normalize
their relations, cooperate to put an end to cross-
border activities of armed groups and strengthen
actions to combat illicit arms trafficking in the
region, including through the establishment of
effective joint border monitoring. The Council
expresses its concern at the external support
received by Chadian armed groups, as reported
by the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council expresses deep
concern at the direct threat the activity of armed
groups poses for the safety of the civilian
population and the conduct of humanitarian
operations. It reiterates its full support for the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), which is
mandated to contribute to protect vulnerable
civilians including refugees and internally
displaced persons, to protect United Nations and
associated personnel and to facilitate the delivery
of humanitarian assistance.

"The Security Council calls on all parties to
abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law, in particular to respect the
security of civilians, including women and
children, humanitarian workers and United
Nations personnel.

"The Security Council encourages the
Chadian authorities in promoting political
dialogue, with respect for the constitutional
framework, as initiated in the Agreement of
13 August 2007."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/ 13.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.
09-33234

