Mr. Shinyo (Japan): First of all, I strongly
welcome your initiative to convene this discussion
today. I also wish to express our appreciation to Costa
Rica for its proposal to convene this meeting.
The continuous efforts of the members of the
Security Council aimed at improving the Council's
working methods in order to enhance its efficiency and
transparency are commendable, and notable
achievements and improvements have been made, as
described in the concept paper for this open debate
(S/2008/528, annex). We are very pleased to see such
developments building upon the efforts of Japan and
other countries towards the adoption of the note by the
President of the Council dated 19 July 2006
(S/2006/507). In this context, I would also like to
express our great appreciation to the successive Chairs
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, who have made
indispensable contributions in implementing the note.
Ambassador Burian of Slovakia not only finalized a
new note by the President of the Council (S/2007/749),
but also set the course for its implementation,
particularly in involving the Secretariat. We also know
that, whenever the Council is facing procedural
difficulties, Ambassador Arias of Panama acts as a
guardian of the note in the Council. We hope that the
active efforts through the Working Group will continue
and that the positive momentum from 2006 will be
maintained.

Improving the working methods benefits both the
members and the non-members of the Council. As the
concept of peace and security evolves and as States
become increasingly interdependent economically and
politically, the Council must actively engage the wider
membership of the United Nations and develop more
efficient working methods to ensure its responsiveness
to emerging challenges. It is the Council that plays the
leading role in this endeavour. We hope that those
States which are granted a special responsibility in the
Charter or through elections will spare no effort to
respond to the needs and concerns of the Member
States at large.

Allow me to make a few proposals on possible
ways forward.

First, it is essential to engage States which have
special interests or responsibilities regarding particular
matters, in order to ensure the implementation and
effectiveness of the Council's actions. The
participation of non-members in the Council's
meetings has been significantly improved. We are also
aware that the relevant parties are consulted informally
on a case-by-case basis. However, more needs to be
done, particularly in ensuring the engagement of the
troop-contributing countries and the financial
contributing countries. Making better use of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations is
desirable. It is important to have an informal exchange
of views prior to a major adjustment to or the creation
of a peacekeeping operation mandate in the Working
Group. That should help in addressing the legitimate
concerns of the major stakeholders, including troop
contributors and financial contributors.

Secondly, the Security Council would certainly
benefit from seeking more interactive relationships
with the General Assembly and other organs. That is
important to facilitate the complementarity of the
organs. As the Security Council and the General
Assembly have their own responsibilities and
memberships, cross-cutting issues such as conflict
prevention, peacebuilding, climate change and other
relevant matters deserve substantive discussion in both
organs, and one organ can make useful inputs to others
based on those discussions. In addition, as Japan
currently serves as the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, I would like to express our gratitude to
the Council for inviting the Chairs of the country-
specific configurations to almost all of the Council's
relevant meetings. We hope the Council will seek to
make more active use of the Peacebuilding
Commission as its advisory body. In this context, I
believe that the regular meetings of the President of the
Council and the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission will continue to facilitate communication
between the two organs.

Thirdly, the increasing number of public
meetings, especially open debates, is welcome.
However, I would like to point out that both members
and non-members of the Council should make
maximum efforts to ensure the effectiveness of such
meetings by making focused and concise statements
with specific and practical proposals and by pursuing
action-oriented follow-up.

Fourthly and finally, in the context of reform of
the Security Council, the issue of working methods is
also an important component. There is no doubt about
that. Japan believes, however, that not only the
improvement of working methods but also the
expansion of the Security Council is a crucial aspect of
the reform of the Council. I would like to emphasize
that the reform of the Security Council through the
expansion of the Council should have a significant
positive impact on the improvement of the Council's
working methods.

Nowadays, everyone is aware of the importance
of improving working methods, and we are always
heartened to note that many representatives regularly
carry the blue booklet which Japan voluntarily issued,
in order to refer to the note and other useful
information in it. We reiterate our hope that the
Council will give positive consideration to the
publication of the booklet as an official document of
the United Nations.

The improvement of the working methods of the
Council is something that can never fully achieve its
goals. The Security Council always needs to evolve in
order to respond swiftly and effectively to ever-
changing world challenges. A follow-up to the
discussion in this open debate is essential in terms of
further advancing this task and preserving what we
have achieved since the adoption of the note by the
President in 2006. Japan will continue to follow the
development of this matter with great interest and will
make utmost efforts to contribute to this endeavour.

