Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): For the Czech
Republic, the conflicts in the Republic of Croatia and in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina are of tremendous
concern, and we follow them with the utmost attention, for
a number of reasons. One is the cultural and historical
affinity the Czechs have had for many decades - one
might even say centuries - with South Slavs. Another is
the geographical proximity of these conflicts to our own
region of Central Europe. Yet another is the daily reminder
that the conflicts provide us of that fact that similar turmoil,
but for the grace of God, might have affected our own
people if Czechoslovakia had not separated quite as
peaceably as it did.

These are some of the reasons that have led my
country to contribute significantly to the strength of the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), having
provided a mechanized battalion which is now operating in
Croatia. We are, or have been, involved in other
international activities in the area as well, including earlier
missions of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe (CSCE), operations of the Mission of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro),
the sanctions missions on the Danube and the monitoring
mission of the European Union. This, too, is why we were

 

keen to be a sponsor of the three draft resolutions at hand
today.

Czech diplomacy has always felt that the most
critical relationship in the area is that between the Croats
and the Serbs. Other conflicts, though equally bloody and
desperate, would be less intractable if the fundamental
Croat-Serb conflict were resolved. And it is in Croatia
that UNPROFOR has been facing a particularly vexing
task. Croatia's authorities have on a number of occasions
eloquently expressed their dissatisfaction with certain
consequences of UNPROFOR's presence there,
unintended though they surely were. They have been
particularly concerned about the danger of solidifying the
internal division of the country between areas directly
controlled by the Croatian Government and those under
the control of local Serb authorities. The Security
Council's not having managed to address these concerns
effectively enough probably contributed to the decision
not to allow the continuation of a United Nations
presence in Croatia in its present form.

However, UNPROFOR's leaving Croatia without any
replacement would have left an extraordinarily dangerous
vacuum. Czech foreign policy has warned against the
consequences - again, possibly unintended - that such
a step might have had, including the opening it would
have offered to the war parties on both sides of the ethnic
divide. We welcome President Tudjman's decision, in the
end, to agree to a United Nations presence in his
country - a force for which we are today coining the term
"United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in
Croatia" (UNCRO), We also welcome the international
diplomatic efforts that have led to this conclusion -
wishing, perhaps, to highlight the spark-plug role played
by United States diplomacy.

While many aspects of the situation in Croatia are
worrisome, one is definitely encouraging: namely, the
Economic Agreement between Zagreb and Knin of last
December. This agreement has not remained a dead letter,
but is in fact being infused with real content.
Infrastructure lines, from highways to power lines to
pipelines, are once again turning into lifelines. We hope
that economic cooperation will take on a logic and a
dynamic of its own and will have salutary spill-over
effects on political dialogue and rapprochement as well.
It is a part of UNCRO's mandate to help implement this
important Economic Agreement. We are also encouraged
by the positive approach the Croatian authorities have
taken vis-a-vis the so-called Zagreb-4 plan, which offers
a possible way out of the country's political impasse. We

 

call on both sides, and in particular on local Serb
authorities, to enter into negotiations, urgently and without
preconditions, and to make full use of that plan.

As the new United Nations peace-keeping force is to
be deployed on Croatian territory, we urge the Government
of the Republic of Croatia to settle without delay an
agreement on the status of United Nations forces and other
personnel and to provide the United Nations with suitable
radio broadcasting frequencies and television broadcasting
slots, as described in the relevant report of the Secretary-
General.
The conflict in Croatia is not unfolding in a vacuum,
to state the obvious. Activities of the Knin Serbs are clearly
associated with those of Pale Serbs, with the attendant
danger of conflicts escalating in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, and beyond. As for Bosnia, our rejection and
denunciation of the brazen claims of Pale Serbs to more
than half of the country's territory, and of their
intransigence with respect to the Contact Group peace plan,
is well known. We are, nevertheless, disquieted by the
steady erosion of the four-month cease-fire in Bosnia. We
had welcomed this cease-fire as providing an opening for
serious talks - but the opening is fast closing up again. As
a possible preview of coming attractions, belligerents are
striving to expand the territory they control by force, and
appear to be using the winter lull not to negotiate for peace,
but, rather, to prepare for war, for another spring offensive.
Lamentably, playing the military card will surely increase
the number of victims without significantly shifting the
battle lines - and hopes for peace, slim as they are, will
recede even further.

We feel very strongly that no resolution of this
Council can be successful unless and until the belligerent
parties themselves are ready for peace and working for
peace. And in this context we feel that UNPROFOR itself,
now limited only to the territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, will have slim chances of being successful in
fulfilling its mandate if the cease-fire is not adhered to and
extended beyond its current expiry date.

The draft resolution we are voting on today with
regard to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is
the one with good news. In that country, the United Nations
has demonstrated that preventive military deployment can
work, and this fact is appropriately reflected in the new
name of the operation there - the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force, or UNPREDEP. Thanks to
the operations of the United Nations Protection Force, the
situation has been stabilized, certainly in so far as

 

preventing the eruption or further expansion of open
conflagrations is concerned. Lessons from there may well
be applicable to other parts of the world as well.

The war-tom countries of the South Slavs have seen
any number of peace plans come and go. My Government
is in principle prepared to respect any solution to the
crises that the belligerent parties agree upon, provided
certain basic principles are adhered to. One such is
respect for the territorial integrity of all the States in the
region, within their internationally recognized borders.
Another is the provision of serious guarantees for the
protection of human rights and the rights of all minorities.
We have repeatedly pointed out our belief that the
mutual recognition of all States of the South Slavs would
provide an important impetus for exiting from their crises.
The proposed summit meeting of representatives of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro),
the Republic of Croatia and the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina might offer one occasion to take this step. A
more helpful approach on the part of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia authorities would be of particular
importance and would without a doubt meet with an
appropriate response from the international community.

I mentioned earlier some of the players instrumental
in seeking ways out of the Balkan turmoil, despite what
at times appear to be formidable, even insurmountable,
obstacles. We salute the efforts of the Member States of
the Contact Group. We welcome the continuing efforts of
the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia,
United Nations officials, the European Union and other
international players, as well as those of all forces of
peace that are making themselves heard through the
clamour of war in the countries themselves. Our gratitude
goes also to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization for its
support of the United Nations role in the region. Above
all, though, we salute the soldiers of UNPROFOR. We
extend our sympathy to those who have suffered injuries
and mourn those - and there have been far too many of
them - who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the
name of the solidarity of our United Nations.

