Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): It is regrettable that the
situation in Central Africa and the Great Lakes region
remains tense and fragile, and therefore requires the
continuing involvement of the international
community. It is important to recognize that conflicts
in that region often involve neighbouring countries,
which obliges us to seek their resolution from a
regional perspective. I therefore welcome your
decision, Mr. President, to convene this meeting, which
will enable us to address the issues from a region-wide
perspective.

At the Third Tokyo International Conference on
African Development (TICAD III), held last
September, Japan indicated that the consolidation of
peace is one of three pillars of our assistance to Africa
and that great emphasis is to be placed on the
promotion of human security. We consider the Great
Lakes region to be a priority subregion - one in which
efforts for the consolidation of peace and the
promotion of human security are definitively required.

Regarding the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I would first like to express our deep sorrow
over the killing in the Ituri region of one ofthe Kenyan
military observers from the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). That occurrence demonstrates
that, despite the progress in the peace process since the
establishment of the transitional Government, the
situation in the eastern part of the country remains
insecure and precarious.

Japan fully supports the focused redeployment of
MONUC troops to the eastern areas. In order to further
strengthen the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, it goes without saying that
reform of the security sector is of vital importance.
Japan thus decided last October to extend assistance in
the amount of approximately $4 million for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
Congolese soldiers. We are also considering extending
additional assistance in this area, in coordination with
the United Nations and other donors.

I understand that the Security Council is
discussing measures to enhance the arms embargo
imposed in the eastern part of the territory, such as the
establishment of a group of technical experts to
conduct preliminary investigations and of a sanctions
committee to make recommendations to the Council
based on the findings of the expert group, as proposed
by the Secretary-General. We would like to stress in
this connection that any measures introduced by the
Council must be based on a careful study of their cost-
effectiveness, in order to ensure that they are both
feasible and effective.

As for Burundi, Japan welcomes the meeting that
took place in the Netherlands between the
representatives of the Forces nationales de liberation
and President Ndayizeye, and their agreement to
continue their talks. We strongly hope that, although
the situation is still fragile and the outcome difficult to
predict, those talks will eventually lead to lasting peace
in Burundi. At the same time, we are very much
encouraged to note that African initiatives for conflict
resolution and peace consolidation are also under way
in Burundi. The efforts of South Africa and Tanzania to
facilitate and mediate a peace agreement, the summit-
level initiative of the Great Lakes region, and the
African Mission in Burundi (AMIB) - the first
peacekeeping operation of the African Union (AU) -
all represent the crystallization of the main principle
underlying the New Partnership for Africa's
Development and TICAD - that is, African
ownership - and we greatly appreciate those efforts.

We welcome the entry into force of the Protocol
on the Peace and Security Council of the AU, which
will enable African countries to deal with conflict in
the region more effectively. Japan is convinced that
conflicts in Africa can be more effectively addressed
by African countries themselves, as they naturally have
greater knowledge and cultural sensitivity, as well as a
strong sense of ownership, with regard to conflict in
the region. Also, Japan believes that the success of
such AU activities, including AMIB, will be of
decisive importance for conflict resolution in Africa in
the future. Japan appreciates the contribution of South
Africa, Ethiopia and Mozambique in this connection
and strongly hopes that, given sufficient international
support, the activities of AMIB will continue to be
conducted effectively.

As a member of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Burundi established by the Economic and Social
Council, I had the valuable experience of participating
in the international effort to conduct a needs
assessment exercise in the areas of humanitarian and
economic assistance, as well as in the formulation of
advice on the coordination and effective
implementation of such assistance. I found that
Burundi needs international assistance in a number of
areas. In order to promote the post-conflict peace
process in Burundi, Japan intends to support that
country, in coordination with other countries, the
United Nations and the international organizations
concerned. More concretely, we will consider
extending appropriate assistance for improving human
security for the people, promoting disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and implementing
elections in accordance with specific requests by the
Government of Burundi and international
organizations, once relevant national programmes have
been finalized.

I am aware that a United Nations reconnaissance
mission is now on the ground to assist in the effort to
consolidate the peace in Burundi. Japan intends to send
a concurrent mission to Bujumbura next week to have
discussions with our partners on future cooperation
between our two countries. To date, the Security
Council has assessed the situation among its 15
members only and made important decisions without
consulting the major non-member financially
contributing countries - although the Council
certainly expects to share the financial burden of its
decisions with the non-members.

Japan therefore welcomes the fact that on this
occasion the Secretariat is providing major donors and
contributors with the opportunity to send concurrent
missions to conduct assessments alongside the United
Nations mission. We hope that this will become a
precedent for the future. We would also like to see
Burundi, in the process of its transition from the post-
conflict stage to reconstruction and development,
become a model for the promotion of human security
in Africa.

As a member ofthe Group of Friends of the Great
Lakes Region, Japan finds it regrettable that the
international conference has been postponed until the
end of this year. Naturally, we are hoping that the
conference will be a success, but at the same time we
are concerned about the overly broad themes and
agenda. We would like to emphasize that the focus of
the conference should be the consolidation of peace.

In order to consolidate peace, it is essential to
demonstrate the dividends of peace to the people in the
local community and to advance the peace process,
humanitarian and reconstruction assistance and security
in a comprehensive and integrated manner. Relying on
this conviction, we remain strongly committed to the
consolidation ofpeace in the region.

