Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for your
concept note (S/2015/793, annex). I would like to start
by saying that we should keep in mind that we must
tackle a two-track reform of the Security Council,
one is structural and the other deals with the working
methods.

Algeria commends the efforts to hold more open
debates, interactive dialogues and monthly wrap-up
sessions. However, we strongly believe that the Security
Council can do more in terms of its transparency and
openness - and thus its effectiveness. Obviously,
some steps could be easily taken. I wish to mention
open debates as an example. It is rather puzzling that
decisions are often made on an issue by the Security
Council, and only then does that constitute a reason for
initiating an open debate. It is certainly important to
have Member States express their opinions, but their
opinions should precede decisions.

I would like to highlight some of the measures
that my country deems important for improving the
efficiency of the work of the Security Council.

First, there is the matter of formalizing of the rules
of procedure, which have remained provisional for the
past 70 years,

Secondly, the number of public meetings should
be increased in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of
the Charter of the United Nations. Closed meetings and
informal consultations should be kept to a minimum
and held only as an exception. The use of what is known
as groups of friends or penholders on specific issues
needs to acquire perennial relevance through more
interaction between members and non-members alike.

Thirdly, the Council should establish subsidiary
organs in accordance with the Charter. Wuch organs
should report on their activities to the general
membership of the United Nations, in an adequate and
timely manner.

Fourthly, cooperation between the Council and
regional and subregional organizations is crucial.
States that have undertaken mediation or good offices
initiatives should be given ample opportunity to interact
with the Council. Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter
ought to be given priority on a more frequent basis.
Moreover, with regard to article 99 of the Charter, the
Secretary-General has a powerful tool at his disposal.
Inclusiveness would most certainly benefit the
international community as a whole when it comes to
early warning, conflict prevention and resolution and
the promotion of peace.

Fifthly, the Security Council should take into
account the recommendations of the General Assembly
on matters relating to international peace and security,
pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 11 of the Charter.
Issues on the agenda of the General Assembly or the
Economic and Social Council should not be shifted to
the Security Council agenda.

Sixthly, we need to have enhanced cooperation
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly. The Council's report to the Assembly should
be more detailed and analytical, and discussions on its
contents need to be more comprehensive.

My country, which serves as the coordinator
for the Non-Alligned Movement on the question
of the revitalization of the General Assembly, has
always strongly advocated for the improvement of the
structural relationship between the General Assembly
and the Security Council. In that regard, the selection
of the next Secretary-General and the use of the veto
are matters that require our attention, if we want to
send the right message and strengthen our collective
work in the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Security Council is the executive board
of the General Assembly. It acts on behalf of the entire
international community and is also answerable to it
through the General Assembly.

Finally, I would like to stress that the question
on the working methods of the Security Council is an
integral part of its reform process. I therefore reaffirm
the African common position as outlined in the
Ezulwini Consensus.

