Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We are grateful to the
Prosector for her detailed briefing on the situation in
Darfur. This is the third report our delegation has heard
since we joined the Council in 2016, and we find it
alarming that so little progress has been made in the
ensuing period and actually since the Security Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) over 10 years ago. We welcome
the recent months' reports of the visible improvement
of the situation in Darfur and we recognize the positive
role of the Sudan's Government in this.
Nevertheless, we remain deeply concerned
about violations of international humanitarian law,
human rights violations and abuses, including attacks
against camps of internally displaced persons (IDPs),
sexual and gender-based violence and other crimes
committed in Darfur in the past. The Council should
pay special attention to these crimes. It is even more
alarming that those most responsible for them are not
held accountable. The ICC is not the one to blame for
the current situation. On the contrary, we commend
the efforts the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC has
undertaken to move the process forward.

However, the Court's capacities are limited when
it comes to execution and enforcement measures. The
ICC relies entirely on States' cooperation in carrying
out arrests and surrendering suspects. Resolution
1593 (2005), on Darfur, obliges the Government of the
Sudan and all other parties to the conflict to cooperate
fully with and provide any necessary assistance to the
Court and the Prosecutor. Unfortunately, the Sudanese
authorities continue to question the Court's jurisdiction.

The travels of the Darfur suspects across
international borders with total impunity, including
during the reporting period, is also a matter of concern.
In this regard, we call on all actors in the region and
beyond to fully comply with all their commitments
and obligations without exception and ensure full
cooperation with the ICC. We would like to emphasize
that non-compliance with ICC decisions and requests
undermine the foundations of the international criminal
justice system. In this respect, we welcome the decision
of Gambia to revoke its withdrawals from the Rome
Statute. We hope to see its full cooperation with the
Court as the next step.

We should consolidate our efforts against impunity.
Failure to bring tojustice those responsible for the worst
crimes promotes further violations. The inevitability of
punishment, irrespective of position or the nationality
of perpetrators, is a sine qua non.

Finally, I would like to thank the Prosecutor for her
dedicated efforts. We hope that her work, despite the
challenges just mentioned and limited resources, will
bring concrete and tangible results.

