Mr. Dieng: I thank the President of the Security
Council, Mr. Matthew Rycroft, for convening this
meeting and for extending an invitation to me to
brief members on the situation in Burundi from the
perspective of my mandate.

I last briefed the Council on the situation in Burundi
last May, following my visit to Burundi. I observed
then that, although the crisis in Burundi was primarily
political in nature, some senior Burundian leaders were
manipulating the issue of ethnicity to advance their
political interests. I warned that, ifthey continued to do
so, the result could be an increase in violence in which
individuals could be targeted based on their political or
ethnic affiliation.

Unfortunately, that is what has happened. The
country appears to be on the verge of descending into
violence that could escalate to atrocity crimes. The
ongoing efforts to promote dialogue have not succeeded
in bringing the Government and the opposition to
common ground.

The violence and human rights violations reported
during the recent period include the assassination of
senior members of the security forces and high-profile
individuals affiliated with both the ruling party and
the opposition, as well as targeted killings of ordinary
civilians.

We are also witnessing the continued militarization
ofopposition political parties and actors, both inside and
outside Burundi. Those supporting the opposition have
carried out targeted killings across the country. The
violence has escalated tensions and further destabilized
the country. My Office has received reports of civilians
fleeing from areas perceived to be sympathetic to the
opposition for fear of attacks.

I was alarmed by the speech given on 29 October
by Reverien Ndikuriyo, the President of the Senate, in
which he used inflammatory and threatening language.
Some ofthe language used was very similar to that used
before and during the genocide of the Tutsi in Rwanda,
during which Hutu moderates and others were killed, in
particular the repeated use of the word gukora, which
means "to work" in Kirundi and was used to incite
people to commit genocide in Rwanda in 1994. This
speech adds to the fear that ruling-party officials may
be preparing the ground for widespread violence in
Burundi.

It is therefore critical that the President and the
senior leadership refrain from making or uttering
any statement that could be considered as inciting
populations to commit crimes against their fellow
citizens. To do so is both dangerous and irresponsible,
and it is prohibited under international law.

If there was ever a time for President Nkurunziza
and his Government to display responsible and
courageous leadership, it is now. For the sake of all
Burundians, we need the Government to commit to
restoring peace and security through dialogue and to
take a series of concrete steps to de-escalate the current
crisis. At the same time, this responsibility does not lie
with Burundi's Government alone; the international
community, in particular the East African Community,
the African Union and the United Nations have an
indispensable role to play in restoring peace to Burundi.

In its October communique, the African Union's
Peace and Security Council expressed its determination
to impose sanctions against those perpetrating violence,
called for the deployment of additional human rights
monitors, including by the African Union Commission,
to investigate the ongoing violations, and requested the
African Union Commission to develop contingency
planning for the potential deployment of a peacekeeping
mission to protect civilians. This strong commitment
must be followed through with action and supported by
the international community.

To deter further violence, the Security Council
should take urgent measures to prevent the situation
from escalating, including by providing full support
to the immediate implementation of the decisions of
the African Union Peace and Security Council. The
deployment of African Union human rights monitors
could be a key deterrent against human rights violations
and abuses. The Council could urge the Government
of Burundi to finalize negotiations with the African
Union on the presence of these monitors, so that they
can be deployed, have unrestricted access and carry out
their mandate without hindrance.

Another essential factor that would contribute to
preventing the situation from escalating further is the
taking of measures that could act as a deterrent by
putting in place measures to hold accountable those who
may commit acts of violence and incite violence. The
persistent accountability gap and prevailing impunity
for ongoing serious human rights violations and
abuses, including discourse that constitutes incitement
to violence, is fuelling the crisis in Burundi. Such
measures could include the immediate establishment
of a commission of inquiry to investigate the ongoing
violations, as recommended by the African Union. It is
also important to remind Burundi that, as a State party
to the International Criminal Court, those inciting
or engaging in atrocity crimes will risk criminal
prosecution.

Burundi is at a crossroads, and the international
community needs to wake up to this reality. No one
should underestimate what is at stake. The civil war
between 1993 and 2005 cost over 300,000 lives and
displaced more than 1 million people in Burundi. The
country's history and that of its neighbour Rwanda
have shown the tragic consequences of failing to act
when leaders incite or fail to contain violence. Beyond
the possible human toll, a return to conflict would put
the Arusha Agreement at risk and have destabilizing
consequences for the entire region. We should act
before it is too late. The United Nations has invested
heavily in Burundi and cannot fail to take appropriate
action now. I urge the Security Council to send a clear
and united message to the Government in Bujumbura
that it has an obligation to sit down with the opposition
to address their differences peacefully. The Council
should also call on all actors to renounce the use of
violence. Only a sincere and constructive dialogue can
avert the impending catastrophe in Burundi.

I should also invite the Council to urge the
Government to bring to justice all perpetrators of
human rights violations and crimes being committed.
My Office and other experts and institutions have
stressed that without unity in the Council on the
situation in Burundi, and the action that must be taken
to reverse the current crisis, Burundi may slide back
into a chaos with which we are all too familiar. Given
the clear information we have about the gravity of the
situation, we will not be able to claim, if a full-scale
conflict erupts, that we did not know. The international
community has a responsibility to protect Burundians
and to prevent the commission of atrocity crimes.

