The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.

Many points have been made, and the discussion
has gone on for a while. I shall therefore be brief and
will make just a few points.

First of all, I want to thank the two Special
Envoys for their service and for their briefings today.
They have described well the situation and the
challenges that we face. They have challenged the
Security Council; now, the ball is in our court as to
what to do in the face of what they have described. I
would like to emphasize a few points drawn from their
briefings and to speak of what we need to do.

Secondly, the situation could, of course, get
worse. Therefore, the first task for us is to determine
what we can do to avoid that. Certainly, if the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) is not
implemented - if the North-South agreement falls
apart - the situation in the Sudan could get a lot
worse. Therefore, it is very important that we remain
attentive to the implementation of the CPA. Right after
this meeting, the Council will issue a presidential
statement with regard to Abyei; that should send the
good message that the Council remains engaged and
focused on the issue of the CPA. That has to be a
continuing preoccupation of ours in the coming period.
The third point I would like to make is with
regard to the security situation. I think it is clear, at
least to me and to my delegation, that that is
fundamental: without security - or improved security,
as we will not be able to have perfect security for some
time to come - everything is at risk. I do not think

you can have much political progress in an
environment where there is the current degree of
insecurity. I will come to the political track later, but
we know that there are many sources of insecurity.
Addressing all of them simultaneously is also a
considerable challenge. There are internal factors and
external, regional, factors that affect the security
situation.

One thing that is a very important help with
regard to security is the deployment of an effective
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). The Council has expressed itself
unanimously on this issue. Unfortunately, the
deployment has not taken place as expected in terms of
speed and the effectiveness of the force. There are
challenges that we need to address and that we need to
be more attentive to, in our view. One of these is to
make sure that we are attentive to the Secretariat: that
the United Nations and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations do what they need to do.
Several colleagues spoke about the logistics
requirement, which needs to be addressed. There are
resources available: money that has been dedicated to
this effort. But I think that this has been rather slow.
The United Nations - the Secretariat - can and
should do more, and we need to be more attentive in
order to make sure that our intent is well understood
and that all possible speed that can be generated is
indeed generated.

Also, I think frankly that we have not been tough
enough with the Government of Sudan. I think it has
been, shall we say, dragging its feet with regard to the
implementation of an effective force, and colleagues
have not been prepared to incentivize that Government
appropriately. I think we need to look at what we can
do and what should be done to make sure that an
effective force is in place. Sometimes, the willingness
of the Government to negotiate on the political track is
being used as a shield to avoid pressuring it on these
other things as much as it needs to be pressured. I think
that to deal with this problem we need to focus on this.

The third point is the issue of getting the right
capabilities there. All of us need to redouble our efforts
to get the international community to ensure that the
capabilities are made available, whether it be heavy-lift
or medium-lift capacity or helicopters. For our part, the
United States, of course, is spending about
$100 million to get African forces - 6,000 of them at
least - to the level of capability where they can be
deployed there as quickly as possible. I think we could
be more focused in order to encourage the deployment
or availability of appropriate assets.

Also, I think one factor that affects the situation
is the arms in the area. We need to look at the situation
with regard to the embargo - several colleagues have
raised this - and see whether the embargo is being
implemented effectively or not.

I will briefly touch on the fourth point, on the
political process. It is obviously very important.
Ultimately, without it there cannot be peace in Darfur
or in Sudan. The challenges have been outlined very
well: the fragmentation of the rebel movements; the
disagreements among rebel groups; the Government
policies, not only with regard to Darfur - although it
has been willing to negotiate - but also, as mentioned,
its policies relating to the CPA; and the regional
rivalries that exist. All of that makes this difficult. We
have to look at whether there are ways in which we
could incentivize the parties to move. What can each of
us do, or what can we - or some subset of us - do
together to do better?

We welcome the imminent appointment of a chief
mediator. Ambassador Kumalo said we should pray for
him; we will do more than that: we will pray for him
and we will cooperate with him as well. I know that he
will face a serious challenge, and for him to succeed
we need to see how to incentivize the various parties.

In my view, we would be mistaken to expect a lot
from the political track in the short term, given the
difficulties that exist. Therefore, I think that the short-
term focus needs to be more on the security track: to
improve the security environment by having more
capable forces there.

My last point is that I think that the situation -
which some colleagues have described as gloomy or
difficult - could lead one to be fatigued and perhaps
to say that there is not much we can do about it and
that we have to learn to live with the situation. I think
that would be a mistake. I think it is important to
restate that this is an important situation with huge
implications, not only in political and security terms,
as was described very ably by the two Special Envoys,
but also in terms of the terrible humanitarian situation.
It therefore needs to remain a focus of our efforts.
Certainly, it is for my Government. But also, we have
to recognize that our own credibility, as the Security
Council, is at stake here, given the resolutions we have
adopted and the resources that are being spent and that
there is a willingness to spend.

What we need to do is to adjust our approach, to
be more effective than we have been, because there is
certainly a big gap between where we want to be and
where we are. Thus, I think that the two
Special Envoys have provided us with some issues to
consider - and to consider seriously. Again, I want to
thank them for their service and for their briefings
today. My country holds both of them in high regard.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Eliasson to respond to
comments and questions raised.

