Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): Before I begin, I should
like to join previous speakers in conveying my
delegation's best wishes to Ambassador Wang Yingfan
and to say that we shall sorely miss his presence at this
table. We should also like to extend a very warm
welcome to the new Permanent Representative of
Chile, Ambassador Mufioz.

We should like to thank you, Sir, for convening
this meeting on Afghanistan, with its special emphasis
on the problem of illicit narcotics. In that regard, I also
wish to thank Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Costa for their
briefings.

Afghanistan today is a major source of the
world's opium. It is also a major point of origin for
much of the illicit morphine, heroin and hashish that
are available on the street. Therefore, this drug problem
is not just Afghanistan's problem; it is also a serious
problem for Afghanistan's neighbours and for the
regions beyond.

Over the years, in an environment of conflict and
lawlessness, Afghanistan became a primary locus for
drugs. Although opium production in Afghanistan
almost disappeared in the year 2000, it has since
increased significantly. Last year, opium production
stood at 3,400 metric tons. The projections for this year
are for nearly the same level of production, if not more.
An area whose size is estimated at 74,000 hectares
remains under opium cultivation.

The problem of illicit narcotics in Afghanistan is
a cross-cutting one that not only affects that country's
relief and reconstruction efforts but is also exacerbated
by the general lack of security and lawlessness in the
country. Ordinary Afghans continue to live in fear of
armed men, from ordinary brigands to powerful
warlords. Factional fighting and ethnic and even
internecine conflict mar much of the landscape. Added
to that are the activities of the Taliban and of other
rebel elements that have recently targeted not only
coalition forces and International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) personnel but also international
humanitarian staff, including demining personnel and
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
officials. Pakistan unequivocally condemns all such
acts, as well as attempts to undermine the authority of
President Karzai. Only last week, President Musharraf
once again made it amply clear that the Taliban was not
good for Afghanistan and that it is not good for
Pakistan.

For Pakistan, the Government of President Karzai
is the only legitimate authority, and therefore only its
writ - not those of the self-styled commanders -
should run throughout the country. Until the authority
of the Afghan Transitional Administration is extended
throughout the country, the lawlessness and the
security threats will continue. The lack of security and
of law and order is the basic catalyst for the illicit
production and trafficking of narcotics. Such activities
are fed by abject poverty and a lack of alternative
livelihoods. They are perpetuated and protected by
influential commanders who defy the decrees of the
central Government and flout the ban on growing
poppy. As long as the drug trade flourishes, the
prospects of peace and stability in Afghanistan - as
well as the chances for its recovery and reconstruction
- will remain dim.

The drug problem in Afghanistan also has serious
implications for its neighbours, particularly Pakistan.
Before the conflict began in Afghanistan, the number
of drug addicts in Pakistan was negligible; today, there
are nearly 3.5 million of them. That is in spite of the
fact that Pakistan has taken strong and effective
measures to deal with drug production on its side of the
border. Pakistan is no longer a poppy-cultivating
country; its production of poppy, amounting to 800
metric tons in the early 1990s, has now come down to
almost zero. Yet the illicit trafficking in narcotics from
Afghanistan continues. Last year, Pakistani law-
enforcement authorities seized 2,700 kilograms of
opium, 6,800 kilograms of morphine, 5,900 kilograms
of heroin and 85,000 kilograms of hashish. That
amounted to 67 per cent by volume of all the drugs
seized in the region surrounding Afghanistan.
Unfortunately, the illicit outflow of narcotics has
increased even more this year. In one raid alone, our
authorities intercepted 1,350 kilograms of heroin.

The problem of the production of and trade in
illicit narcotics originating in Afghanistan is growing.
In our View, there needs to be a comprehensive and
coordinated approach, not only to interdict the illicit
trafficking of drugs, but also to deal with their source.
Pakistan welcomes the decree issued by President
Karzai on 17 January 2003 banning the production of
opium, and calls on the international community to
provide all possible assistance to the Afghan
Government to help implement its national drug
control strategy to eliminate drug production by the
year 2013. We also support the lead role taken by the
United Kingdom and Germany, respectively, to help
build Afghan capacities in counter-narcotics and law
enforcement. Pakistan also participated in the
Ministerial Conference on Drug Routes from Central
Asia to Europe, held last month in Paris, and supports
its outcome as another milestone in evolving a
comprehensive approach to the drug problem in
Afghanistan.

Nevertheless, such a comprehensive approach
must begin with effective measures inside Afghanistan.
These include strengthened law enforcement and the
extension of State authority to all parts of the country,
especially over all the border controls and customs
posts. At the same time, there is also a need to wean
Afghan farmers away from poppy cultivation. This will
require the provision of immediate assistance in crop
substitution and income support to the affected Afghan
farmers and landless labourers. Anti-opium production
strategies must be mainstreamed into the national
reconstruction programmes and integrated into rural
development strategies, giving priority to major areas
under opium poppy cultivation, especially in the south-
eastern areas of Afghanistan.

Pakistan, with its own successes in curbing opium
production, providing alternative livelihoods to farmers
and drug interdiction, stands ready to work with the
international community to assist the Afghan
Government in meeting its counter-narcotics goals. The
best framework for promoting regional cooperation in
counter-narcotics has remained the existing framework
of the existing framework of the "six-plus-two"
mechanism, which has had a successful history, at least
in the area of regional counter-narcotics cooperation.

However, no counter-narcotics mechanism can be
effective unless neighbouring countries continue to
receive international support. Neighbouring States,
such as Pakistan, are in the front line of the war against
drugs and face the brunt of its consequences. It is they
who, after Afghanistan, require the most assistance in
counter-narcotics, especially in bolstering their law
enforcement capacities. A coordinated approach based
on sharing information - involving Afghan authorities,
the neighbouring States and coalition forces - can
make effective headway in dismantling illegal drug
laboratories and destroying stockpiles of narcotics.

While interdiction methods are useful, the
problem of illicit drug manufacturing cannot be
effectively tackled unless the chemical precursors used
in drug manufacturing - especially acetic
anhydride - can be prevented from reaching the illicit
laboratories in Afghanistan. The most effective way to
do this is to trace back the supply of the precursors to
their countries of origin and to eliminate them at
source. In this, countries which produce these
chemicals bear a special responsibility to prevent their
outflow. Without the precursors, there would be no
illicit heroin or morphine.

No measure to counter the threat of drugs can be
effective unless it can address both the demand and the
supply sides of the illegal drug trade. Reducing the
supply of drugs must take place alongside effective
demand reduction. In dismantling the networks
engaged in smuggling illicit narcotics, special attention
needs to be paid also to tracing back and prosecuting
its financing at source. Demand-reduction strategies
must be evolved not only for Afghanistan and the
transit States, but also for countries which are the
destination markets. The street price for drugs in
Afghanistan or its neighbouring States is negligible
compared to that available in the destination States.
Unless strong enforcement action is taken - not only
against the suppliers, but also against the consumers
and financiers of illicit drugs in destination States -
the drug problem will not go away.

Let me conclude by once again strongly
supporting the pledges made by President Karzai to
eliminate illicit drug production and to control all
trafficking and abuse of drugs in Afghanistan. It is in
the interest of all of us to work together to assist
Afghanistan in this endeavour. We look forward to the
day when Afghanistan is free from drugs and its
neighbours, especially Pakistan, are also safe from this
scourge.

