Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First, I
wish to join those who have already thanked
Ambassador Oshima for the briefing to the Council this
morning on the results of the lessons learned by the
Security Council mission to Afghanistan. My
delegation fully supports that assessment of the
situation, as well as the recommendations, and would
like to congratulate Ambassador Oshima for the
manner in which he prepared and led the mission. My
delegation also supports the statement to be made later
by Finland on behalf of the European Union.

I wish to make a few additional comments on
what my delegation believes should guide the future
actions of the international community and in
particular, those of the United Nations. Given the fear
that the international community could disengage, it is
crucial to reaffirm the long-term commitment of the
international community to Afghanistan and the
Security Council mission has contributed to that
assurance.

Afghanistan is experiencing a difficult situation,
even if the security situation appears to be stabilizing
as winter approaches. The contribution of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to the
improvement must be recognized - Operation Medusa
has strengthened its credibility - and it must continue
to receive our full support. Beyond that, we must also
strengthen our efforts to provide training and
equipment for the Afghan security forces. France is
strongly committed to those efforts through its military
presence in Afghanistan.

The many difficult problems faced by
Afghanistan cannot be resolved exclusively through
military means. Our action must be part of a global
strategy to strengthen the responsibility of the Afghan
authorities and neighbouring countries and improve the
daily living conditions of the population. Thus, it is
important for the Afghan authorities and the
international community to maintain their efforts. That
is true first of all for the Afghan authorities. They must
strive to achieve, within the timeframe, the objectives
set forth in the Afghanistan Compact by placing
particular priority on the following issues: improved
governance and a firm fight against corruption, the
disbandment of illegally armed groups - a necessary
condition for long-term stability - and lastly,
strengthening the fight against drug trafficking within
the national strategy adopted by the Afghanistan
Government. Efforts already under way concerning
protection of human rights must also be continued.

At the same time, the international community
must maintain its own efforts. The United Nations,
through the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), has a central and impartial
role - namely, for coordination of the implementation
of the Afghanistan Compact. It alone has the necessary
legitimacy and expertise to assume the role of
coordinator in reconstruction efforts and promoting
support to strengthen the State of Afghanistan.
Therefore, we must give UNAMA the means to fully
carry out its mission.

My delegation reiterates its wish that the
presence of UNAMA be extended to new provinces,
subject to security conditions. We also take the
opportunity to pay tribute to the work of UNAMA and
in particular, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tom Koenigs.

Lastly, the neighbouring countries of Afghanistan
have a decisive role to play. Pakistan and Afghanistan
must work hand in hand in order to fully control the
borders between the two countries. The work of the
Tripartite Commission, as well as the Jirga project on
both sides of the border, are both positive
developments. Those efforts must be part of an overall
perspective to strengthen regional cooperation. We
must therefore maintain our efforts to deal with the
current difficulties and not endanger the significant
progress that has been made since the Bonn process.
France will play its full role in that effort.

