Ms. Bird (Australia): I thank the President for
Jordan's ongoing contribution to this very important
agenda item, going back to the Amman message during
World Interfaith Harmony Week.

Along with many Member States, Australia is
facing unprecedented numbers of youth travelling
to fight for Daesh, Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab and other
terrorist groups. No community or social group is
immune to terrorist recruitment. One of the teenagers
intercepted by police at Sydney airport last month on
his way to join a terrorist group was affluent, a high
academic achiever and a member of the debating and
football teams.

Australia has strengthened laws and boosted
resources to prevent terrorist recruitment. The Foreign
Minister has cancelled over 100 passports to prevent
travel. Counter-terrorism units in our airports have
intercepted teenagers as young as 16 attempting to join
Daesh's ranks. But measures to strengthen security and
law enforcement alone are not the solution. Additional
action is needed as part of a multidimensional strategy.
As others have said here today, that includes looking
at whether we are sufficiently addressing the root
causes of Violent extremism and fostering peaceful
and cohesive societies. Our strategies for countering
terrorism and supporting peace need to place youth
at the centre. Young people can be more vulnerable
to outside influences and are often seeking a sense of
purpose and belonging. Some have less ability to rebut
or contest radical or extremist ideas. That is why young
people are often the number one target of terrorist
groups.

Take the example of the 18-year old Australian
who is reported to have killed 17 people in a suicide
attack in Ramadi last month. He has been described as
a shy and impressionable boy who grew up an atheist
in Melbourne. We have heard other similarly tragic
stories today. One of the biggest challenges we face in
countering extremist and radical ideas is the exposure
of young people to online propaganda. But simply
deleting all such material from the Internet is both
impossible and ineffective. We also need to involve
young people in the solutions. Young people themselves
are best placed to deliver positive messages to contest
extremist views. That is why in Australia, for example,
we are empowering youth to engage in constructive
debates through an online magazine called The Point,
written by young Australians for young Australians.

Despite the online threat, in most cases youth
are recruited through local networks, so it is also
important to focus attention at the community level.
Strong communities are often well placed to intervene
against attempts towards radicalization and build a
sense ofinclusion. Assistance in that area could include
empowering youth and non-governmental organizations
to run leadership and mentoring programmes and to
support youth participation in the arts and sport in
order to enhance equity and inclusion.

We need to continue sharing approaches that work
best, in particular those that effectively target and
engage youth. The Global Counter-Terrorism Forum's
good practices are a useful inspiration for all Member
States. The Security Council and all States must remain
proactive in using United Nations sanctions to target
those individuals recruiting youth for terrorism.

We also need to move beyond supporting better
coordination among the United Nations counter-
terrorism entities to ensure that all the relevant
programmes of the United Nations take account of the
roles of youth in countering violent extremism. We
hope that the United Nations plan of action will provide
the framework to guide that.

Today's debate takes us a step closer to placing
youth at the centre of terrorism prevention. We also
need to make the most of upcoming opportunities to
advance this agenda at the United Nations if we are to
overcome that threat.

