Mr. Naanda (Namibia): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and would like to thank you for
convening this very important debate on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. I also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the Head of the African Union (AU)
Mission in Mali and the Sahel, former President Pierre
Buyoya, for their insightful briefings. Let me use this
opportunity to also thank the non-permanent members
of the Security Council during 2013-2014 for their
contribution to the maintenance of a peaceful world.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representatiave of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Namibia also joins the other delegations
in condemning the horrendous attacks on the
schoolchildren in Pakistan. We believe the Security
Council has a duty to take action on that matter.

Today's peacekeeping activities have both increased
and strained United Nations resources and capacity
owing to various changes in the operations, both
quantitative and qualitative. Peacekeeping operations
are more complex and demanding then ever, with
various factors contributing to the changing nature of
peacekeeping. They include the often intra-State nature
of conflicts, the lack of full consent and cooperation
on the part of the parties and the breakdown of law and
order. The United Nations faces increasing challenges
from the emergence of uncontrolled militias and
armed civilians, the collapse of State structures and
the targeting of civilians during conflicts, with the
attendant humanitarian disasters, which include mass
movements of people, who become internally displaced
persons and refugees.

The importance of the partnership between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations can be traced to the timely intervention
of the African Union in the conflicts in the Sudan,
Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic and, recently, in Mali. Such
timely intervention averted the escalation of those
conflicts, which could have lead to ethnic cleansing,
and has contributed immensely to the later transfer
of those missions to United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

The United Nations has extensive experience in
best practices pertaining to peacekeeping operations.
We believe that experience is central to the partnership
and should be conveyed to the relevant regional
organizations. Furthermore, the respective roles should
be based on their comparative advantages. Regional
and subregional organizations have the comparative
advantages of geographic proximity and a deeper
understanding of the root causes of the conflict and the
cultural dimensions of the local community. Therefore,
the Council should engage more with regional
organizations so as to enable them to deal effectively
international peace and security issues.

Although Chapter V, Article 24, of the Charter of the
United Nations clearly vests the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
with the Security Council, the Charter also provides a
role for regional organizations and arrangements in the
maintenance of peace and security in their respective
regions. Chapter VI, Article 33, paragraph 1, provides
that parties to any dispute endangering international
peace and security

"shall, first of all, seek a solution by negotiation,
enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration,
judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or
arrangements, or other peaceful means oftheir own
choice."

Chapter VIII, Article 52, paragraph 1, stipulates that
nothing in the Charter is to preclude
"the existence of regional arrangements or agencies
for dealing with such matters relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security as
are appropriate for regional action".

Paragraph 2 of the same Article goes on to invite
Member States entering into such arrangements
or disputes through such regional arrangements or
constituting such agencies to

"make every effort to achieve pacific settlement of
local disputes through such regional arrangements
or by such regional agencies before referring them
to the Security Council."

Namibia has experience in its own region through the
Southern African Development Community (SADC). In
that regard, we understand implicitly the comparative
advantage that regional organizations can bring to
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
We fully subscribe to the complementarity of the
roles of regional organizations and the United Nations
in containing threats to peace and security. As such,
SADC member States have committed themselves to
strengthening the thematic group of the international
cooperating partners on peace and security by
enhancing capacity for implementation, monitoring,
evaluation. They have also agreed to a mutual defence
pact on military intervention to resolve regional conflict
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
In that connection, in March 1998, the SADC Organ on
Politics, Defence and Security Cooperation authorized
an intervention to restore democracy and the rule of
law in the Kingdom of Lesotho, after the disputed
parliamentary election results had ruling Lesotho
Congress for Democracy Party winning overwhelming,
79 out of 80 seats, and the opposition party alleged vote
fraud.

In 2009, following a coup in Madagascar, the
African Union suspended the country's membership.
SADC took the lead in mediating a solution and
appointed the former President of Mozambique, His
Excellency Mr. Joaquim Chissano, to try to mediate a
political solution, a process that led to the holding of
free and fair elections in Madagascar. This year, SADC
further resolved several months of political stalemate
in Lesotho. The mediation efforts were led by South
African Deputy President, His Excellency Mr. Cyril
Ramaphosa, on behalf of SADC.

In conclusion, I would like to thank regional
and subregional organizations for their valuable
contribution towards our shared goals of maintaining
international peace and security as set out in the United
Nations Charter.

