Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Let me first express our
heartfelt congratulations to you, Sir, and to the British
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of May. Allow me also to thank
and commend the South African delegation for its
stewardship during the month of April. We also wish to
underscore our gratitude to the Chairs of the three
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council for their
comprehensive briefings and contributions to the joint
efforts against international terrorism. We also
welcome their initiative to increase mutual cooperation
so as to maximize synergy, avoid duplication and lower
the burden on Member States.

While aligning itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly on behalf of the presidency of the
European Union, Italy will limit its remarks to the
following few points.

I would like warmly to thank Ambassador
Verbeke, who will soon leave his position as Chairman
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) - a task he fulfilled with great precision,
responsibility and leadership.

The briefing we heard a few minutes ago gave us
just a sampling of the many activities of the 1267
Committee. The sanctions list continues to be an
essential tool in the fight against international
terrorism. It is important that, with the continued
support of the wider membership, it be constantly
updated as a living document corresponding to the
ever-present threat of Al-Qaida and the Taliban. We
believe that improving the quality of the consolidated
list should be one of the key priorities of the Sanctions
Committee. That is because only complete identifiers
and a regular update of the list can provide Member
States with the precise information needed to more
effectively apply the sanctions regime that has been
established.

We acknowledge that legal challenges have been
raised to the sanctions list at the national and
international levels and that the Committee and the
Council have the responsibility to do everything
reasonable to improve the handling of specific cases.
We see the merit of the Security Council continuing on
the path of improving existing procedures, as was done
in the recent past with resolutions 1730 (2006) and
1735 (2006), so as to reconcile security demands with
respect for fundamental rights.

We would also like to express our utmost
gratitude for the high professional skills shown
throughout these years by the Monitoring Team, whose
contribution to the general debate on sanctions is all
the more relevant, and we look forward to the
negotiations for the renewal of its mandate.

The Security Council has recently renewed the
mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Executive

Directorate (CTED) confirming its main tasks and
responsibilities, while endorsing the reorganization
plan, which lays the groundwork for more efficient
action. To that end, Italy truly appreciates all the
efforts made by the Executive Director, Mr. Smith. We
hope that, with more focused action, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and CTED can better
exploit their role and potential as instruments of
dialogue with Member States. We also have to
reinforce every opportunity to better coordinate
international cooperation with donors, other
partners - such as the Security Council Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1540 (2004) - and their groups of experts, as well as
all the participants in the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.

We further encourage CTC and CTED to continue
to work with external organizations, such as the
Counter-Terrorism Action Group (CTAG) of the G8.
Italy is committed to strengthening such cooperation
during its presidency of the G8 next year. In that area,
we welcome the methodology introduced by CTED,
successfully implemented during the 17 April Tokyo
meeting with CTAG, aimed at identifying with the G8
presidency specific cases, countries, regions or themes
of mutual interest to be jointly discussed. That
methodology should contribute to the prevention of
duplication and overlapping in the provision of
technical assistance to interested countries.

Italy welcomes the recent adoption of resolution
1810 (2008), which renews the 1540 Committee's
mandate for three more years. We support the new
emphasis placed on the need to step up efforts to
promote the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), in particular through outreach activities and
international assistance. To that end, the sharing of
experience and lessons learned between the 1540
Committee, the membership and relevant international
and regional organizations will be crucial. Enhancing
cooperation between the 1540 Committee and the
Al-Qaida and Counter-Terrorism Committees will also
be essential to ensuring compliance with resolution
1540 (2004).

We look forward to fruitful discussions within the
1540 Committee on how to make the best use of and
improve existing funding mechanisms to assist States
in meeting their non-proliferation obligations. We also
look forward to the next comprehensive review of the
status of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
due by January 31 2009.

Let me conclude by saying a few words about the
September review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. Several initiatives have already been
produced in the framework of the Strategy. Member
States have a responsibility to continue on that track in
order to achieve progress in all areas of the broad plan
of action that was approved with the Strategy. We
welcome the Task Force's efforts thus far to achieve
specific goals in many important areas, and we
appreciate the contribution that both the Monitoring
Team and CTED have provided. Italy feels that those
joint efforts should continue and, if possible, be
strengthened. We look forward to the briefing that the
Task Force and its working groups will provide in the
near future.

