Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome this open debate of the Security Council
and support the statement made by the delegation of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Once again, we express our deep concern over
the situation in the Middle East, in particular the
lack of tangible progress towards a just, peaceful,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, which is at the heart of the Arab-
Israeli conflict.

It is regrettable that since the last time the Council
convened to consider this issue, there has been no
improvement in the situation on the ground. The
occupation of the Palestinian territory continues, as
do the confiscation of Palestinian lands and property,
the construction and expansion of settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, forced displacement, the full gamut of
illegal settlement policies and practices, and collective
punishment of the Palestinian people.

The Security Council must adopt concrete measures
to put an end to this historic injustice without further
delay. It should also immediately put an end to the
nearly decade-long blockade of the Gaza Strip, where
more than 2 million Palestinian civilians are immersed
in a deep socioeconomic and humanitarian crisis.

Cuba notes and supports the initiatives to resume
direct peace negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis and to promote reconciliation and
intra-Palestinian unity. Our country will continue to
support a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict that is based on a two-
State solution and allows the Palestinians to enjoy their
right to self-determination and a free, independent
and sovereign State, with its capital in East Jerusalem
and within the pre-1967 borders, as well as the right
of refugees to return. We will also continue to
support the entry of Palestine as a full Member of the
United Nations.

With regard to the Syrian Golan, Cuba demands
the end of the Israeli occupation and reiterates that
any measures or actions that have been or are being
taken to change the legal, physical and demographic
status and the institutional structure of the occupied
Syrian Golan, as well as Israel's measures to exercise
its jurisdiction and administration in that territory,
constitute violations of international law, international
agreements, the Charter and resolutions of the United
Nations, including Security Council resolution 497
(1981), and the Fourth Geneva Convention.

Cuba calls for a constructive and respectful
dialogue among the peoples of the region and for an end
to the violence, interference in internal affairs, foreign
aggression and conflicts in the Middle East.

