Mrs. Bernal Prado (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Peru for convening this open debate, which gives
us an opportunity to analyse the significant contribution
young people make to efforts to maintain and promote
peace and security, as well as the role they can play in
conflict prevention and resolution.

We appreciate the contributions made to this
debate. In particular, we thank Mr. Graeme Simpson
and his team for the independent progress study on
youth, peace and security (see S/2018/86). Our country
sponsored and participated in the drafting of resolution
2250 (2015), which was proposed by Jordan, during our
membership in the Council in 2015.

Chile values the recommendations made in the
study. It highlights the initiatives young people around
the world have undertaken towards peace and urges
Governments and international actors to recognize
young people as the missing peace. That is in line with
Sustainable Development Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, which promotes peaceful
and inclusive societies for sustainable development,
as well as Sustainable Development Goal 4, which,
among its goals, recommends an inclusive and quality
education for a culture of peace and non-violence
with respect to human rights, gender equality and an
appreciation of cultural diversity.

We highlight the synergies between resolution 1325
(2005) - and subsequent resolutions on the women
and peace and security agenda - and resolution 2250
(2015), given the important role that young women
play as agents of change and forgers of peace. In that
regard, we urge the system to consider such synergies
in the definition of its actions, as well as the link with
the Vancouver Principles, which cover the situation of
children in armed conflict.

A few days ago, the Secretary-General pointed out
that it is necessary to consider youth not as a threat, but
as an enormous potential for our world, especially in
our search for peace, development, justice and respect
for human rights. Consistent with that policy, our
country supports the initiatives and recommendations
related to sustaining peace, such as including advisers
on the protection of children and youth in peacekeeping
missions and operations. We also recall the important
role of the Arms Trade Treaty and subregional initiatives
to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, as well as the implementation of resolution
2143 (2014), co-sponsored by Chile.

The role of education in the future of our children
and youth is indisputable. We must therefore contribute
to promoting and protecting that right, even in conflict
and post-conflict situations. Chile has joined the Safe
Schools Declaration and urges an evaluation of the
Lucens Guidelines in that regard. Critical infrastructure,
such as hospitals and educational centres, must be
protected in accordance with international law in times
of peace and conflict. The well-being of young people
and their positive inclusion in society will depend on it.

At the regional level, in 2016, Chile adhered to the
Ibero-American Youth Pact, which creates a political,
economic and social alliance that promotes the integral
development of young people in order to reverse the
different forms of exclusion that may affect them.

At the national level, our country has established
the National Institute for Youth, a public body that
proposes and promotes programmes for young people.
In that regard, I would highlight grants for initiatives
in the areas of human rights, equality, inclusion,
integration and non-discrimination. We have also set
up a volunteer network at the national level and a youth
volunteer programme within the Pacific Alliance.

We would also like to highlight the recent
establishment of an office on childhood in the Ministry
for Social Development, dedicated to ensuring
comprehensive protection. That measure, which
gives continuity to work undertaken by the previous
Government, will allow the State to have access to a
dedicated institutional framework for coordinating
public services directed at children. Experience shows
that youth participation and inclusive development are
paramount if we want to help to build a more peaceful,
safe and just world for all.
