Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2333 (2016), extending the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). We
believe that it is unacceptable to extend the mandate
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
in circumstances where Blue Helmets are anticipating
exclusively peacebuilding tasks.

We were surprised by the text in the document
concerning the scope of the military and police
components of the Mission, which, as we know, will
be engaged in promoting elections, reform the security
and justice sectors, and broadcast United Nations radio.
We do not understand why those purely peaceful tasks
require the presence of 700 armed peacekeepers and 5
military helicopters in the country.

We have always been sympathetic to the positions
of Governments hosting United Nations peacekeeping
missions, but that does not mean that in formulating
its decisions, the Council Security should not take into
account all factors determining the situation in that
country. At the same time, we should not forget that
the Secretary-General, in his latest report on Liberia
(S/2016/968) clearly states that the security situation
remains stable and that the country has not experienced
any military threat for several years.
We note the position of the Liberian Government,
calling for an extension of the Mission's mandate in
its current form for one year. However, we are also
forced to note that this would appear to conceal the
usual dependency mentaility and attempts to assign
the United Nations tasks that Monrovia should long
since have been able to assume itself. We do not share
the conclusions of the Secretary-General's report that
the justification for maintaining the presence of the
peacekeeping operation in Liberia is a test ofthe ability
of national institutions to maintain stability. In other
words, United Nations personnel will be in Liberia just
to be on the safe side if the situation should deteriorate
in the run-up to the 2017 elections. In so doing, we will
divert troops and resources that the United Nations
sorely needs in other hot spots.

In that regard, we sincerely regret that the penholders
refused to reflect in the draft version an alternative to
the mass presence of peacekeepers, whereby the rapid
reaction force of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali could have
been proactively deployed in the election period. In
that connection, we have to reiterate our concerns
that working methods of resolution sponsors, which
ignored this and other sensible proposals of a number
of delegations. We cannot agree with the explanation
that the positions of delegations diverged significantly
and that there was no possibility to bring them closer
together. Such a situation calls for further efforts to
develop a compromise, especially as the time left the
end of the UNMIL mandate allowed us to do so.

