Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in French): I thank the
delegation of France for having organized this debate.

(spoke in Arabic)

Allow me to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon; the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein; the Patriarch of Babylon of
the Chaldeans, Mr. Louis Raphael I Sako; and member
of the Iraqi Parliament, Mrs. Vian Dakhil. I would like
to tell Mrs. Dakhil that her words were difficult for all
of us to hear, especially for me, as a woman and as an
Arab.

Numerous conflicts and daunting challenges
confront us in the Middle East region, whether we
are Muslims, Christians, Sunnis or Shiites. Multiple
experiments were conducted over the past century
to thwart the establishment of good governance,
moderation and tolerance. However, the region has never
witnessed the new kind of terrorism - assassinations
and killings, rape, forced displacements, persecution
of religious and ethnic minorities. This terrorism is
amplified in hate speeches and the misuse of religion
for political reasons. The heinous violence and crimes
committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
(ISIS) deliberately and systematically target religious
and ethnic minorities, notably Christians, Turkmen,
Kurds, Assyrians, Sabians, Mandeans and Kakais, with
the aim of annihilating those minorities as a group
and depopulating the region by direct killing or by
spreading fear among the populations.

Among the terrorist crimes perpetrated against
religious and ethnic groups are those of torture, rape,
women and girls enslaved and others forced to work
as combatants, suicide bombers, executioners, sex
slaves or forced workers. I would like to say that all
of those crimes and violations are new to our societies
in the Middle East region. Our region has historically
been known for its pluralism, tolerance, coexistence
and acceptance of others despite the fact that there
were many faiths, religions and sects living in the
region since time immemorial. Are these war crimes,
crimes against humanity or crimes of genocide? Such
terms indeed describe what we currently see. The real
challenge that our societies currently face is to hold
perpetrators accountable, deter and prevent impunity
by imposing punishment. We want to prevent the
recurrence of such crimes; therefore, we must monitor
and document the violations against ethnic or religious
minorities by extremist armed groups, with a View
to holding accountable those who have committed
or ordered such crimes, particularly those who have
committed operations of sexual Violence against, or
mass kidnappings of, girls and women, which is what
happened with the Yazidis recently.

We must create a mechanism to document the
immovable assets and wealth that armed groups
have seized from minorities. Needless to say, States
must provide protection to their religious and ethnic
minorities. We also stress the need for States not to
discriminate among its citizens on the basis of religion,
faith or sect. The Middle East region will never enjoy
peace and security unless efforts to combat extremism
and extremist thoughts are pursued in tandem with
joint, serious efforts to address the root causes of such
phenomena and the expansion of terrorist groups, or
unless the core questions of the region are addressed,
particularly the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the
Syrian crisis. Ignoring our responsibility to seek
permanent solutions to such crises does not only
encourage terrorism but will prevent us from the
achieving stability.

We must also fight hate crimes and address the root
causes of the attraction that terrorist organizations have
for young people. This popularity has allowed terrorist
organizations to promote their extremist ideologies. We
must recall that provocative actions against Muslims
will lead only to fomenting hate speech, because any
defamation of a religion or its followers is totally
extraneous to freedom of thought and expression.
There is a fine line between the exercise of freedom
and fomenting and inciting hate speech. This obdurate
racism and Islamophobic discourse are the best
propaganda for ISIS, Al-Qaida and other extremist
organizations.

Jordan, under the leadership of His Majesty
King Abdullah II, the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques and the protector of Islamic sites and the
Islamic religion, has supported every effort to protect
religious minorities, safeguard the Christian and Arab
identities and preserve the right to worship freely
based on the common denominators of Islam and
Christianity. His Highness said that the Christians of
the region are closer to understanding Islam because
they form part and parcel of our Arab societies and
have played an effective role in building our culture and
our civilization. Minorities do not represent only a faith
or a language; they are representative of many cultures,
because they are the common denominator of the value
of the region in which they live. The historical wealth
of eastern civilization is therefore the result of the
diversity and harmony among the region's components,
which has provided fertile ground for the development
of the culture of our region.

Jordan has stressed its policy of tolerance and
respect for religion in many initiatives, including the
Amman message, the proposal to proclaim World
Interfaith Harmony Week, and the initiative entitled "A
common word", on the common denominator between
Islam and Christianity, which is love of God and love of
neighbour. That is because we in Jordan believe in our
religious and ethical duty to protect minorities in Iraq
and Syria and other parts of the middle East. As we
have always done in the conflicts to which our region
has been exposed and because we wanted to provide
safe haven to the weak, we in Jordan hosted more than
2,000 Christians from Iraq who had sought safe haven
in Jordan following the terror that they had to endure
from ISIS and other groups.

In conclusion, diversity in society is natural, and
therefore building societies that are stable and live in
harmony is not only an ambition of the people of the
Middle East but also a usurped right that we hope to
recover, so that we can enjoy it the way we did in the
past.

