Mr. Vantsevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus welcomes you, Sir, as President of the Security
Council and as the representative of a State that is an

 

active Member of the United Nations and of the Non-
Aligned Movement. We are certain that your presidency
will enrich the activities of the Security Council and give
them new dynamism and effectiveness. The Council's very
busy working agenda this month reaffirms that conviction.

The Government of the Republic of Belarus welcomes
the Security Council's increasing attention to humanitarian
issues. The human factor has always been and remains a
central link in all of the activities to establish international
peace and security. Belarus, whose every fourth inhabitant
was killed in the Second World War, knows the true value
and significance of humanism and humanitarian activity.
Focusing the attention of the Security Council on
humanitarian aspects of the maintenance of peace and
universal stability considerably enhances the role of that
central organ of the United Nations in world affairs.

On the other hand, all those meeting today in this
Chamber are very well aware that this issue has not become
relevant by mere chance. Wars and conflicts, which have
brought suffering to millions of people and take human
lives every day, are today's tragic reality. An analysis of the
international situation at the turn of the century and the
millennium, regrettably, does not instil us with optimism
for a substantial reduction of armed conflict in our world in
the foreseeable future.
In this context, it is important to emphasize the
substantial progress which the Security Council has made
in defining the humanitarian dimension of mandates for
peacekeeping forces. Belarus welcomes in particular
resolution 1291 (2000), the Council's most recent on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Pursuant to that
resolution, the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
authorizes it to

"take the necessary action, in the areas of deployment
of its infantry battalions and as it deems it within its
capabilities, to protect United Nations and co-located
JMC personnel, facilities, installations and equipment,
ensure the security and freedom of movement of its
personnel, and protect civilians under imminent threat
of physical violence". (resolution 129] (2000), para.
8)

We are convinced that, together with other tools
available to the Security Council - first among which is
an effective arms embargo in the area of conflict - the
measures undertaken will allow us substantially to improve
the situation with regard to ensuring the safety of United
Nations and associated personnel, which the Security
Council discussed in detail in February.

Ensuring the unimpeded access of humanitarian
personnel to all those in need in areas of hostility is a
priority task for all United Nations peacekeeping
missions. The monitoring functions for the enforcement
of this requirement are the responsibility of the Security
Council. The resolution on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo inspires our optimism in this area. All those
responsible for violating the rules of such access must
bear the most serious responsibility, since timely
assistance will, more often than not, determine what is
most important: saving human lives.

In this context, the Security Council cannot further
countenance criminal impunity, the consequences of
which, as a rule, are tragic. In this regard, the question of
the legal guarantee of humanitarian activities and of the
need to establish real tools that will allow the world
community to hold accountable all those who violate
international documents of humanitarian law continues to
be a priority of the work of the States Members of the
United Nations. Without an effective solution to these
problems, we will continue to bear silent witness to
crimes committed against civilians, humanitarian
personnel and diplomatic officials and to crimes against
humanity.

Sanctions imposed by the Security Council remain
a significant tool for ensuring peace and security. We are
convinced of their absolute effectiveness in a number of
conflict regions of the world. Angola can be taken as an
example. The fruitful efforts of the Chairman of the
sanctions committee, Ambassador Robert Fowler, are no
doubt having significant positive results.

Despite the effectiveness of sanctions in some
regions, we remain witnesses to situations where a given
enforcement measure plays an entirely opposite role. The
situation in Iraq is a confirmation of this. We cannot
remain silent over this contradiction in humanitarian
activities. Resolution 1284 (1999), which, when it was
adopted, inspired optimism on the part of many Member
States as a possibility for overcoming a humanitarian
crisis in that country, has not yet justified those hopes.
We believe that this situation should be the subject of a
detailed discussion by the Security Council in the very
near future, in order to take the most effective measures
to correct it.
 

The past year has been marked by new trends and
approaches in consideration by the Security Council, and in
fact by the entire United Nations, of a number of
fundamental dimensions in humanitarian activities. The
attention of the world community was drawn to the
emergence of a concept of so-called humanitarian
intervention. We are convinced that the basis of this
approach is illogical from the start. We cannot put an end
to war with war, or through anti-humanitarian actions
correct human rights violations. The legalization of such an
approach, in our understanding, is fraught with
unforeseeable danger. In new circumstances, whereby the
nature of conflicts has changed, humankind must find a
compromise and find a true balance between the
sovereignty of States and the sovereignty of the
individual. We see, first and foremost, the United Nations
Charter as a basis for this work. By way of an instrument
for the discussion of this issue, Belarus has proposed the
establishment of an open-ended group in the General
Assembly. An important role could be played by the
further implementation of the programme of action for a
culture of peace. We are all witnesses to the many fruitful
efforts undertaken by Bangladesh in this area.

It is quite obvious that the topic for today's
discussion is becoming more relevant and richer in
content day by day. Belarus is prepared to make its
contribution to this activity and will do its utmost to give
real content and meaning to the decisions of the Security
Council in this sphere.

