Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I have
the honour today to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The countries of Central and Eastern Europe
associated with the European Union - Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey join in this
statement.

I wish first to thank the Jamaican presidency for
convening this discussion on children in armed
conflict. Allow me, in my turn, to pay tribute to the
presence among us of Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, who has been engaged
courageously and creatively in the field for two years
in a remarkable effort to inform, persuade and prevent.
I thank him for his briefing and his eloquence, which
fully reflect his convictions.

I also pay tribute to Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), whose expertise and tireless action do
credit to the United Nations system. UNICEF's
informed, precise and lucid reports are valuable tools
for each of us, the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. I
would emphasize the high quality of her statement.

The European Union welcomes the fact that the
entire United Nations system and its various
organizations and bodies are serving the interests and
rights of children. The European Union calls for this
cooperation to continue.

May I, however, express one regret at this stage?
The European Union would have liked a little more
time to study the substantive report submitted to us
today under paragraph 20 of resolution 1261 (1999) on
children in armed conflict. This report of the Secretary-
General, which is of high quality, contains many
recommendations. These 55 recommendations deserve
thorough study. They will be studied in the appropriate
ways and by the competent bodies.

Many speakers have taken the floor and many
others will do so. I shall therefore limit my remarks to
a few comments addressing the heart of the concerns
and thinking of the European Union.

First, this debate is again welcome. This debate is
again necessary. It follows on the fruitful discussions
that the Council has been organizing for the past two
years. It is natural that the Security Council should
pursue and endow it with its full scope. The role and
mission of the Security Council is to address subjects
and situations that are often tragic. It is called on to
prevent threats to peace, to halt or avert the outbreak of
wars and to re-establish conditions for a restoration of
peace when they have been disrupted.

And yet, among its prerogatives under the
Charter, there is one that should flow from all the
others, prompt us to assume greater obligations and
require even more sustained will and perseverance of
every member of the Council. That mission is to
prevent, at all times and in all places, the primary
targeting of children as victims of conflict or war.

Here, the Secretary-General's conclusion is
devastating and his pen seems to employ every shade
of blackest ink in describing the situation of children.
A few figures suffice: 13 million children have been
displaced by war; between 8,000 and 10,000 children
are mine victims; between 1986 and 1996, armed
conflicts have killed 2 million children, wounded 6
million and traumatized 10 million. I have not even
touched on sexual violence, torture, mutilation or
children recruited by force and condemned to being
child soldiers.

Secondly, one cannot separate the plight of
children from the root causes and chains of events that
underlie the conflicts which claim children as their first
victims. That is why today's debate is a natural
continuation of that which took place in the Council
last week on the prevention of conflicts. The best way
to prevent conflicts is to tackle their underlying causes.
With respect to children, we must emphasize the
promotion of their rights. Education, protection,
integration, access to knowledge and social and civil
guarantees are the principles governing the protection
of children. It is our job to ensure respect for these
principles and norms with the greatest determination
and vigilance.

Thirdly, it is fortunate that we are not starting
these deliberations from scratch. In its resolution 1261
(1999), adopted unanimously last year, the Security
Council solemnly undertook a commitment to and
responsibility for those children who suffer the
violence of war. The Council committed itself to
paying particular attention to the protection, well-being
and rights of children when it is called upon to take
measures aimed at promoting peace and security.

As is often the case, that important undertaking,
with a year's hindsight, seems nearly self-evident.
Some have been surprised that the Council did not take
up such a tragically urgent subject earlier. Indeed, the
Council serves peace insofar as it ensures the most
disadvantaged among us the protection and vigilance
that their weakness requires. Is there any need to prove
that the Council, in its area of competence, has always
been concerned by this aspect and never
underestimated it? In any case, that concern is
enshrined positively and formally in a resolution.

It is too early to take stock of the implementation
of resolution 1261 (1999). I observe, however, that the
idea of paying particular attention to the protection of
children is duly taken into account in the work, texts
and decisions of the Security Council, as the resolution
requires us to do.

I shall cite only the two recent examples of
resolution 1291 (2000), strengthening the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and resolution 1270 (1999),
establishing the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone. Those two resolutions stress the importance of
providing personnel whose actions take humanitarian
law and the law relating to the protection of children
into account. This is a step in the right direction. These
developments must be encouraged and supported by all
the actors of the international system. In resolution
1261 (1999), the Security Council demonstrated its
commitment to taking into account, when exercising its
competencies, the well-being and protection of children
during the phases of re-establishing, maintaining and
building peace. The European Union welcomes the
priority that the Council attaches to designing policies
on behalf of children in armed conflict.

Fourtth, beyond general guidelines and
recommendations - beyond the integration of the
protection of children into peacekeeping operations and
the specific provisions and programmes that parties to
a conflict are called on take into account and
implement - the European Union believes it
fundamental that follow-up and monitoring be carried
out on the basis of the commitments undertaken by
States or armed groups to the protection of children.

While it is essential that the Council include in
the mandates of peacekeeping and peace-restoration
operations provisions on the protection of children and
the safeguarding of their rights, it is no less crucial that
those provisions not remain dead letters. It would be
highly regrettable for the Council to adopt special
measures to protect children without requiring follow-
up and evaluation.

Here, the European Union welcomes the fact that
in his reports to the Council the Secretary-General
devotes special attention to problems relating to the
protection of children. Such information must be
systematic, whether it relates to disarmament, to
demobilization or to rehabilitation programmes.

Sometimes there are fortunate sequences of
events in international relations. Last year, we marked
the tenth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, which is a basic, nearly universal text.
Two protocols have now supplemented that legal
structure, one of which relates to the subject before the
Council today. The European Union welcomed the
adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. The European Union played an
active role throughout the difficult negotiations leading
to the adoption of the Protocol.

Let me highlight three elements of the Optional
Protocol, which supplemented and developed the
provisions of the 1989 Convention in a major way: the
minimum age for compulsory recruitment or direct
participation in hostilities was raised from 15; the
States parties to the Protocol were called upon to raise
the minimum age for voluntary recruitment and to
provide special protections and safeguards for those
under 18; and the provisions and measures contained in
the Protocol categorically prohibit the recruitment or
use in hostilities of anyone under 18. The Protocol
strengthens international norms; it calls on parties to
conflicts, including armed groups, to commit
themselves to respect for the rules guaranteeing that the
rights of children will be respected.

I have no doubt that the Millennium Assembly
will duly hail the adoption of the Protocol. I urge the
greatest possible number of States to sign the Protocol
during the Millennium Summit, as those States
members of the European Union that have not yet done
so are planning to do.

In speaking of the European Union's assessment
and analysis of the question of children in armed
conflict, I should like to stress the problem of small
arms and the question of sanctions. The international
community must first of all address the factors that
exacerbate the harm done to children. One of these is
access to weapons, in particular small arms and light
weapons. The technical enhancement of such weapons,
their light weight and their ease of use make it simpler
for children to use them. That is why the European
Union considers that the international community must
take coordinated action on the priority issue of
protocols to be required for their sale and transfer. I
will not dwell on the measures to be implemented at
the national, regional and international levels, but will
mention only the enhancement of national legal and
regulatory frameworks, the campaign against illicit
trafficking, and the strengthening of controls on legal
trade, including through the marking of weapons.

The European Union has adopted a code of
conduct on arms exports and a Joint Action on small
arms. The European Union actively supports the
preparation and convening in 2001 of a United Nations
conference on the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects.

Although it is necessary to deal with factors that
exacerbate the plight of children in armed conflict, it is
necessary also to assess precisely the consequences of
measures that the international community takes in
imposing sanctions against Governments or armed
groups. The European Union takes attentive note of the
analysis in the report of the Secretary-General of the
unintended consequences of sanctions, of which
hundreds of thousands of children are victims. The
European Union believes that it is up to the Security
Council and the Secretary-General to assess,
systematically and regularly, the humanitarian impact
of sanctions on civilian populations, including on
children.

I wish finally to raise the matter of uprooted and
displaced children. The first images of conflicts that
come to us are often those of children wandering the
roads, separated from their families or abandoned in
makeshift shelters. The European Union attaches
special importance to the needs and security of children
displaced within their own countries, and to assisting
them. It is especially important for the parties to a
conflict to fulfil their obligations and allow
humanitarian organizations unimpeded, safe access to
displaced children. Here, the European Union recalls
the importance of the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement, especially as they relate to children.

Those were the main thoughts I wished briefly to
place before the Council on behalf of the European
Union. International relations comprise both norms and
practices. Today's debate enables us to stress the
development of the norms that define and guarantee the
rights of children in armed conflict; here I am thinking
of Security Council resolution 1261 (1999) and, first
and foremost, of the Optional Protocol formulated last
January. In terms of practices, we have today's Security
Council debate; the Council must fully play its role in
encouraging and making recommendations to ensure
respect for the norms and principles on children in
armed conflicts, which it is our duty to protect.

