Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): Our delegation is
grateful to you, Mr. President, for finding the most
appropriate format for this important meeting. I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his introduction of
the report. I would also like to extend my words of
appreciation to the Office of the Iraq Programme, which
has been carrying on its shoulders the main workload of
implementing the humanitarian programme.

The report submitted by the Secretary-General is
comprehensive and substantive. It provides us with a clear
and realistic view of achievements and failures in the
process of implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Through the report, we have received
an objective picture of our achievements, as well as of
unresolved and outstanding issues, definite proposals and
the prospects for improvement.

However, the report evokes some mixed feelings. On
the one hand, real progress has been achieved in some
areas and practical measures have been undertaken to
meet the urgent needs of the Iraqi people. On the other,
the large number of accumulated and unresolved problems
predetermines negative trends, which are yet to be
overcome. Will these negative trends predominate, and if
so, for how long? When will we manage to stop
stagnation in some areas and turn it into stable progress?
The answers to these questions depend upon our decisive
and prompt actions in order to encourage Iraq to meet its
own obligations, which would then lead to the suspension
and eventual lifting of sanctions.

In our view, the Secretary-General's grave concern
about the present humanitarian situation in Iraq is the core
of his report, and we fully share this view.

It is not by chance that the report begins with the
section on the status of the oil industry. Needless to say,

 

the oil industry is a backbone of the entire humanitarian
programme and the guarantee of its successful
implementation. The findings of the group of oil experts
established by the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
30 of resolution 1284 (1999) are really disturbing. The
situation in the oil industry is lamentable and continues to
deteriorate. Iraq can no longer sustain high rates of oil
production without a resolute reconstruction of its oil
facilities.

We believe that the group of oil experts has done
significant work in Iraq and its recommendations should be
of practical use to the Council. Therefore, we fully support
the proposal of the Secretary-General to allocate $600
million for oil spare parts and equipment, which is double
the amount approved by resolution 1281 (1999). In this
regard, we consider that the initiative to adopt a Security
Council resolution to this end is a timely one.

We should also entrust the Committee established by
resolution 661 (1990) to expedite consideration of the
procedures for approval of the spare parts contracts and to
establish a group of experts in accordance with paragraph
18 of resolution 1284 (1999). This will facilitate the
expeditious approval and arrival of the necessary spare
parts and equipment to Iraq.

Given the present substantial increase in the price of
oil and the improvements authorized by the Council for
programme implementation, all the preconditions are
present to accumulate the funds necessary to attain the
programme's objectives. But this can be achieved only if all
the parties involved in its implementation fully cooperate,
in particular in the review and approval of applications.

The practice of placing applications on hold continues
to have serious implications for the effective
implementation of the programme. The Office of the Iraq
Programme has elucidated this problem several times. The
report explicitly reveals the negative trend. There continues
to be a steady increase in both the numbers of applications
placed on hold and their value. The figures are well known.
I could not agree more with Ambassador Van Walsum of
the Netherlands: They are intolerably high.

In this context, we should recognize that the Council
failed to implement the recommendations endorsed in its
resolution 1153 (1998) to review annexes to the distribution
plans at the outset in order to identify as early as possible
those items which could be subject to holds and those on
which further information and end-use verification are
likely to be required.

We should also recognize that we failed to
implement some other recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in this regard, as he rightly points out
in his report. We should accept our share of responsibility
for the disturbing situation in such sectors as health, water
and sanitation, and electricity, which suffer the most
under the deficit. The lack of spare parts and poor
maintenance causes the deterioration of equipment at
power stations, hospitals, water purification systems and
elsewhere. The lack of medicines and food products of
good quality and poor living conditions affect the most
vulnerable part of the population, the children. According
to the United Nations Children's Fund, mortality among
infants and children under five has risen dramatically
under the sanctions regime. It is regrettable that the
sanctions regime, introduced as a powerful tool to stop
aggression, has become a tool for punishing the ordinary
people.

The humanitarian programme is often referred to as
a unique one and as a temporary measure to provide for
the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people. Yes, it is. One
can just imagine what degree of misery and suffering the
Iraqi people would have sustained if this programme had
not been launched. But this in no way means that it
cannot be criticized in terms of its implementation,
shortcomings and bottlenecks originated by its creators. It
would be unfair not to mention the years-long efforts of
the programme's officers in the field, who provided its
practical implementation on day-by-day basis and who
experienced on their own all its disadvantages and
limitations. Here, I cannot but mention the recent
resignation of the Humanitarian Coordinator in Iraq,
Mr. Von Sponeck.

We note that, in the Secretary-General's report, there
are a number of critical remarks addressed to the
Government of Iraq. We believe that Iraq, too, should
draw very serious conclusions on its part. We would also
like to hear more about the state of cooperation between
the United Nations agencies in Iraq and the local and
central authorities of that country. Finally, we would like
to suggest that all the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in his report, as well as those made by
the delegations during this debate, should be carefully
considered by the Committee established by resolution
661 (1990).

In conclusion, I cannot but mention another aspect
of the humanitarian problem, which is not directly related
to
 

today's discussion, but constitutes one of the essential parts
of resolution 1284 (1999). I refer specifically to section B
of the resolution. which relates to the issue of the
repatriation or return of all Kuwaiti and third country
nationals or their remains. We sincerely hope that the recent
appointment of Ambassador Vorontsov as the coordinator
for these highly sensitive human issues, as well as for the
return of property and archives seized by Iraq, will expedite
our common efforts to this end. We look forward to hearing
a briefing from the coordinator as soon as possible.

