Mr. Jinga: I would to thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Council today in my capacity
as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
during this very important and timely meeting on peace
and security in Africa, the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and an integrated response to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace in the Sahel.

On 18 December, the Security Council
adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2018/2O
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. That is
further testimony to the Council's recognition of and
support for the important role that the Peacebuilding
Commission is playing in fostering coordination and
coherence in international peacebuilding efforts. The
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission on the
situation in the Sahel began with presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/2, adopted on 20 January 2017, which
emphasized the convening role of the Commission
in mobilizing international support, in collaboration
with the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel, towards the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

Since then, the Commission has convened a
series of meetings on the situation in the Sahel, with
the participation of the countries of the region, the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the African
Union, the European Union, different parts of the
United Nations system and other national and regional
actors. The Commission has been focused primarily on
deepening partnerships and ensuring the cooperation,
coordination and coherence of the United Nations
and the international community in support of the
Sahel. On 30 January, the Council adopted another
presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/3), which
reiterated the importance of the convening role of the
PBC in peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts in
the Sahel.

In March 2018, in support of the Sahel countries'
efforts to foster coherence and ensure coordination,
I attended the sixth meeting of the Ministerial
Coordination Platform for the Sahel held in
N'Djamena, together with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel,
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas; the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacebuilding Support, Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco; and the Permanent Representative
of Chad to the United Nations, Ambassador Ali
Alifei Moustapha. On the margins, we met with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad, His Excellency
Mr. Mahamat Zene Cherif, and the Minister ofEconomy
and Development Planning of Chad, His Excellency
Mr. Issa Doubragne. I also had the opportunity to visit
a project, supported by the Peacebuilding Fund, at the
border of Chad and Cameroon, where I interacted with
the local population, community leaders, civil society
and the United Nations country team.

From 15 to 19 October, I once againjoined Special
Representative Chambas and Assistant Secretary-
General Fernandez-Taranco on a regional visit to West
Africa and the Sahel. In Ouagadougou, we met with
the President of Burkina Faso, His Excellency Mr. Roch
Marc Christian Kabore'; the Minister of Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation, His Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry; the
Ministry of Economic Planning and Development, Her
Excellency Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly; and the Minister
of the Civil Service, Labour and Social Security, His
Excellency Mr. Cle'ment Sawadogo. We also met and
exchanged views with the diplomatic community,
representatives of civil society and the United Nations
country team.

In Dakar, we attended the launch of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel study on
pastoralism and security in the region. We also met with
the United Nations regional directors team, who are
playing a key role in United Nations efforts in the Sahel
region. My engagements with Government officials,
civil society, United Nations regional directors and
country teams in Chad, Burkina Faso and Senegal
provided me with useful insights into the multifaceted
challenges facing the Sahel region.

In Abidjan, we met with the Vice-President for
Regional Development, Integration and Business
Delivery of the African Development Bank, Mr. Khaled
Sherif, as part of our continued efforts to enhance
the strategic partnership with international financial
institutions in support of peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. Our discussions focused mainly on ways to
reinforce coordination and coherence in support of
the countries of the Sahel region. The Vice-President
of the African Development Bank assured us that the
Sahel is also one of the bank's major priorities, and we
emphasized the potential for enhanced coordination
with the United Nations in support of countries in the
region, including through the Peacebuilding Fund and
the Bank's 10,000 Communities in 1,000 Days initiative.

Council members will also recall that in July, at
the meeting between the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the African Union Peace and Security
Council here in New York, we explored ways to deepen
the strategic partnership with the African Union in
support of the Sahel region. Overall, my visits to the
Sahel and interactions with national authorities, civil
society, the diplomatic community and United Nations
regional directors and country teams allowed me to
gain a better understanding of the important role the
Peacebuilding Commission can continue to play in
support of the Sahel.

On 12 November, the Commission held its annual
session on the situation in the Sahel. The meeting was
attended by the Deputy Secretary-General, the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, the
High Representative of the African Union for Mali and
the Sahel, the Permanent Secretary of the G-5 Sahel,
local elected officials, and representatives of women
and civil society organizations from the Sahel region.
The annual session provided a unique opportunity to
deliberate on the political, security, social, economic
and environmental challenges faced by the countries in
the Sahel.

Furthermore, the annual session allowed
Member States to explore opportunities to strengthen
partnerships and to bring coherence to international
support for the Sahel region. On 13 November, the
PBC and the Economic and Social Council dedicated
their joint annual meeting to the linkages between
climate change, peacebuilding and sustaining peace in
the Sahel. Both meetings underscored the importance
that the Commission continue using its platform to
sustain international attention and advance a more
coherent, coordinated and action-oriented approach to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace in the Sahel region.
Over the past couple ofyears, in close collaboration
with the countries of the region and United Nations
leadership both at Headquarters and in the field, the
Peacebuilding Commission has used every opportunity
to sustain international attention and support in
addressing the multifaceted challenges of the Sahel.
The Commission will continue to prioritize the Sahel
region with the support of the Council. I wish everyone
happy holidays.

