Mr. Kpotsra (Togo) (spoke in French): Before
beginning my statement, I would like to congratulate
you wholeheartedly, Mr. President, on behalf of my
delegation, on your assumption ofthe presidency of the
Security Council this month, and to express our full
admiration at the masterful way in which you have
been steering the work of this body. The impressive
role that Tunisia has played through you and your
delegation only confirms the good feelings that Togo
and its people have for your country, its leaders and its
people. All our wishes for success go out to you, Sir.

Allow me also to reiterate to the new members of
the Council - Colombia, Ireland, Mauritius, Norway
and Singapore - my delegation's congratulations. We
are sure that they will make a significant contribution
to the work of the Council during their term. To your
predecessor, Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani, I must
pay tribute for the ease and excellence with which he
was able to carry out his office.

The open debate that the Security Council is
holding today to consider the final report of the
Monitoring Mechanism on Angola sanctions occurs
within a context of strengthening cooperation between
the Security Council and all States, with a view to
guaranteeing the effectiveness of the embargo regime,
for the following reasons.

In carrying out its mandate the Monitoring
Mechanism has to a great extent tried to favour an
approach based on research, in cooperation with all
parties concerned. That research is aimed at finding
adequate ways of strengthening the sanctions regime
imposed against UNITA. My delegation welcomes and
congratulates the Chairman of the Mechanism,
Ambassador Juan Larrain, as well as the members of
his team, for that constructive and positive approach,
which has brought considerable change to the
propensity, which prevailed only a few months ago, to
resort to sensationalism and calumny with regard to
this question.

We note with satisfaction that the new Chairman
of the sanctions Committee for Angola, Ambassador
Richard Ryan of Ireland, intends to take up his mandate
by opting for a constructive approach conducive to
starting a frank and open dialogue with all
Governments in order to obtain their steadfast
cooperation for effective and stringent respect for the
sanctions imposed against UNITA. We wish once again
to extend our congratulations to him and to reiterate
our firm commitment to assist him in carrying out his
duties. My delegation remains convinced that it is
through substantive dialogue and seeking ongoing
cooperation with all States that the United Nations will
be able to achieve effective implementation of the
sanctions imposed by the Council, and in particular
those against UNITA.

It is against that background that the Government
of Togo committed itself fully to cooperate with the
Angola sanctions Committee as soon as certain
allegations - and not always very innocent ones -
drew our attention to this matter. Since deciding, on
22 March 2000, to establish a nine-member inter-
ministerial commission of inquiry to carry out an in-
depth investigation of the allegations contained in the
report of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 1237 (1999), the Government of Togo has
continued to take decisive measures aimed at ensuring
strict compliance with national legislation and the
conformity ofthat legislation with the standards set out
by the Security Council.

Among the measures is the signing and
implementation of the following texts. In a ministerial
decree of 15 May 2000, the Government of Togo
decided to expel from its national territory 56
Angolans, even though they were not on the list of
UNITA leaders and adult members of their immediate
families targeted by the sanctions. A 17 May 2000
directive by the Ministry for National Defence
regarding the security of borders instructed security
and customs forces to deny entry into Togo to all
individuals referred to in resolution 1127 (1997).
Another directive of that Ministry, dated 12 July 2000,
imposed a ban on all transit by land, air or sea of
military materiel destined for UNITA.

The readiness demonstrated by the Government
of Togo and the various measures it has successively
adopted have already made it possible to shed light on
some of the allegations contained in the report of the
Panel of Experts. Those concern, among other things,
military materiel allegedly procured by UNITA. The
Monitoring Mechanism, which succeeded the Panel of
Experts, has established that the 18 end-user
certificates that were supposedly remitted by the
authorities of my country to UNITA leaders were in
fact false documents. This is described in paragraphs
34, 43 and 49 ofthe report under consideration.

The fact nevertheless remains that we must
deplore that arms were sold and transferred on the
basis of some of those false end-user certificates. It is
therefore important that the necessary support be given
to the recommendation of the Monitoring Mechanism
to ensure that exports regimes for military materiel and
weapons are strengthened by, among other things,
establishing a verification system to determine the
authenticity of relevant documentation and the actual
delivering country. As the Monitoring Mechanism
suggests, we should ensure in particular that the form
used to issue end-user certificates is standardized and
has a degree of security adequate to discourage and
prevent their falsification.

Strengthening these monitoring measures would
be aimed at ending the practices to which numerous
arms merchants resort, with the complicity of greedy
individuals whose sole concern is to make exorbitant
profits in disregard of established rules and norms. We
should also hope that the conclusions and
recommendations to be reached by the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which is to be held
next July, will make it possible to remedy such
phenomena. In the same vein, it is important that
importing countries define and set up appropriate
mechanisms to manage arms imports with a view to
favouring an exchange of information between
importing and producing countries.

When questioned with regard to the transit of
military materiel to Togo, the Government of Togo
informed the Monitoring Mechanism about the
documented case of the movement of military materiel
between the former Zaire and Togo in May 1997, as
mentioned in paragraphs 46 and 47 of the final report.
That information was confirmed in writing to the
Monitoring Mechanism only a week ago.

With regard to the chapter concerning UNITA
representation and the travel and place of residence of
UNITA leaders and the adult members oftheir families,
the final report seems to cast doubt on the application
of the decision by the Government of Togo regarding
the expulsion of 56 Angolan nationals residing on its
territory. To be more precise, this was a matter of
36 pupils and 2 students residing with 18 members of
their families. In this regard, I should like to recall that
in my statement to the Council on 15 March 2000 on
the occasion of the report of the Panel of Experts, I
recognized that the authorities of Togo had in fact
authorized the stay in Togo of Angolan children
accompanying some of their family members for
humanitarian reasons.

Despite the fact that Angolan nationals were not
on the list of UNITA leaders and adult members of
their families established by the Committee on
sanctions, and even though their presence hardly
represents any danger to their country or its
institutions, the Government of Togo decided on
15 May 2000 to expel them from its national territory.
One must agree that this was a painful decision that
had to be taken and carried out, although it certainly
contravened international humanitarian norms. It is
even more intolerable to take note today of doubts
regarding the effectiveness of the implementation of
that decision.

With regard to the section dealing with the trade
in diamonds, and specifically paragraph 188, the final
report indicates that South African records of rough
diamond imports refer to an import on 12 January 1999
of diamonds weighing 587.89 carats, with a value of
$48,500 and originating from the "Presidence du
Togo". Laymen though we are in this area, we
nevertheless have difficulty in believing that such
transactions would take place without the identity of
the seller being revealed, retained and recorded. We do
hope, however, that the clarifications required by the
Monitoring Mechanism will be provided by the
competent South African authorities, and that this will
also make it possible to shed light on the real persons
behind that operation.

I would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the fact that last Tuesday, 20 February 2001,
the Minister of Defence of the Togolese Republic, who
is present in the Chamber, and I myself held a working
meeting lasting about two hours with Ambassador
Larrain and three members of his team.

On that occasion, the Monitoring Mechanism was
provided with an explanation and additional
information about the military materiel in transit at the
Niamtougou base on 17 and 18 May 1997 and about
that which was confiscated by Togo. Discussions also
took place with regard to the question of expelled
Angolan nationals. On each of those points, we
reiterated our promise to continue to cooperate fully
with the Monitoring Mechanism, provided that the
Government receives assistance for that purpose.

In that context, the imminent issuance, as
announced, of the updated list of UNITA
representatives and leaders, as well as the adult
members of their families, will no doubt contribute to
strengthening cooperation in this area. Likewise,
further detailed information from the Angolan
Government to help to identify accurately the
individuals concerned, would assist enormously. For its
part, convinced that it is the victim of improper
accusations, and resolved not to allow itself to continue
to be used as a scapegoat, the Government of Togo will
in due course take appropriate measures to institute
proceedings against individuals or companies that,
through their misdeeds, endeavour to tarnish Togo's
image.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate the ardent
wish of the Government of Togo for a speedy end to
the conflict in Angola. We are prepared to make a
vigorous contribution to that end.

Furthermore, this was borne out by the audience
that the head of State of Togo gave on 30 January to
the Angolan Ambassador to Togo and Nigeria, who, at
the end of his 13-year mission, came to bid farewell.

