Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April and to thank you for
organizing this meeting devoted to mediation and
settlement of disputes, in extension of the timely
initiative of the delegation of Burkina F aso during its
Council presidency in September 2008. The choice of
this topic demonstrates yet again the continuity and
steadfastness of the commitment of Mexico in the
service of peace and security throughout the world.

I also wish to convey my gratitude to Mr. Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General, for his comprehensive
briefing.

Today's debate, the framework for which has
been provided by the report of the Secretary-General
on enhancing mediation and its support activities,
provides an opportunity to underscore our support for
the United Nations role in finding solutions to
problems through negotiation.

The peaceful settlement of disputes, in addition to
being a guiding principle in international relations, is a
common objective at the very heart of our
Organization's activity. The promotion of this type of
dispute settlement, excluding the use of force, is a
fundamental principle in Article 2 of the Charter, and
all of Chapter VI is devoted to it. Mediation, which is
part of peaceful settlement, is rightly considered to be
the most cost-effective and efficient way to find
constructive solutions to disputes.

Since its creation the United Nations has, through
the good offices and mediation of its Secretaries-
General and of eminent personalities, undertaken
significant efforts to peacefully resolve conflicts in the
world, and its actions have often been crowned with
success. However, sometimes those actions were
considered failures because of a lack of a good
understanding of the dynamic of conflicts and of the
stakes involved, which in hindsight masked a lack of
preparation or an imperfect command of the use of
time, if not an intentional lack of will to uphold the
authority of the United Nations and the Charter
principles.

To mitigate those shortcomings, the proposal of
the Secretary-General to create, as part of the
comprehensive restructuring of the Organization, a
Mediation Support Unit composed of a pool of well-
trained experts has been welcomed by all Member
States. From our point of view, it is the institutional
anchor for an activity that we need to support by

promoting improvement of the quality of operational
support to mediators, a good connection of United
Nations interventions with regional and subregional
pillars and, finally, greater involvement of the Security
Council and its support for the mandate entrusted to
mediators.

Experience has shown that to be genuinely
effective, mediation, far from falling within the
exclusive remit of the United Nations, benefits from
association with a multiplicity of actors pooling their
efforts and whose skills are brought to bear at different
stages of the process, according to their specific
contribution and taking account of the comparative
advantage that their actions represent, in terms of both
political and material costs.

Moreover, we are of the view that improving the
method of financing special political missions will
make it possible to identify ways to optimize the use of
the Organization's resources over the medium and long
terms.

Africa has long cultivated a tradition of
negotiation and dialogue to resolve disputes by
peaceful means. That culture of dialogue already
existed when the Organization of African Unity was
established in 1963, through the Commission of
Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration. Its activities
were intended to facilitate the goal of continental
development, which at the time was constantly being
hampered by the proliferation of conflicts.

With its transformation into the African Union in
2002, its member States undertook the substantive
renewal of a number of its organs, taking care to
include in its new institutional architecture a similar
conflict management and resolution mechanism, based
on a Panel of the Wise responsible for supporting its
efforts in order to prevent the eruption of conflicts and
to create favourable conditions for conflict
management and resolution. That mechanism, which
was a first on both the African international scenes, has
not only enabled African countries to give concrete
content to the culture of peace - which represents a
strong aspiration of all African peoples - but, also,
and in particular, has given Africa the opportunity to
capitalize on considerable experience in its quest for
lasting solutions to conflicts.

At a time when we are witnessing an
unprecedented increase in the number and scale of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, which have
revealed the objective limits of the Organization's
capacity to meet these needs, it is becoming imperative
to make the too-long-awaited change of moving the
Organization from a culture of reaction to a culture of
prevention. The international community as a whole
and the Security Council in particular must now
commit themselves to a resolute approach aimed at
supporting, consolidating and broadening the
momentum launched on the African continent by the
African Union, from which the United Nations will
only stand to benefit.

Finally, I should like to stress that Algeria, which
has always advocated the peaceful settlement of
disputes, has often been called upon to mediate in
situations as varied as the 1974 territorial dispute
between Iran and Iraq, in which conflict was avoided;
the 1979 hostage crisis between the United States and
Iran; the civil war in Lebanon, leading to the
conclusion of the Taif Accords; the open conflict
between Ethiopia and Eritrea, which ended with the
2000 Algiers Agreement; and the ongoing efforts
regarding issues of a sensitive and internal nature in
the immediate regional environment on its southern
border. From those situations, we have learned that any
successful mediation effort must be carried out with
respect for Charter principles and depends on the
unequivocal political will of the parties to a dispute,
the mediator's deep sensitivity to the environment and,
above all, the parties' confidence in the mediator.

