Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): First, I should like, on behalf of my
Government, to express our condolences to the people
and the Government of Algeria in connection with the
tragic military plane crash that claimed the lives of
247 passengers.

Secondly, I welcome the participation of the
Secretary-General in this very important meeting. I
thank him for his comprehensive and accurate briefing,
which made clear that he and others in the Council
did in fact understand this meeting's agenda item. He
spoke in a manner commensurate with the threats to
international peace and security posed by the allegations
and accusations against my country and its allies.

My colleague the Ambassador of Sweden said that
the use ofchemical weapons is a war crime. This is true.
I agree with him, as does my Government. However, I
would ask him whether he believes that war in itself
is a crime and needs to be stopped and prevented.
Perhaps this would be a very good title for a book by
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute,
and perhaps this would make clear to Member States
that war in itselfis a crime.

My colleague the representative of the United
States said that the Syrian chemical weapons that killed
civilians had been used 50 times; that is what she said.
Chemical weapons were used 50 times and killed 200
civilians. Imagine that - the Syrian Government
reversed the course of the global terrorist war against
my country by killing only 200 civilians after having
used chemical weapons 50 times. Are these not the
words of amateurs? This is a scenario for DC Comics'
Superman series. Is that how the White House
strategists think - that a certain Government has used
chemical weapons 50 times to kill 200 civilians? How
is that logical?

My American colleague overlooked one important
detail - that her country, on board the MV Cape
Ray, destroyed the Syrian chemical stockpiles in the
Mediterranean, along with ships from Denmark and
Norway. How could it be that the experts in the United
States delegation did not tell her that Ms. Sigrid Kaag
told the Security Council in June 2014 that there were
no more chemical stockpiles in Syria. Could they have
simply forgotten all of that?

Some believe that the massive western military
forces in the eastern Mediterranean are due to a Sufi
Western affection for a handful of terrorist yobs in
Douma. By the way, those yobs were chased out to the
North, as the Council is aware. They are now on their
way to Saudi Arabia and thence to Yemen. They will
be recycled and used on other fronts, including Yemen.
No, the massive military forces in the Mediterranean
do not target that handful of terrorists. They target the
State of Syria and its allies. That should be the topic
discussed today in this meeting.

My colleague the American Ambassador was not
horrified that her country used 20 million gallons of
Agent Orange in Viet Nam in 1961, killing and injuring
3 million Vietnamese. Four hundred thousand children
are born with deformities every year due to the use of
Agent Orange at that time. She was not horrified by
her country's forces killing thousands of Syrians in
Raqqa and thousands of Iraqis in Fallujah and Mosul
through the use of white phosphorus, which is a
chemical weapon. 1 ask my colleague, the Ambassador
of Sweden: Is that not a war crime?

I would like to read a remark of the former Defence
Minister of Britain, Mr. Doug Henderson. He spoke
of the use by his country and the United States of
white phosphorus in Iraq. I would ask my friend the
British Ambassador to listen to this. Mr. Henderson
said that it was unbelievable that the United Kingdom
would occupy a country - meaning Iraq - to look for
chemical weapons and at the same time use chemical
weapons against that very same country.

George Orwell, the well-respected and ethical
Western author said: "In a time of universal deceit,
telling the truth is a revolutionary act". The truth
that needs to be told today is that three permanent
members of the Security Council are dragging the
entire world once again towards the abyss of war and
aggression. They seek to obstruct the Council's work
in maintaining international peace and security, which
is the main principle agreed upon and endorsed by our
founding fathers when they adopted the Charter of the
United Nations in San Francisco on 26 June, 1945. Even
though my colleague, the Ambassador of Bolivia has
already read it out, I would like to once again remind
the Council of paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the Charter:

"All members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations".

The truth that needs to be told today is that those
three States have a legacy based on fallacies and
fabricated narratives in order to launch wars, occupy
States, control their resources and change their
governing systems. The truth that needs to be told today
is that the entire world and the Council stand witnesses
to the invasion, occupation and destruction of Iraq
based on a United States lie in this very Chamber 14
years ago. They stand witnesses to France's exploitation
of the Council to destroy Libya under the pretext of
protecting civilians while ending the future of an entire
people for the very simple reason that its President
at the time, Mr. Sarkozy, wanted a cover up for his
financial corruption. This is an ongoing case, of which
members are all aware. However, some countries still
fall for those lies promoted by those very same States
in order to attack my country, Syria.

God bless the days when France the policies
of Charles de Gaulle in the Council followed and
repudiated the aggression of the United States and
Britain against Iraq. We yearn for those days. France
no longer respects the policies of Charles de Gaulle and
is now one of the countries that launch attacks against
other countries.

The truth that needs to be told today is that the
international community has not sought to rein in those
who are reckless and undermine international relations,
subjecting them to disaster time and again since the
establishment of this international Organization. Our
biggest fear is that if the international community does
not come together to end the abuse of those who are
reckless, then the Organization will die in circumstances
very similar to that which led to the death of the League
of Nations.

The truth that needs to be told today is that after
the failure of the United States, Britain, France and
their proxies in our region to achieve their objectives
in Syria through providing all forms of support to the
armed terrorist groups, we see them today tweeting
and bragging about their nice, new and smart rockets,
and defying international legitimacy from the Council
Chamber. They dispatch war planes and fleets to
achieve what their terrorists have failed to achieve over
the past seven years.

The truth that needs to be told today is that the
Syrian Government liberated hundreds of thousands of
civilians in eastern Ghouta from the practices of armed
terrorist groups that used them as human shields, held
them hostage for years and prevented any medical or
food assistance from reaching them. The terrorist
groups used the schools, homes and hospitals of those
civilians as military bases to launch attacks on 8 million
civilians in Damascus.

The truth that needs to be told today is that some
reckless people are pushing international relations
towards the abyss based on a fake video prepared by
the terrorist White Helmets, pursuant to instructions by
Western intelligence.

The truth that needs to be told today is that the so-
called international alliance used its war planes to serve
Da'esh in order to block the victory of the Syrian Arab
Army and its allies against that terrorist organization.
That international alliance made the White Helmets
its media division to fabricate and falsify incidents in
order to benefit the Al-Qaida terrorist organization.

The government of my country took the initiative to
invite the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons to dispatch its Fact-finding Mission to visit
Syria and the alleged site of the incident in Douma.
The Government of my country has provided all the
facilitation needed for the team to work in a transparent
and accurate manner. The team is supposed to start its
work in a few hours. This invitation was issued out of
strength, confidence and diplomatic experience, not
because we are weak or afraid and giving in to bullying
or threats.

The Syrian Arab Republic condemns in the
strongest terms the Governments of these three States
for launching their threats to use power in a flagrant
violation of Article 1 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which identifies the primary purpose of the
United Nations as the maintenance of international
peace and security and the suppression of acts of
aggression and other breaches to peace.

With the exception of the United States, Britain and
France, we all understand that the Security Council is
the organ charged with the maintenance of international

peace and security and should stand against attempts
to impose the law of the jungle and the rule of the
powerful. However, some Member States think that the
United Nations is just a private business company that
works on the basis of pecuniary interests, market rules
and the principle of supply and demand to determine the
fate of peoples and States, and that use it as a platform
for cheap theatrics and the dissemination of lies. This
is the truth that disappoints the hopes and aspirations of
the peoples of the world.

I am not reinventing the wheel in this Chamber. The
history of our relations with those States is filled with
agony, pain and bitterness as a result of their very well-
known policies of aggression. Another more important
and shocking truth that should be told today is that the
silence of the majority with respect to those aggressive
policies does not constitute collusion with these States,
but it does arise from fear of their arrogance and
political blackmail, economic pressure and aggressive
record. Those States do not blink when they go after
anyone who is telling the truth.

In conclusion, if those three States - the United
States, Britain and France - think they can attack us
and undermine our sovereignty and set out to do so,
we would have no other choice but to apply Article 51
of the Charter, which gives us the legitimate right to
defend ourselves. This is not a threat the way they do; it
is a promise. This is a promise. We will not let anyone
attack our sovereignty.

Why do I say that this is a promise? I say this
because a thought commonly ascribed to the great
United States leader George Washington, who lived
more than 200 years ago comes to mind the sound
that is louder than that of the cannons is the sound of
the truth that emanates from the heart of a united nation
that wants to live free. We in Syria also have leaders
and prominent figures as great as George Washington.
They are doing the same thing for Syria - protecting
the unity and sovereignty of their country.

 

The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.
