Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I welcome the Dominican Republic as it takes
a seat on the Security Council for the first time and
presides over it this month. The initiative to convene this
debate on the impacts of climate-related disasters on
international peace and security, as well as the presence
of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Dominican
Republic, Mr. Miguel Vargas Maldonado, demonstrates
that bringing this fundamental issue to the attention of
the membership is a priority for the presidency.

Climate change is one of the greatest challenges of
our time, and its adverse effects undermine the ability
of all countries to achieve sustainable development.
Its effects are real and sudden and disproportionately
affect vulnerable groups. Its global nature requires
maximum international cooperation. The United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is
the main intergovernmental forum that possesses the
necessary expertise to negotiate a global response to
climate change. Discussions in the Security Council
on this issue complement global efforts to better
understand the links between climate change and
international peace and security, as well as to mobilize
the capacities of United Nations organs in line with
their respective mandates.

The increase in global temperature, desertification
and droughts, sea-level rise and natural disasters is
leading to the destruction of homes and infrastructure,
loss of crops, food insecurity, unemployment
and increased inequalities. The effects on the
environment, the economy and society can see the
benefits of development gained with so much effort
reversed overnight. The humanitarian consequences
are catastrophic, with the loss of millions of lives,
displacement, the separation of families, exposure to
exploitation and susceptibility to marginalization. It is
alarming that people must travel long distances daily in
search of water and food, to the detriment of education
and work opportunities, and that young people run the
risk of being recruited by Violent extremism.

Conflicts generated by climate change, due to
their increasing number, intensity and duration,
deserve urgent and innovative approaches. In that
context, 135.7 million people required humanitarian
assistance in the year 2017, with financing needs of
$23.5 billion. Against that backdrop, Ecuador promotes
the principles of equity and common but differentiated
responsibilities, as well as the right to development.
We advocate for an increase in adequate, predictable
and sustainable financing, in addition to the transfer of
technology, to developing countries.

It is necessary to promote preventive approaches to
address disaster risks in a comprehensive manner, with
people-centred, multi-risk, multisectoral, inclusive
and accessible policies. That is acknowledged in the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-
2030, as disaster-prone developing countries require
special attention in view of their greater vulnerability
and levels of risk, which often exceed their capacity to
respond and recover.

Sustainable development is not possible without
peace and security, and peace and security are at risk
without sustainable development. We hope that this
debate will promote political will and the mobilization
of resources in the relevant forums to address
climate change.

