Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My
delegation followed with great interest Mr. Roed-
Larsen's briefing on the latest developments in
Palestine. I wish to thank him for his uncompromising
analysis of the situation.

The situation in the Middle East, especially in
Palestine, is disturbing. The great hopes inspired by the
road map seem to be fading. Indeed, since the attack in
Jerusalem of 19 August and the many reprisals that
followed, violence has gained the upper hand. The
unilateral, conditional and temporary truce has been
broken. The closure of territories has resumed, constant
incursions have begun anew, raids are intensifying and
other coercive measures have been announced.
It goes without saying that the return of violence
compromises the implementation of the road map,
which is the only option for the parties if they want
peace. Today, we should direct our efforts towards the
second phase of the road map. Let us recall that the
second phase was to provide, on the basis of an
assessment of the results of the first, the convening of
an international conference and the establishment of a
viable independent Palestinian State. Unfortunately,
that has not occurred. More disturbing yet, the
achievements of the first phase are now being
challenged. The resurgence of Violence and the myriad
threats against the head of the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Arafat, do not augur well for the future.

In this regard, Cameroon joins the international
community in stating that these solutions are roads that
lead nowhere. They may enduringly undermine the
prospects for peace contained in the road map.

We share the hope expressed earlier by Mr. Roed-
Larsen about what he called the Quartet mechanism.
We also reiterate our support to the members of the
Quartet in particular and to all international or regional
mediators in their efforts to bring the conflicting
parties back to the path of peace.

We welcome the efforts made by the European
Union through the contacts of Mr. Javier Solana, High
Representative for External Policy. We are convinced
that other major international actors beyond the Quartet
can use their influence to act upon the parties. Finally,
we once again express an appeal to the parties
themselves to make greater use of peaceful means. In
that regard, it is important that the Security Council
send them a strong signal, without delay, urging them
to resume immediately a constructive dialogue with a
View to a definitive settlement of this long-lasting
conflict.

We wish to reiterate our commitment to a
comprehensive, just and lasting peaceful settlement of
the Middle East conflict, in accordance with Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), and
1397 (2002).

