Mr. Koenders (Netherlands): The Kingdom of
the Netherlands currently holds the Presidency of
the European Union. Today, I will make a number of
comments in my national capacity. A statement on
behalf of the European Union (EU) will be delivered
later.

I am extremely worried about the different crises in
the Middle East. It sometimes seems that our common
responsibility to protect and our obligations for the
protection of civilians have been all but forgotten.
International humanitarian law in countries is
threatened every day like Yemen and Syria. Hundreds
of thousands of people have been killed. Millions have
had to flee their homes. Entire populations are afraid
of what tomorrow may bring. The Security Council has
an enormous responsibility to help put an end to the
Violence. We owe it to the people. Peace cannot wait. It
is long overdue.

The civil war in Syria is about to enter its sixth year.
The numbers are staggering. Half the population has
been displaced, and more than one out of one hundred
Syrians has died, with the overwhelming majority
killed by their own Government. Many people, who are
internally displaced, flee to neighbouring countries.
We all have a responsibility to ensure that people in
Syria are able to live their lives free from Violence, free
from poverty and free from fear in their own homes,
Villages and countries. The Netherlands urges all
parties involved to step up efforts to fully implement
resolution 2254 (2015), which incorporates two
elements: a political process with a calendar oriented
towards transition and the fight against Daesh. Both
elements are necessary and can strengthen each other.

We need to beat terrorism, boost freedom and
prioritize the humanitarian needs of all Syrians. One
must be accompanied by the other, and that is how the
Dutch Government sees it. That is why we have to act
intelligently against Daesh, whose ideology and actions
against innocent men, women and children - Muslims,
Christians and Yazidi - are abhorrent. The
international coalition against Daesh consists of more
than 60 countries. We are making progress on the
battlefield, especially in Iraq, and in undercutting
their financial resources and vicious narrative. But
prevention is also key worldwide. We must do more to
find solutions to the ongoing conflicts in the region by
tackling the political and socioeconomic crises and root
causes on which Daesh and other terrorist groups feed.

Thankfully, meaningful steps have been taken in

recent months with regard to the political process as
well. We have seen the establishment ofthe International
Syria Support Group. We have also seen the opposition,
to a large degree, joining ranks in Riyadh. Resolution
2254 (2015) provides a framework for transition in
Syria - a necessary precondition for peace - and
on 29 January talks will start that should ultimately
lead to sustainable peace. I think that we should all
do our utmost to convince the parties to engage fully
and unequivocally, and we need to stand ready to help
where we can. In that light, the Netherlands specifically
supports a group of Syrian women who will play an
advisory role in the talks. It is important for all of us
to put our money where our mouth is in implementing
Security Council resolutions, including resolution
1325 (2000). In addition, we have been supporting the
political process with training and capacity-building
for the opposition groups involved in the talks and in
supporting diplomacy.
We have deep respect for United Nations Special
Envoy De Mistura and other partners who are working
hard towards that end. I myself have worked as Special
Representative, and I have often had the opportunity
to brief the Council on other situations, including in
Mali among other places. I can tell the Council how
important it is for the Special Envoy to be not only
encouraged but also supported by everybody. We
have been substantially supporting De Mistura's
team. We also commend Secretary Kerry and Foreign
Minister Lavrov, whose efforts have shown that great
differences can be overcome and Security Council
members can effectively collaborate towards the same
goal. Diplomacy can still work.

Because peace cannot wait, more needs to be done.
We also need to step up our humanitarian efforts,
assistance and sense of urgency to help the people
inside Syria and those who are fleeing, making sure
that they will be safe from the Violence and deprivations
that they suffer and have a home to go back to where
they can live in peace and security. Countries such as
Lebanon - represented here today - Jordan, Turkey
and Iraq that host the majority of refugees deserve
much more assistance. In that regard, we welcome the
conference the United Kingdom, Germany, Norway,
Kuwait and the United Nations will host in London on
4 February, where the Netherlands will pledge more
humanitarian aid and structural support for Syrians in
Syria and abroad.

The number one priority of the Council should
be to find a lasting solution for Syria. It is not easy,
but peace cannot wait. I call upon the Council to set
aside its differences and pave the way for a solution
that addresses the need for justice and accountability,
because there can be no peace withoutjustice.

We also urgently need peace between Israel and its
neighbours. This has been a matter close to my heart ever
since I worked in Gaza for three months in 1999. That
was a time of cautious optimism. It was time when there
was a ground-breaking ceremony for a Gaza harbour.
Nothing has come of that and many other initiatives,
and we all know why. The situation cannot go on like
this. It has now been 23 years since the Oslo accords
were signed, and despite the commendable efforts to
negotiate a lasting peace agreement, peace remains
elusive. Conditions on the ground have worsened. After
decades of negotiations, a final status agreement seems
further away than ever. Many have lost all hope. The
latest escalation of violence illustrates just how volatile
the situation is. For Israelis and Palestinians, peace
cannot wait.
We cannot afford to look away as the situation
on the ground continues to deteriorate. Innocent lives
have been lost on both sides. I urge both sides to show
maximum restraint. All responses must be proportionate
and comply with international law. Violence against
innocent civilians can never be justified. Let me
reiterate our long-standing engagement in favour of a
two-State solution, with an independent, democratic
and viable State of Palestine and the State of Israel
living side by side in peace and security and mutual
recognition, based on the borders of 1967. Preserving
the viability of the two-State solution is crucial. For that
to happen, I believe a new and transformative approach
is needed, with three sets of actions.

First, we must create a more favourable climate for
negotiations. That can be done by stopping violence,
building confidence, including continued security
cooperation, strengthening the Palestinian economy
and improving conditions in Gaza. Both sides must
refrain from steps and inflammatory rhetoric that
undermine confidence and trigger further escalation.
In that regard, it is critically important that Israel halts
all settlement expansion. As the European Union has
pointed out time and again, settlements are illegal
under international law and a severe threat to the two-
State solution. I deplore the planned authorization by
the Israeli Government to confiscate 370 acres in the
West Bank, south of Jericho.

Secondly, while commending the progress made in
Palestinian State-building, I believe that it should be
enhanced. The Palestinian Authority plays a vital role
in keeping the prospect of the two-State solution alive.
But it must be capable, accountable and responsive,
and it must respond to extremist propaganda. Good
governance, effective service delivery and pluralistic
and inclusive Government, with space for dissenting
views, will strengthen the legitimacy of Palestinian
leadership. And it would be good if the Palestinian
Authority could return to Gaza.

The third element builds on developments in the
region. A new format for negotiations is needed, with
substantial roles for Arab partners and the European
Union, alongside the United States, based on the
2002 Arab Peace Initiative. I fully support efforts to
create a new dynamic and welcome the work of Egypt,
Morocco, Jordan and the League of Arab States in
the context of the Arab Quartet. I favour a Security
Council consensus as a basis for renewed final status
negotiations, in which parameters for a peace accord
could be incorporated. The Netherlands stands ready to
assist where it can. It is close to both parties.

We have to find a compromise, and we are working
on that together with our EU. In line with the European
Union Council conclusions on Syria, we will work
with all the relevant stakeholders towards a renewed
multilateral approach to the peace process. We also
fully support the European Union's reiterated offer
to both parties of a package of European political,
economic and security support, and of a special,
privileged partnership with the European Union, which
offers substantial benefits to both parties, in the event
of a final peace agreement.

In the past, the Council has shown that it could and
would unite against threats to international peace and
stability. In the face of today's threats, the Council can
prove to the world that it does not shy away from its
collective responsibility, but rather that it will work
together to advance the Middle East peace process and
resolve the conflict in Syria once and for all. We, the
world, and the people we represent need the leadership
of the Council, because we cannot let peace wait.

