Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me this opportunity to address the Security Council on
the situation in Somalia.

Allow me to start by expressing my condolences
to the United Nations family and to the families of
the 21 United Nations colleagues who perished in the
Ethiopian air disaster in March. We at the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) pay tribute to
them for their service to humankind and their efforts to
make our world a better world.

On behalf of the African Union Commission, I
would also like to pay tribute to AMISOM's former
Acting Police Commissioner, Ms. Christine Alalo, who
also perished in the March air crash. Her exceptional
leadership qualities, commitment and passion were
instrumental in the positive performance ofAMISOM's
police component in very challenging circumstances.
She will be remembered for her valuable contribution
to efforts for peace and stability on our continent.

In previous reporting periods, differences between
the Federal Government and the federal member states
overshadowed the political landscape in the country
and warranted our collective and justified concern.
Today in Somalia we are witnessing encouraging signs
of political engagement. The inaugural ceremony of
Mr. Saed Abdullahi Mohamed Deni as President of
Puntland, in January, was a significant moment of
gathering and collective reflection in that regard. The
event brought to Garowe the entire Somali political
class. Former Somali President Sheikh Sharif and
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, as well as leaders of the
regional states, ministers, lawmakers and their national
leaders, were in attendance. All without exception
hailed the values of reconciliation and solidarity and
appealed for the unity of the Somalian nation.

In his remarks during the event, President Abdullahi
Farmajo called for forgiveness and collaboration and
pledged that he will spare no effort in resolving the
political stand-off between his Government and the
federalmember states. Since January this year, AMISOM
has observed the gradual evolving of centre-periphery
relations. Both the Federal Government and federal
member states are investing effort in dialogue to reset
their relations. It is in the international community's
interest to continue to encourage and harness the
readiness of the Somali political stakeholders to engage
with each other.

The encouraging atmosphere of dialogue was also
witnessed on 11 March, when Prime Minister Hassan
Khayre paid a working visit to Kismayo, where he spent
a number of days as the guest of Mr. Madobe, regional
President of Jubaland, with whom he discussed ways
of advancing consensus in Somalia. Despite divided
opinions about its outcome, the recently concluded
week-long meeting in Garowe represents an important
step in the right direction after a long time of absence
of collaborative engagement between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the regional member
states. The African Union encouraged that effort as we
look forward to a new round of talks to accelerate the
implementation of Somalia's inclusive political agenda.

With regard to the constitutional review process,
so far the two mandated constitutional bodies - the
Joint Parliamentary Constitutional Review Oversight
Committee and the Independent Constitutional Review
and Implementation Commission ~ are delivering
some progress. In that respect, AMISOM. commends
their efforts, particularly the series of strategy sessions,
the most recent of which was the Djibouti session in
March. A key outcome of the Djibouti session was the
decision to expand the review process to the regions.
That is part of a public outreach and consultation
campaign on the provisional Constitution.

With regard to elections, the effort to speed up
the review of the much-awaited electoral law and
political party law was quite evident. In late April,
the draft electoral law was tabled before the Cabinet
and, on 2 May, endorsed and subsequently referred to
the Federal Parliament. While AMISOM. takes note of
the initial reactions to the draft electoral law, it is of
essence that all stakeholders intensify their interaction
with a View to achieving the final adoption of those
important bills in the coming months.

The work being done by the National Independent
Electoral Commission to ensure that the universal
elections in 2020-2021 are conducted in a free, fair
and transparent manner is commendable. Over the
past quarter, the Commission has registered progress
on pre-voter registration preparations, including the
mapping of potential sites for that purpose across
Somalia. Once concluded, it will fall to the Somali
security forces and AMISOM. to secure the locations.

In support of the National Independent Electoral
Commission, AMISOM. is working closely with its
Chairperson and her team, particularly in the area of
capacity-building. As part of that, and in line with
AMISOM's new mandate under the African Union
Peace and Security Council's communique from its
848th meeting, of 9 May, AMISOM. recently agreed on
a support package with the Commission. The package
will include training on developing an electoral
security strategy, electoral dispute resolution, and a
training-the-trainers course on electoral security for
the Somalia police force. We note with appreciation
Prime Minister Khayre's appointment of a lead official
to handle the issues related to the establishment of the
federal electoral security task force.

On 1 April, a well-trained and equipped battalion
of the Somali National Army, together with Danab
special forces and AMISOM, successfully dislodged
Al-Shabaab from Sabiid, a strategic bridge town in the
fertile plains of the Shabelle River. A month later, the
town of Bariire, sprawling on both sides of the Shabelle
River, was also taken by another battalion of the Somali
National Army, supported by AMISOM. and partners.

For seven years, the town of Sabiid was a strategic
stronghold of AI-Shabaab. It offered the extremist
group a hub for assembling vehicle-borne improvised
explosive devices that were routinely transported into
Mogadishu and indiscriminately targeted, maimed and
killed innocent Somali men, women and children. That
stronghold has now been taken away from them. One
month and three weeks later, the Somali National Army
continues to hold the bridge town of Sabiid. The town
is being rebuilt and stabilized. Ninety per cent of the
population that fled the town at the time of occupation
have now returned to their homes.

The Somali National Army is patrolling the streets
of Sabiid, protecting population centres and securing
critical infrastructure and sensitive sites. The Governor
of Lower Shabelle is tirelessly in touch with the
population, moving from village to Village, listening to
their needs and concerns and helping to address them.
He has asked the population to identify a suitable person
from among them to be appointed as administrator of
the town.

The Government has put in place infrastructure
to receive and distribute humanitarian assistance
and attend to other pressing needs of the population.
Humanitarian agencies are responding generously by
availing themselves of and distributing emergency
food items, medicines, water purification tablets,
mosquito nets, blankets, iron and plastic sheets and
other emergency requirements. Partners are reacting
positively to the Government's appeal for quick-
impact projects to open up roads, build schools, police
stations and other public infrastructure, providing the
population with sustainable sources of water, health
services, schools, a marketplace and essential services.

What is happening in Lower Shabelle is a
game-changer. A Government-led, coordinated and
complementary joint intervention, conducted shoulder-
to-shoulder with AMISOM, the United Nations, the
European Union, the United States of America, the
United Kingdom and other partners, is implementing
a comprehensive approach to security in Sabiid and
Bariire, under the transition plan.

The recovery of Sabiid represents an overall
success for the Somali National Army, for AMISOM
and for partners. Key to that success has been joint
comprehensive planning and coordination, both in
terms of military and civilian tasks. That approach and
support for it need to be sustainable, predictable and
assured so that Sabiid, Bariire and other towns that are
going to be liberated from Al-Shabaab as a result of the
implementation of the transition plan do not fall back
into the hands of the extremist group.

While on the topic of stabilization and early-
recovery activities, I am pleased to report that AMISOM
will be scaling up its support to the residents of Sabiid.
That follows an initial support package of non-food
items to 600 households, consisting of 2,700 blankets,
2,700 plastic sheets and 3,050 mosquito nets. Our
new focus, following interaction with Lower Shabelle
stakeholders, will now be on Sabiid's immediate needs,
as well as those of Bariire.

To further ensure that stabilization takes place,
AMISOM. welcomes the recent initiative announced
by Prime Minister Khayre on 18 May on behalf of the
Federal Government to align military and policing
activities in Sabiid. In that regard, AMISOM. stands
ready to work with international partners, the Federal
Government and South-West state to identify, screen
and train a local policing force, both in Sabiid and
Bariire as well as other recovered areas.

If there is a lesson to be learned from Sabiid and
Bariire, it is that successful Somali National Army-
1ed operations under the right conditions are possible
and achievable. Somalis have the capacity to take over
responsibility for the security of their own country.
Those conditions are: the ability of the Somali National
Army to generate forces; a properly trained Army; a
well-equipped Army; and guaranteed Army salaries.
Fortunately, all those conditions were available and met
prior to and during the Sabiid and Bariire operations.
That is the way to go. We need to be sure that Somalia's
security forces are equipped and supplied with essential
hardware and means to contain Al-Shabaab. The group
remains a potent threat, especially with its ability to
recruit, self-finance and target Government officials,
businesses and civilians. While we have been witnessing
an intermittent downward trend in Al-Shabaab's
operational activities, including mid-level defections,
we must remain vigilant when it comes to the emerging
threat of the Islamic State.

During the reporting period, we observed that the
Islamic State might be exploiting A1-Shabaab's recent
tactical shift. In that respect, AMISOM. is assessing
reports that the Islamic State is seeking to move into
areas previously controlled by AI-Shabaab. Mindful of
that threat, and as we approach the height of Ramadan,
AMISOM, together with Somali partners, is prepared
for any counter-attacks on Sabiid and Bariire and
for reprisal attacks on Mogadishu. We are equally
anticipating and putting in place measures to address
Al-Shabaab's operations in their new locations across
the Bay, Bakool and Hiran regions.

Iwould now like to turn to the status of the transition
plan. It is now one year since the African Union Peace
and Security Council endorsed the transition plan,
in its 769th communique, of 30 April 2018. Since
then, AMISOM. has continued to register progress in
implementing the transition plan, based on our available
capabilities. On the operational pillar, AMISOM. has
successfully completed key tasks. We have transferred
security responsibility for Mogadishu stadium to
Somali security forces and recently, on 28 February,
we handed over J aalle Siyaad Barre Military Academy.
Between mid-February and 5 April, we completed the
drawdown of 1,000 troops. Meanwhile, in preparation
for securing the main supply route between Mogadishu
and Baidoa and recapturing Lego, we undertook key

shipping operations in Sabiid and Bariire, which Ijust
spoke about.

As part of our comprehensive approach to
security, AMISOM. also registered a key milestone
on the institutional capacity-building pillar. With the
completion of the regional forces operational readiness
assessment in mid-February, AMISOM. remains clear
about the trajectory of the transition and our final
exit from Somalia, as guided by the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council. For that reason, it is important that
we collectively address some of the key challenges
affecting the implementation of the transition.

First, the Federal Government will need further
assistance in generating the required troops to
undertake joint operations with AMISOM, assume
security responsibilities, hold territories and make sure
that the population is with it and does not run away
from it.

Secondly, the transition will need to see an
accelerated inclusive political settlement between the
Government and the regional states, as well as between
clans, particularly agreements on resource- and power-
sharing, governance, land issues, oversight structures
and the integration of forces.

In resolution 2431 (2018), the Council directed
AMISOM. to develop a new concept of operations that
would be aligned with supporting the implementation
of the transition plan. That exercise was completed
last November. However, to fully operationalize the
concept of operations, AMISOM. sector commanders
met from 11 to 14 February with their Somali National
Army counterparts in Mogadishu. The outcome of the
sector commanders conference now forms the basis
for AMISOM's reconfiguration of its military, police
and civilian components. That includes dedicated
implementation plans for all AMISOM. sectors, taking
into consideration the collapsing of forward-operating
bases or handing them over to Somali security forces,
and the creation of quick-reaction forces and mobile
forces for the military component.

I am happy to report that, in line with the concept

of operations, to date three AMISOM. sectors have
undergone reconfiguration, with the creation of quick-
reaction forces and mobile forces. Operations are taking
place in sectors a to 6. AMISOM. also handed over
its Afmadow forward operating base to the Jubaland
security forces in April. In the coming weeks, as the
Somali security forces begin to increase their capacity
to generate forces and assume security responsibilities,
AMISOM. will start its reconfiguration exercise across
the remaining sectors, particularly in sector 5. We are
currently discussing the modalities for the handing over
of Warsheikh, in sector 5, to the Somali police force.

I am pleased to report that in addition to
operationalizing AMISOM's concept of operations
across all sectors, AMISOM. has put in place a
monitoring and evaluation mechanism. All AMISOM
senior officials, starting with my deputy, are placed in
different sectors to very closely follow developments
and the implementation of the concept of operations
and the challenges it faces, as well as to ensure that we
support our commanders to make sure that we deliver
on our transition plan. Our ability to track the progress
of the concept of operations will now equip AMISOM
with the data to make the required adjustments in terms
of achieving the objective of the transition plan.

The Council recently received for its consideration
the report of the Chairperson of the African Union on
the fifth African Union-United Nations joint review of
AMISOM. under the African Union Peace and Security
Council's 9 May communique. As highlighted in both
of those documents, AMISOM. has recorded significant
progress in implementing the transition plan. In order
to maintain that progress and ensure a comprehensive
approach to security based on the outcomes of the 2018
joint review, AMISOM. has deployed its civilian sector
teams. The teams are now augmenting AMISOM's
contribution to institutional capacity-building in the
regional states, as well as broader stabilization and
area recovery.

This new civilian effort must be supported and
sustained in terms of human resources and logistics
to be able to adequately support the transition
implementation in the regional states. Similar to
AMISOM. civilians, the police component has also
expanded its presence, providing operational support
and training and mentoring to federal and regional
police forces. Two additional formed police units and
67 individual police officers, as recommended by the
fifth AU-United Nations joint review of AMISOM, will
continue to enhance AMISOM's role in training and

mentoring and, importantly, to support the elections in
2020-2021.

During the joint review in March, both the
African Union and the United Nations took stock of
the implementation of the transition plan and agreed
that, while AMISOM. had made progress, outstanding
tasks of the first phase still had to be completed before
commencing the second phase in June. In that regard,
it remains important that the Council take into account
the joint review's option 1 proposal when considering
AMISOM's future troop reductions. Allowing
AMISOM. to maintain its current troop level will
enhance Somalia's security and consolidate the security
gains achieved since the beginning of the transition.
Consideration of option 1 will also create an enabling
environment for the political process, including the
provision of adequate security for Somalia's upcoming
universal elections.

