The United States thanks Germany and the United Kingdom for their leadership in heading the negotiations on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) under difficult circumstances. Today marks a new day for the Sudan and the international community. With the establishment of UNITAMS, the Council stands shoulder to shoulder with the people of the Sudan, who, just a little over a year ago, stood up to insist on their fundamental freedoms. We are confident that UNITAMS will provide valuable support to the Sudanese Government, and, most importantly, the Sudanese people in building the long-term peace and stability that they so richly deserve. Given the vital role that women continue to play in the Sudan's transition, we look forward in particular to the steps that UNITAMS will take to empower women to participate in political dialogue. The United States also welcomes the extension of UNAMID until 31 December. The mandate reiterates that UNAMID's core task during this period is the protection of civilians. We expect UNAMID to continue to build the capacity of the Sudanese security agencies to protect civilians in Darfur in line with the Government's recently released protection-of-civilians plan. We look forward to learning more about the plan's implementation and seeing the Sudan fulfil its responsibilities in Darfur and throughout the country. We also expect that UNAMID and UNITAMS will maintain their political support for the Juba peace process. With respect to the climate-change language in this document, we note that on 4 November 2019 the United States submitted its notification of withdrawal from the Paris Agreement. Therefore, the climate-change language is without prejudice to United States positions. We affirm our support for promoting economic growth and improving energy security while protecting the environment. Beyond UNITAMS, the United States also wishes to note our concern at the proliferation of climate-change language in Security Council products, particularly those products that do not directly pertain to climate. We believe that those products should focus on the important work of maintaining international peace and security rather than attempting to catalogue every single factor or selectively focus on factors that may have an impact on this work.
