The Deputy Secretary-General: I wish to begin
by thanking the Permanent Mission of the Netherlands
and Ambassador Van Oosterom for having convened
this briefing and for the really dynamic presidency of
the Security Council this month. Let me also say that
I wish to congratulate the Security Council, because I
am here in Monrovia as we come to the closure of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia tomorrow. This is
really an exciting moment, although there are a lot of
concerns about how we will continue to build on the
gains of peace and to ensure that there is sustainable
development. But the Government and the President of
Liberia were very, very appreciative of the support of
the United Nations and wished me to convey that to
the Council.

I welcome this opportunity to brief the Council
on the situation in the Lake Chad basin. Since the last
such briefing, in September 2017 (see S/PV.8047),
considerable progress has been made in the fight
against Boko Haram. The Multinational Joint Task
Force operations have contributed to the liberation
of hostages and led to many territorial gains. The
Secretary-General commends the Governments of
the region for their sustained efforts and increased
coordination, which have been crucial. It is now key
that we stabilize the areas that have been reclaimed
and that we seize the opportunity to really promote
sustainable development.

Unfortunately, Boko Haram continues to carry out
raids, abductions and suicide bombings, as demonstrated
last month by the horrific abduction of 110 schoolgirls
in north-east Nigeria's Yobe state. Today, though,
we are very grateful and relieved that most of those
girls - 105 - have been returned to their families.

The United Nations is supporting the African Union
and the Lake Chad Basin Commission in developing a
stabilization, recovery and resilience strategy for the
region, in line with resolution 2349 (2017). The strategy,
we hope, will be launched next month in N'Djamena. In
parallel, the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General for Central Africa and for West Africa and
the Sahel continue their efforts, in close partnership
with the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, to address the root causes of the crisis.

Violations of human rights continue to fuel
insecurity in the Lake Chad basin. Investments and
strengthening community justice mechanisms will
be essential to promoting reconciliation, ensuring
accountability and sustaining peace. It is also critical
for counter-terrorism activities and initiatives aimed at
preventing violent extremism to integrate the human
rights and the gender dimensions. We welcome the
recruitment of the three African Union-Lake Chad
Basin Commission human rights officers as part of
the civilian component of the Multinational Joint Task
Force. The appointment of a gender advisor for the Force
is, however, needed urgently to enhance the protection
of women and girls and ensure their participation in
peace and development processes.

Too many girls and women across the region
continue to experience sexual and gender-based
violence and other violations of their rights. Boko
Haram has abducted more than 4,000 women and girls.
Those who are able to return often face stigmatization
by their communities. Over the past several years, the
group's use of women and girls to carry out suicide
attacks has increased dramatically. One reason may
be the lack of women in the security sector who can
check other women at checkpoints. Clearly, women's
participation in efforts to promote gender equality are
critical elements of our response.

Boko Haram, sadly and horrifically, used children
in 135 suicide attacks in 2017, representing a fivefold
increase from 2016. The international community must
do more to respond to the plight of children affected by
the upheaval in the region, including through support
for the return of children to their communities and a
more concerted effort on reintegation and rehabilitation.

The humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad
basin remains complex and dire, with 10.7 million
people in need of life-saving assistance and 2.3 million
people - including 1.5 million children - forcibly
displaced from their homes. We thank the Governments
of Cameroon and Nigeria for their continued
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees in the framework
of the tripartite agreement, and we encourage all the
affected States to fully implement the 2016 Abuja
Action Statement.

Humanitarian assistance has scaled up considerably
and reached more than 6 million people in 2017. Food
security has improved in the north-east of Nigeria,
where famine was averted last year. But that progress
is still very fragile. As of today, 4.5 million people are
severely food insecure across the Lake Chad basin, and
that number is expected to rise to 5.8 million by June.

The scale-up of assistance has taken place in an
extremely volatile environment. On 1 March, three aid
workers were killed in the town of Rann, in Borno state,
following an attack by suspected Boko Haram insurgent.
Three others are still missing, and humanitarian aid has
temporarily been suspended. An estimated $1.6 billion
will be required to assist 7.8 million people in four
countries. I call on Member States to ensure that the
humanitarian appeal is well funded and that the pledges
are disbursed promptly. The experience of the last
appeal was successful. It was very much appreciated, it
came in time and it has been well disbursed.

I would also like to highlight the importance of
strengthening the Safe Schools initiative, as well as
communications infrastructure, so that people can
call for assistance when needed. This was a major
gap in the recent abduction of the 110 girls in Yobe
state. The crisis has resulted in massive destruction of
basic infrastructure, health and educational facilities,
commercial buildings, private houses and agricultural
assets. Along with the impacts of violent extremism,
underdevelopment, demographic shifts and climate
change, we can see another powerful example of
a complex, multidimensional situation that really
requires an integrated approach to addressing the
humanitarian and development challenges that will link
to sustainable peace.

The United Nations continues to support the affected
Governments in creating livelihoods, strengthening
institutions, building community resilience and taking
other steps to address the root causes. National and
local non-governmental organizations and faith-based
organizations still have an invaluable role to play in
prevention and reintegration efforts.

Restoring the Lake Chad ecosystem is going to
be essential. It would improve livelihoods for millions
of people, reduce local tensions and foster regional
integration and development. Last month's international
conference on Lake Chad in Abuja was successful,
and the adoption of the Abjua declaration reaffirmed
the region's commitment to increasing cooperation to
address the socioeconomic impact of climate change
and instability in the Sahel, West Africa and the Lake
Chad region.

Finally, the Security Council's visit to the region
over a year ago should not be underestimated, and the
adoption of resolution 2349 (2017) really created a
momentum that must be maintained. The visit by the
African Union Peace and Security Council in July
2017 further highlighted the challenges faced by the
Multinational Joint Task Force. Sustained international,
financial and technical support for the Force remains
crucial to protecting the fragile progress made in the
fight against Boko Haram. The joint ECCAS-ECOWAS
summit on Boko Haram - the first to be held in the first
half of 2018 - will be another important undertaking.
We must continue to address these complex challenges,
in close cooperation with the affected countries and all
relevant subregional organizations, in line resolution
2349 (2017).

We should also recognize that security measures
and military operations have proven limits. There
will be no sustaining peace without sustainable
development, and development gains will always be
at risk without lasting peace. I hope that we can work
together to end this crisis, which has caused immense
suffering and continues to have serious consequences
well beyond the borders.

