Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): The draft resolution submitted
for action today will extend the mandate of the United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) and
will thus represent an important contribution to the
maintenance of international peace and security in the
Balkans.

It is worth recalling on this occasion that
UNPREDEP was established in 1992. The purpose of its
establishment, as defined in resolution 795 (1992), was to
prevent any developments which could undermine
stability in Macedonia or threaten its territorial integrity.
That was an important decision taken at a time when a
large part of the region was destabilized and when the
war against Bosnia and Herzegovina already represented
a major threat to international peace and security. The
decision to establish the first United Nations preventive
deployment mission at that moment was timely, brave and
wise. That decision once again confirmed that an ounce
of prevention is better than a pound of cure, a lesson
successfully tested in Macedonia and sadly neglected in
some other situations in the region.

The mandate of the mission has been clear: to
prevent spillover from the armed conflicts in other parts
of the region. The mission was initiated by the
Government of Macedonia, a matter of considerable
importance for its success.

In the years following its establishment, UN PREDEP
played an outstanding role in the stabilization of the
situation along Macedonia' s northern and western borders,
in deterring threats and preventing clashes and in
generating dialogue among the ethnic communities in the

 

country. It is indeed remarkable that, despite the conflicts
in neighbouring areas, Macedonia has succeeded in
maintaining its peace and stability in the last six years.
UNPREDEP continues to play all these roles today, at a
time of threats to international peace in the vicinity of
Macedonia.

We share the View expressed by the Secretary-General
that peace and stability in Macedonia continue to depend
largely on the developments in other parts of the region.
The continued tension and conflict in the immediate vicinity
of Macedonia could easily exacerbate its internal problems
and could lead to the deterioration of inter-ethnic relations
in the country. UNPREDEP should therefore continue its
vitally important mission.

It is timely and necessary that the Security Council
take action now. Slovenia will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council.

