Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to
thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for presenting the forty-sixth
report (S/2014/777, annex) on the implementation of
the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
commend his continued support to the parties in the
country towards the full implementation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace. I also recognize the
presence among us of the Permanent Representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In May this year, Bosnia and Herzegovina
experienced devastating floods that killed 20 people,
displaced 90,000 people, destroyed over 2,000 homes
and damaged infrastructure. Rwanda is concerned by the
economic impact of this disaster, which has amounted
to more than €2 billion. We applaud the international
community for the solidarity shown towards the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are particularly
encouraged by the outcome of the international donors
conference held on 16 July in Brussels, which resulted
in significant pledges, critical to the recovery of the
affected communities.

Rwanda welcomes the holding, on 12 October,
of free, fair and orderly elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as attested by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe monitoring
team. Despite reported irregularities in some polling
stations, we commend the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for enabling their people to exercise their
right to vote in a peaceful environment. However, we
regret that the elections in Mostar, which were set
to take place in October, were not held. We urge all
political parties involved to seek a way out, with a
View to ending the gridlock and implement the 2010
ruling of the Constitutional Court. In that regard, we
encourage the authorities to consider Mr. Inzko's letter
to the Joint Collegium of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly, with a proposal for a one-time
local elections.

We hope that the elected authorities will make the
necessary reforms to address, as a matter of priority,
the socioeconomic situation in the country, particularly
youth unemployment, which has reached a dangerous
rate - approximately 60 per cent. In that regard, it is
unfortunate that, despite the February demonstrations,
which should have been a wake-up call, political tension
and gridlock persists in the country.

In that context, we remain concerned by the
continued failure to make any progress on the
outstanding 5+2 objectives to meet the prerequisite for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
The stalemate in the political situation is an impediment
for the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to reach
their Euro-Atlantic integration goal. We hope that the
benefits of such integration will be a driving factor for
resolving the gridlock. In that regard, we recognize
the important contribution of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Operation Althea for the security
and stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the past
years.

As Rwanda has stated in previous debates, we
find it unfortunate that so much effort is devoted to
divisive rhetoric that undermines the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We urge the ruling party in the Republika Srpska
to engage in a constructive manner that is geared
towards nation-building and to disassociate itself from
statements publicly advocating for the secession and
dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. As recalled
by Mr. Valentin Inzko, self-determination in this case
would be a blatant violation of the Constitution and the
Dayton Peace Accords. We call on the political actors
in the country to act responsibly and to always promote
reconciliation and national unity.

Rwanda notes that, under the period under review,
there was no vote on any of the proposals submitted
to correct the systematic discrimination addressed by
the European Court of Human Rights in the Sejdie-
Finci case. We hope that the current Parliamentary
Assembly will consider those important proposals that
would create an environment with equal rights for all,
including minorities.
I will conclude by recalling that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is preparing to commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the genocide in Srebrenica.
In that respect, Rwanda welcomes the adoption,
by the Parliament of the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, of amendments to entity criminal code
to make genocide denial a criminal offence. As we
believe that fighting genocide denial is critical for
reconciliation and healing, we hope that there will soon
be a consensus on that issue in the country. Let us hope
that 2015 will enable all communities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to turn a dark page in their history.

