Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank Mr. Jan
Kubis for his informative briefing. I also commend him
for his tireless efforts to achieve national reconciliation
and stability in Iraq.

Before I begin my statement, Japan strongly
condemns the terrorist attacks in Baghdad and Basra.
I would like to express my sincere condolences to the
families of the victims, and we pray for the speedy
recovery of the injured.

Japan supports the Government of Iraq, which is
standing on the front line in the fight against terrorism,
especially against the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). Following the liberation of eastern
Mosul, Iraqi security forces, with support from the
combined joint task force, are recapturing western
Mosul. We are encouraged to hear that the completion
of that operation is within reach. Today, I would like to
focus on the protection of civilians, the humanitarian
situation and national reconciliation.

First, the protection of civilians is an immediate
challenge that all parties in Iraq must address,
particularly in the context of the liberation operations.
Approximately 200,000 people are living in ISIL-
controlled areas of western Mosul. Japan supports
the Iraqi Government's commitment to placing the
protection of civilians at the centre of its military
operations. The procedures and tactics of military
operations should always be designed to minimize the
impact on civilians, based on lessons learned from past
operations. Furthermore, all parties, including the Iraqi
security forces and the Peshmerga, should bear in mind
that human rights abuses simply lead to further enmity
and violence. Any human rights abuse, whether it be
against Shiites, Sunnis, the Yazidi minority or others,
is totally unacceptable. It benefits nobody in Iraq
except the terrorists. The protection of civilians is not
merely an obligation. It also decreases the motivation
for reprisals and is paramount to sustaining peace.

Secondly, the humanitarian situation in Iraq is a
serious challenge in both the immediate and the long
terms. The Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian
Affairs estimates that 11 million people in Iraq are
in need of humanitarian assistance, with 3.1 million
people internally displaced. The humanitarian situation
is particularly severe for people displaced by the
fighting, including nearly 678,000 people who have
been displaced from Mosul.

Japan applauds the United Nations and all
humanitarian workers in Iraq for their tireless efforts
in extremely difficult circumstances. Japan has been a
steadfast supporter of humanitarian and stabilization
assistance in Iraq, including through a $100 million
contribution announced in January. That sum is
already being dispersed through various international
organizations, such as the United Nations Development
Programme, to support the rapid rehabilitation of key
infrastructure and livelihoods in newly liberated areas.
Japan is firmly determined to continue such support.
Japan calls on the international community to continue
its robust support for Iraq.

Finally, national reconciliation is the most critical
condition for a peaceful and stable Iraq. The operation
to liberate Mosul is ongoing, but it is not too early to
discuss the post-liberation phase. Without real national
reconciliation, peace cannot be sustained in Iraq. The
unity shown by the Iraqi people in combating Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) must be further
strengthened during the post-ISIL phase.

We welcomed the visit by Secretary-General
Guterres to Iraq in March. I particularly appreciated
that he participated in serious discussions on national
reconciliation. Iraq's efforts with regard to national
reconciliation have not yet achieved sufficient
results. Japan calls on the parties in Iraq, including
representatives of political parties, religious leaders
and local community leaders, to make every effort to
promote national reconciliation.

The role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq is also crucial in supporting national
reconciliation efforts by the Iraqi people. I thank
Mr. Kubis for engaging actively with the Government,
other political leaders and civil society. I particularly
commend the "Iraq: Youth and Coexistence" initiative.
Investing in the future through youth is an approach
that Japan has taken in several countries in need
of reconciliation.

Japan will continue to strongly support Iraq and
UNAMIintheireffortstoachievenationalreconciliation.
We look forward to seeing tangible results.

