Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the United Kingdom for conducting
today's debate. We are grateful to the briefers for their
attention to the protection of children in armed conflict
and for the useful information they have provided in
that context to the Council.

Children continue to suffer from the horrors of
war. Russia condemns all serious violations against
children, by whomsoever they may be committed, and
advocates the prosecution of all such perpetrators.
Crimes committed against children must be punished.
We too believe it necessary to deal with all six
categories of grave violations against children in
armed conflict, namely, the recruitment and use of
children, sexual violence against children, the killing
and maiming of children, abductions, attacks against
schools and hospitals and the blocking of humanitarian
access to children. A particular concern is the killing
and wounding of children during planned attacks and
as a result of the indiscriminate or disproportionate
use of force or the use of unmanned aerial vehicles.
It is unfortunate that such cases are taking place
with lamentable regularity. We call for the thorough
investigation of such incidents and the prosecution of
perpetrators.

Resolution 1612 (2005) and the Council's follow-
up documents on the matter provide a foundation for
ensuring the protection of children in armed conflict
and post-conflict rebuilding situations. That pertains
to the functioning of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict and
the activities of the relevant Working Group of the
Security Council. The Russian Federation is of the
view that those mechanisms must focus chiefly on
the most pressing major armed conflict situations on
the Council's agenda. With respect to other situations,
the Working Group may consider those only upon the
agreement of the State in question.
There is no doubt that children need support and
protection in situations other than those involving
armed conflict; the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council also cover matters dealing with children.
In order to strengthen the effectiveness of work in that
important area, existing work distribution arrangements
among the appropriate United Nations entities must be
strictly followed, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations and other international law instruments.

The Russian delegation has carefully studied the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/245), which
was introduced by the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict. First and foremost,
we would note that the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General does not
cover the protection of children as a whole; rather, it
covers the situation of children in armed conflict. We
do not see any justification for a broad interpretation
of the concept of armed conflict, as a result of which,
for several years now, the Security Council has been
presented with information on situations that are not
part of its agenda and cannot be qualified as involving
armed conflict. Moreover, the principle guiding the
selection of information for the report remains unclear.
Balanced evaluations based on well-deserved trust and
reliable information provide a guarantee that, through
respectful dialogue with the States concerned, the
recommendations will be implemented.

The priority set forth during our debate
today - namely, the need to bring pressure to bear on
the so-ca11ed persistent perpetrators - is undoubtedly
important. However, taken out of the relevant context,
tackling the problem is impossible. We suggest first
and foremost that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General draw up clear procedures and criteria
for the listing and de-listing of parties to a conflict in
the annex to the annual report of the Secretary-General.
Unfortunately, despite the multiple appeals over several
years made by a number of members of the Security
Council and the direct instructions given by the Council
in resolutions 1998 (2011) and 2068 (2012), no progress
has been made in resolving the problem.

We believe that, before deciding what should
be done with parties to a conflict characterized as
"persistent perpetrators", we must understand why they
are being classified as such. The only criterion used to
date is continuous reference to a given party to a conflict
in the report of the Secretary-General over a five-year
period. In our view, that criterion is superficial.

With regard to the criteria for de-listing parties to
a conflict in the report, in our view the mere existence
of an action plan for halting some sort of a crime drawn
up by a party to the conflict with the United Nations
is not a guarantee that the situation of children will
improve. There is no denying the fact that a number of
States in whose territories parties to a conflict listed
in the annexes to the Secretary-General's report are
carrying out activities are doing things to change the
situation. The lack of clear criteria not only does not
help the Governments of those countries but also gives
rise to a sort of lack of trust regarding the objectivity
and effective of the approach as a whole.

With regard to efforts to bring pressure to bear on
perpetrators, the means could vary depending on the
situation. In our view, sanctions are not a panacea.
Of primary importance is constructive cooperation
between the United Nations and the States where
armed groups are acting. Undoubtedly, the leading
role for protecting children must be played by national
Governments, and the primary task of the United
Nations is to complement those efforts upon the request
of such States.

Effective cooperation with the Governments of
countries engulfed in conflict or in a post-conflict
reconstruction phase can be established only in an
atmosphere of trust and dialogue, which, in the final
analysis, will foster an improvement of the situation of
children on the ground.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that the
Russian Federation attaches the highest importance
to the matter of the protection of children in armed
conflict and to international efforts to resolve that
important issue.

