Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to thank the Ukrainian
delegation for scheduling this meeting. I would like to
welcome the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Haekkerup, who is on his first
visit to the Security Council. I would also like to thank
him for his very interesting and very detailed report.

I have noted that Kosovo province continues to
fact formidable challenges in the political, security and
economic fields. It is certainly not easy for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) to carry out its work in such a difficult
environment. The Chinese delegation wishes to express
its appreciation to Mr. Haekkerup for the efforts he has
made since taking office to improve UNMIK's work
and implement resolution 1244 (1999).

At this time, preparatory work is being carried
out for the general elections. Whether the elections are
successful or not is directly related to the
comprehensive and lasting solution of the question of
Kosovo. We wish to commend Mr. Haekkerup for the
cautious attitude he has exhibited in the preparations
for Kosovo's elections. China considers that the
elections in Kosovo should be carefully carried out in
strict accordance with the framework of the provisions
of resolution 1244 (1999).

The preparations for the elections should also
ensure the full participation of all ethnic communities.
The work being done to ensure the return of refugees
from minority communities - such as Serbs and
Turks - and to provide security guarantees should also
be intensified. If it is not possible to guarantee their
safety, then merely encouraging them to participate
fully in the general elections is just empty talk.

China has felt all along that the strengthening of
cooperation by UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KF OR)
with the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is an important precondition for the
discharge of their duties. We are pleased to see that
since taking office Mr. Haekkerup has attached great
attention to cooperation with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. The positive and cooperative attitude
shown by the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia also merits our commendation.

But we need to stress that the ultimate resolution
of the Kosovo question should be premised on respect
for, and safeguarding of, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. That
should also be the case in the preparations for the
elections in Kosovo. We hope that UNMIK can take
concrete measures in this regard. We encourage
UNMIK to continue and further strengthen its
cooperation with the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

The security situation around Kosovo has
recently deteriorated, which has aroused wide concern
in the international community. Ethnic Albanian
extremists have been provoking violence in southern
Serbia and in the border area of Macedonia. This not
only poses a threat to the security and stability of the
entire Balkan area, it also adversely affects the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of Kosovo province.

The Security Council already held several
meetings last week on the deteriorating situation. It
adopted a presidential statement and responded in a
timely way. The parties concerned have been making
efforts to resolve the conflict. The ceasefire agreement
that has just been signed and the fact that the troops of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are re-entering the
ground safety zone are both positive steps. The
Security Council is once again today holding a meeting
on Kosovo. It should send an even clearer signal to the
separatists and extremists in the region, namely, that
any attempt to use violence to solve problems will lead
nowhere. We therefore support the Security Council's
adoption of the presidential statement before it.

We also need to acknowledge that there are at the
moment a very small number of extremists carrying out
rampant activities. This demonstrates that the measures
taken by UNMIK and KFOR in approximately the last
two years have not achieved their intended practical
results, and that they need to be improved further. In
particular, it is necessary to thoroughly disarm ethnic
Albanian guerrillas, control the illegal flow of arms
and strengthen the management of Kosovo's borders.
There is an old saying in China that says that it is not
too late to mend the fence even after some of the sheep
have escaped. We have noted that KFOR is carrying
out these measures step by step. We hope that those
measures will really be able to curb the violent
activities of the extremists.

Taking into account the fragility of the situation
and the fact that UNMIK's work is at a crucial stage,
we support the proposal by the Russian Ambassador to
send another Security Council mission to Kosovo. Of
course, we would also be interested in hearing any of
Mr. Haekkerup's views or comments.

