Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to express our appreciation for the convening of
this debate. We consider it to be an excellent
opportunity to provide more information about the
Committees, adding to the transparency and better
understanding of their work.
At the outset, I would like to thank each of the
Chairmen for their detailed and informative briefings
in today's meeting. We highly respect and appreciate
the tireless work, dedication and strong leadership of
Ambassador Mayr-Harting, Ambassador Apakan and
Ambassador Heller, which have cumulatively
contributed to the effectiveness of the respective
Committees.

The challenges posed to the modern world and
our societies by the different forms, methods and
manifestations of international terrorism necessitate a
sustained and comprehensive approach to the
prevention and combating of this phenomenon. In that
regard, we would like to emphasize the importance of
the Committees established pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004) as effective tools in countering terrorism
in all its forms. Furthermore, and in order to enhance
the significant contribution of the Committees to the
strengthening of global security, we would encourage
continuous improvement in cooperation and
coordination among them.

The work of the 1267 Committee, under the able
chairmanship of Ambassador Mayr-Harting, remains
one of the most crucial instruments in fighting the
threat from Al-Qaida and the Taliban. In that regard,
Bosnia and Herzegovina shares the common belief that
the sanctions regime was further strengthened and
improved with the unanimous adoption of resolution
1904 (2009). We are convinced that it will greatly
assist Member States in more effectively implementing
the sanctions regime. Furthermore, we are particularly
looking forward to the appointment of the
ombudsperson in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the resolution, as it represents a very
important step towards making the Committee's
procedures more clear and transparent.

Bosnia and Herzegovina also supports the efforts
of the Chairman to conclude the review process in a
timely manner, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of resolution 1822 (2008). We consider that
the review, if conducted thoroughly with the active and
valuable contribution of the Monitoring Team, will
result in a more precise and accurate consolidated list,
further strengthening the credibility of the Committee
as a very important instrument for combating terrorist
threats.
With the strong commitment and enthusiasm of its
Chairman, Ambassador Apakan, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee continues its outstanding job, primarily in
monitoring the implementation of resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005). Promoting greater visibility
and transparency in the work of the Committee, as well
as streamlining some of its working methods,
Ambassador Apakan has further underlined the
important role of the Committee in countering terrorism.
I also wish to commend the work and engagement of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and its valuable contribution to the overall effort of
countering terrorism. The broad range of thematic and
regional discussions introduced into the Committee's
programme of work helps to identify the challenges and
difficulties that countries face today in their efforts to
efficiently implement their obligations under the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

I wish to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina
attaches great importance to strengthening cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee, in particular
with regard to the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). Moreover, Bosnia and Herzegovina remains
fully committed to the effective prevention of and fight
against this global threat, and stands ready to provide
every assistance and support to international efforts in
that regard.

Bosnia and Herzegovina also attaches great
importance to the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) as one of the
fundamental instruments of United Nations counter-
terrorism and non-proliferation activities. We also offer
our full support to the Committee's Chairman,
Ambassador Heller, in his efforts and excellent work.
The importance of the role of the 1540 Committee as
one of the fundamental instruments of United Nations
counter-terrorism and non-proliferation activities has
already been well stressed. In its brief history, the
Committee has proved that its work is crucial to
addressing the issue of terrorism and to extending the
necessary expertise and support to Member States in
establishing and further developing their capacity to
face the threat of terrorists' acquiring weapons of mass
destruction.

Full cooperation with the Committee and a timely
and comprehensive response to the requirements of
resolution 1540 (2004) are critical to establishing a
strong, comprehensive response to the global threat. In
that context, we are pleased to see the positive effects
of the adoption of the comprehensive review of the
resolution's status of implementation, emphasizing the
more active engagement of States in its implementation
through continuing dialogue and participation in
numerous outreach events.

Finally, let me assure you once again, Madam,
that Bosnia and Herzegovina shares the determination
of all members of the Committee, as well as all
Members of the United Nations in general, to combat
terrorism in all its forms at the national and
international levels, and is firmly committed to
fulfilling its obligations under the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

