Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We express
our appreciation for the convening of this meeting and
for the comprehensive interventions by the briefers,
who have described to us an urgent situation requiring
the attention of the Council. We also welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya.

Peru notes with deep concern the escalating violence
and suffering in various areas of the Libyan territory,
which have resulted in new internally displaced persons,
deaths among the civilian population, primarily of
women and children, and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure, including hospitals and schools.

Those indiscriminate attacks represent flagrant
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights which, due to their nature, could constitute
war crimes. In such circumstances, we deem it vital
that those countries with influence on the parties
act firmly to bring about the end of such regrettable
incidents. This must in addition be guided by efforts to
ensure accountability and to identify and duly punish
the perpetrators of atrocities. Impunity, just as in other
bloody conflicts on the Council's agenda, cannot be
tolerated here. We thus welcome the intention of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to
assess such situations in its efforts to cooperate with
the Libyan authorities.

In this regard, Peru underscores the need for the
parties to return to the negotiating table in pursuit of
a political solution in the context of a Libyan-owned
process and supported by the United Nations, with a
constructive and complementary role being played
by regional organizations such as the African Union
and other concerned international actors. The Berlin
process represents an important step in that direction,
in line with the three-step proposal put forward by the
Special Representative. This will require an immediate
and unconditional ceasefire and the establishment of
confidence-building measures and processes aimed
at ensuring the unification and strengthening of
institutions, particularly in the case of the security
forces. This will also require an end to the blatant and
persistent violations of the arms embargo imposed by
the Council, which only heightens the human cost and
creates space for extremist groups to carry out their
activities. Such a process must be people-centred and
focused on achieving the common good as opposed
to strategic or economic interests such as those that
characterized the development of this conflict.

I wish to conclude by reiterating Peru's deep
concern at the inhumane conditions and abuse suffered
by thousands of migrants and refugees in detention
centres in Libya. We await the urgent action of the
Council and of the international community to speed
up the process of definitively shuttering such centres,
which overtly violate international human rights law.

