Mr. Bolton (United States of America): In order
that the record is clear on what we are doing here, I
would just briefly like to make a few remarks, starting
with the reading of the letters that we have sent to you,
Mr. President, in your capacity as President of the
Security Council, and that bring us to this important
vote today.

The first letter, dated 1 September, addressed to
you, Mr. President, states,

"The United States and other members of
the Security Council are concerned about the
deteriorating situation in Myanmar, known to the
United States as Burma, and this situation is
likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security.

"In his briefings to the Council in December
2005 and June 2006, Under-Secretary-General
Gambari described the grave human rights and
humanitarian conditions in Burma, including the
detention of over 1,100 political prisoners, as
well as the outflow from Burma of refugees,
drugs, HIV-AIDS and other diseases. These
conditions threaten to have a destabilizing impact
on the region.

"Therefore, we request that the situation in
Myanmar, known to the United States as Burma,
be placed on the Council's agenda, and that a
senior official of the Secretariat formally brief
Member States in a meeting of the Security
Council on this situation and its implications for
international peace and security".

The second letter, Mr. President, dated today,
addressed to you in your capacity as President of the
Council, states,

"Further to my letter of 1 September 2006
on the subject of Myanmar, known to the United
States as Burma, and to our subsequent
3
discussions with Council members, I would like
to specifically confirm my request for a meeting
of the Security Council during September, but
after 19 September, under the agenda item 'The
situation in Myanmar', for members of the
Council to receive a briefing from Under-
Secretary-General Gambari on the situation in
that country and the status and progress of the
Secretary-General's good offices mission. I
would appreciate your circulating this letter as a
document of the Security Council".

Since the passage of resolution 688 (1991)
dealing with the refugee flows from Iraq after the first
Persian Gulf war, matters of this kind have been
deemed to be threats to international peace and
security. And so it is with Burma. The vote that the
Council is about to take is an important, albeit
procedural, one. I urge that everyone on the Council
support it.

