Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Bolivia's holding of today's meeting. I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General and
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs Izumi
Nakamitsu and Mr. Joseph Ballard of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons for their
briefings.

China appreciates the role played by Bolivia as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). The non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) and their means of delivery
bears on international peace, security and stability.
It is a common challenge and a major task facing the
international community and an important component
part of global governance. In recent years, thanks
to the joint efforts of the international community,
the international consensus on non-proliferation has
grown in depth and the relevant mechanisms have kept
improving. Countries have scaled up capacity-building
in non-proliferation and deepened cooperation in this
area.

Reviewing past experience in international
non-proliferation, we can draw the following four
lessons.

First, seeking common security is a fundamental
way to advance international non-proliferation. Creating
a peaceful and stable international environment,
building security architecture that features fairness,
justice, joint contributions and shared benefits, and
seeking common security for all countries represent the
ultimate guarantee for the elimination of the driving
forces of terrorism and proliferation.

Secondly, justice and balance constitute the basic
principles in advancing international non-proliferation.
Unilateralism, double standards and discriminatory
practices are detrimental to the authority and
effectiveness of the international non-proliferation
regime. While fulfilling their non-proliferation
obligations, countries are entitled to peacefully enjoy
the fruits of scientific and technological development.

Thirdly, leveraging the role of the international
non-proliferation regime is an important guarantee for
the advancement of international non-proliferation.
The threat of WMD proliferation knows no borders.
On the basis of the universal participation of and
democratic consultation among countries, having
the United Nations and the relevant international
organizations coordinate in non-proliferation efforts
can help strengthen and optimize the international
non-proliferation regime.

Fourthly, dialogue and cooperation are the most
effective way to advance international non-proliferation.
Confrontation, the focus on sanctions and pressure can
only lead to the escalation and overspill of conflicts,
thereby further exacerbating the risk of proliferation.
Dialogue, consultation and seeking peaceful settlements
of regional hotspot issues of proliferation through
political and diplomatic means can produce more durable
and effective results. Over the past several years, the
international non-proliferation situation has remained
serious with certain regional hotspot issues concerning
proliferation defying a solution. Technological progress
has lowered the threshold of proliferation, and the risk
of non-State actors, especially terrorists, acquiring
WMDs and related materials has increased.

The international community needs to work
together and do a better job in the following areas of
global non-proliferation governance.

First, we need to build political consensus and a
process for addressing both the symptoms and root
causes of the problem. We need to abandon the Cold
War mentality; establish a new concept of common,
integrated, cooperative and sustainable security;
improve the security environment of all countries;
and eradicate the breeding grounds of terrorism and
proliferation activities as soon as possible. At the same
time, there is a need to comprehensively implement
non-proliferation obligations and political commitment
in that regard, and commit ourselves to combating the
existing threats of proliferation.

Secondly, we need to strengthen national
responsibility and build a line of defence against
proliferation. National Governments bear the primary
responsibility for non-proliferation. We need to respect
and provide support to countries - based on their
specific circumstances - in their efforts to formulate
non-proliferation policies, improve legal and regulatory
systems on non-proliferation and enhance capacity-
building in non-proliferation law enforcement with a
view to building a strong line of defence.

Thirdly we need to deepen international
cooperation and enhance non-proliferation capacity.
All countries must actively participate in global
non-proliferation governance, While ensuring the
respect for the sovereignty of all countries engaged in
exchanges and mutual learning, as well as pragmatic
cooperation in an open, inclusive, mutually beneficial
and win-win spirit so as to improve the capacity and
the level of non-proliferation of all countries. The needs
of developing countries for international systems in
non-proliferation should be effectively met.

Fourthly, we need to take a multipronged approach
to implement resolution 1540 (2004) comprehensively
and effectively. Resolution 1540 (2004) was the first of
its kind adopted by the Security Council specifically
concerning non-proliferation, and it represents the
common understanding of all countries in connection
with non-proliferation. The Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) needs to strictly
abide by the mandate conferred upon it by the resolution,
continue to take forward the spirit of cooperation,
focus on strengthening its assistance function so as to
enhance the awareness and capacity of Member States in
implementing the resolution and promote international
cooperation in the area of non-proliferation.

China resolutely opposes the proliferation of
WMDs and their means of delivery, and has always
strictly fulfilled its international non-proliferation
obligations. We have taken an active part in regional
and international non-proliferation cooperation, worked
hard to promote the political settlement of hotspot
issues in the area ofnon-proliferation and supported the
United Nations while playing a key role in that regard.

In September 2015 in Qingdao, China, in
cooperation with the 1540 Committee, hosted the
first training course for the points of contact in the
Asia-Pacific region, which yielded positive results.
In August, China, also in cooperation with the 1540
Committee, will co-host another training course in
China. We believe that that training course will play
a constructive role in helping the concerned parties
build capacity in the area of non-proliferation. China
will continue to work with all parties to contribute to
the improvement of the international non-proliferation
regime, the strengthening of global non-proliferation
governance and the maintenance of international peace
and security

