First of all, let me say a few words on counter-terrorism. Some colleagues have already raised the issue of right-wing extremism and terrorism. We welcome the fact that the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Counter- Terrorism Committee keep track of evolving trends and developments, including the threat posed by violent right-wing extremism and terrorism. In this context, I would like to point out a recent study commissioned by the German Federal Foreign Office on the issue of transnational connectivity and violent right-wing extremism and terrorism. This is an issue that we take very seriously. We are firmly committed to pursuing it further and see an important role for the United Nations to play in this regard. We encourage the Committees and United Nations experts to continue to put very strong emphasis on four principles in their counter-terrorism work. The first is human rights. Counter-terrorism measures must never serve as a pretext for human rights violations. They are counterproductive to all efforts to sustainably eradicate the root causes of radicalization and terrorism. Let me express, in this context, that we are very concerned about what is happening in Xinjiang. Let me remind the Council of the declaration that Germany presented in the Third Committee of the General Assembly on behalf of 39 States. The second principle we believe is essential is that of accountability and prosecution for terrorist crimes. That brings me to the principle of the rule of law and ensuring due diligence. In this regard, we commend the Ombudsperson to the Da'esh (ISIL) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, Mr. Kipfer-Fasciati, for his excellent work. Thirdly, international humanitarian law must be respected. Counter-terrorism measures must not hinder humanitarian activities carried out by humanitarian actors and based on humanitarian principles. Lastly, I would like to emphasize the importance of the gender dimension and the role of women, both as the solution and part of the problem. Women are crucial actors in addressing effectively the root causes of conflict and radicalization. They are at the same time also victims and survivors and, in some cases, even perpetrators. With regard to the issue of weapons of mass destruction, in the Council we are currently discussing the terrible effects that the use of weapons of mass destruction can have. Syria is just one example, where the Al-Assad regime is using chemical weapons against its own population. This shows how important this issue is. Let me turn now to resolution 1540 (2004). We welcome the progress made in the implementation of the resolution since its adoption. However, to guarantee full and effective implementation, it is ultimately important to assist those States requiring support. We therefore particularly welcome increased cooperation among the Committee and its Group of Experts, the regional centres of the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and international organizations, such as the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the International Atomic Energy Agency. We regret that the ongoing comprehensive review has been delayed due to the coronavirus disease pandemic. We believe that, in preparing for an extension of the 1540 mandate, it will be worthwhile to think about how to best address threats resulting from new technologies. We believe that this element should be taken into account. In this context, I would like to draw the Council's attention to a process that Germany has organized since 2012 - the Wiesbaden Conferences. The Wiesbaden process raises awareness and furthers the exchange of information and effective practices and promotes private-sector engagement as the first line of defence, which is vital for successful non-proliferation in a globalized world. In conclusion, let me reiterate another core principle - working together to solve those problems that do not stop at national borders. International, regional and subregional cooperation efforts remain vital, as does the collaboration with a variety of actions, including in particular those of civil society. A transnational threat can be overcome only when our response is unified.
