Lord Ashdown: I am conscious of the time and
of the fact that the Council has extremely important
consultations yet to take place, so I will keep my
responses, in most cases, rather brief.

First of all, I would like to comment on Minister
Colak's point about refugee return. Refugee return is
now an issue that is out of the hands of the
international community and that has been entirely
handed over to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities.
Of course, that return process has not yet been
completed, but it is a miracle that a million people
have returned home in Bosnia and Herzegovina. There
are more yet to return; I concede that case. Minister
Colak mentions the 10,000 Croats who have not yet
returned to Banja Luka. How many of them wish to do
so? They may well now be settled in other countries.
Of course, this is a matter of conjecture, but the
Council would not, I think, have a clear picture if they
did not also recognize that there are, some argue,
25,000 Serbs in Banja Luka, driven out of Croatia by
Operation Storm, who have not yet been able to return
to their homes in Croatia. We have to look at this not
just from one side, and we have to recognize that this is
a regional problem. Of all the regional countries,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has achieved more than any
other of the countries of the Balkans region in refugee
return.

I am very grateful for the support that has been
expressed by other participants. Perhaps I may make
just one or two very brief comments, and then I will
have to touch on a rather more serious matter. I regret
that I may perhaps have to end on a rather sour note.

First of all, the representative of Denmark
mentioned the Bonn powers and the necessity to
consider their further use or the further erosion of their
use in a measured way. I absolutely agree with that. I
would want to draw the Council's attention to the fact
that when the stabilization and association agreement is
in place, about 90 per cent of the territory across which
the High Representative uses the Bonn powers will be
interdit. We will not be able to use the Bonn powers
across this territory, because it is a territory in which
Bosnia and Herzegovina must negotiate with the
European Union (EU) as a sovereign State. So, in any
case, the Bonn powers are going to be very
significantly reduced once that threshold is passed.

The representative of the Russian Federation
called for a decline in the use of the Bonn powers. I
agree with that. It has declined, and I anticipate that it
will continue to decline. Here are some figures and
terms of the use of the Bonn powers for the imposition
of laws. In my first year I used the Bonn powers some
70 times, including 36 occasions left behind by my
predecessor. In my second year, I used them less than
30 times; last year, twice; and this year, so far, once. I
hope to be able to get to the end of the year without
using the Bonn powers any further for the imposition
of laws. This has to continue to decline in that fashion.

At this point, may I pay special tribute to Japan
for the unwavering support that it has given; it is
arguably the nation that is most closely engaged but
that has least territorial or geographical interest in the
Balkans, and yet its support over these nine years has
been unwavering and immensely helpful. The
representative of Japan was right to identify the need
for economic reform, a factor also touched on by other
speakers. This has to be driven forward; we are moving
out of the era of aid for Bosnia and Herzegovina and
into the era of attracting international investment. That
means continuing the process of economic reform.

I am grateful to the representative of France for
his comments about the fact that pressure on the ICTY
issues has delivered dividends. My view is that we
should now be prepared to modify that, in the light of
the kind of successes I touched on earlier. But it seems
to me that keeping in reserve the option of sanctions
until this process is completed is an important part of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's and the international
community's strategy for the future.

In this case, let me agree wholeheartedly with the
representative of the United States. We are involved in
a process now. That process may have begun, but it
will not be over until Karadzic and Mladic are in The
Hague. It is extremely important that Republika Srpska
and Serbia and Montenegro realize that we are not
going to be bought off by any lesser price than the
completion of that task, which includes ensuring that
the most senior war criminals - above all, Karadzic
and Mladic - are where they should be - answering
for their crimes at The Hague Tribunal.

Oh dear - I fear I must end on a rather sour note.
I am sad to do so, because the comments made in the
Council Chamber have been extremely encouraging for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and I think Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made real, indeed remarkable
progress. In that respect, I think the real heroes are not
the international community but the ordinary citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and I am grateful indeed
that that has been recognized.

But, like the representative of Great Britain, I
have to express my surprise at the comments made by
Minister Colak on the issue of the judges. Those
comments cannot but undermine trust in the
independence of the judiciary in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. There is a basic principle established in
the European Union and in most democracies that
politicians do not interfere in the judiciary. When a
Minister of Security does that, I think that is rather a
serious matter.

We have an independent body in Bosnia and
Herzegovina - the High Judicial and Prosecutorial
Council - independent of politicians, independent of
the High Representative. That is the body that governs
the actions of the Courts, and, if there are criticisms to
be made, then that is the body that makes those
criticisms. It is a domestic institution, it is a standalone
institution, and it pains me indeed to have to report to
the Council that Mr. Colak has brought his criticisms
of the Court here without first of all even taking the
trouble to identify those criticisms to the High Judicial
and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Secondly, as the representative of the United
Kingdom has clearly pointed out, Minister Colak
believed it right to criticize the number and actions of
the international judges in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
International judges are not in Bosnia and Herzegovina
assisting the work of Bosnia and Herzegovina's courts
at our request; they are there at the request of the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina - indeed, if I
may say so, at the specific request of the Government
of which Minister Colak is a part.
But lastly - and it pains me even more to have
to identify this - at the same time as Minister Colak is
criticizing that Court, his own friend and member of
the party of which he is President - the Croat elected
President of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - is now indicted before that Court for
charges of high-level corruption, of bribery and of
organized crime. Now I leave it to members of the
Council to make their own decision as to whether or
not it is appropriate to bring that matter to the Council
under these circumstances.

What I know for certain is that those comments
will have a major place in tomorrow's press in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I am bound to say that to make
comments in these circumstances in the Council -
with a direct connection with someone who is now
being indicted by that Court - criticizing the Court's
actions is not a wise action for a Minister of Security.
It will damage Bosnia and Herzegovina's international
reputation as being attached to the principle that
politicians do not interfere in the actions of the courts
and will be unhelpful to the independence of the
judiciary, which Minister Colak himself has identified
as a basic principle to be observed.

I am sorry indeed to have to end this very
optimistic report on such a difficult note, but I felt it
was important that the Council should understand some
of the facts behind that particular intervention.

