Mr. Prosor (Israel): I congratulate Chile for its
able stewardship of the Security Council this month. I
thank Foreign Minister Heraldo Munoz for being here
today to preside over this session. Allow me to take this
opportunity to congratulate the new non-permanent
members of the Security Council: Angola, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain, and Venezuela. I welcome them
and wish them good luck. They will need every bit ofit.

I cannot begin without addressing the tragic events
that took place in France last week in which radical
Islamists launched an attack against our way of life.
The slogan of the French Republic is Liberte, Egalite,
Fraternite-Liberty, Equality, and Brotherhood. These
are the very values that are being attacked. The terrorists
who stormed the offices of Charlie Hebdo attacked
liberty and the right of every person to express himself
or herself. The terrorist who targeted Jews in a kosher
grocery store attacked equality: the idea that every
person, no matter his faith, is equal. By aiming their
attacks at innocent civilians, the terrorists also attacked
brotherhood: the bonds of our shared humanity.

The world responded in force. "Je suis Charlie" and
"Je suis juif" became rallying calls to defend our way of
life. Millions of people took to the streets of Paris, and
tens of thousands of people from Boston to Brussels
to Buenos Aires rallied to honour the 17 victims who
were murdered. Just as we stood united on the streets,
we must remain united in our commitment to uphold
freedom.

Make no mistake. Freedom is under attack throughout
the world. We see it in Nigeria, where innocent people
were cut down by gunfire and a ten-year-old girl was
strapped into a suicide vest and sent into a crowded
market. We see it in Pakistan, where children were
gunned down as they sat in their classrooms. We see
it in Syria and Iraq, where journalists are savagely
murdered. We see it in Saudi Arabia, where a blogger
was sentenced to 1,000 lashes for running a website
promoting free speech. And, we see it in Iran, where
15 people were executed on New Year's Day. A war is
being waged against human dignity and human rights,
and we must fight back. Standing united with courage
and conviction, we can turn back the tide of violent
extremism and safeguard the values that we all cherish.

Israel has been fighting to defend its values since
its establishment. Surrounded by extremist groups
committed to our destruction, we have been forced to
fight wars and endure wave after wave of terrorism. We
have buried too many sons and daughters and shed too
many tears, but we have never abandoned the dream of
peace.

In 1967, eight Arab Heads of State attended a
summit in Khartoum to formulate the policies of the
Arab States in the conflict with Israel. They emerged
with their famous three 'no's': no negotiations, no
recognition of Israel, and no peace. Even when it
seemed impossible, Israel continued to strive for peace.

Egypt and Jordan came to understand that while
we are not brothers in faith, we are brothers in fate,
with a shared destiny in the Middle East. Today, other
Arab nations in our region also recognize that radical
Islamists are not just a threat to Israel, but they are a
threat to their own stability and existence. Egypt and
Jordan abandoned the three 'no's' and made peace with
Israel.

The Palestinians, however, are chained to the past.
Weighed down by resentment and bound in hatred, the
Palestinian leadership refuses to abandon the rhetoric
and seek reconciliation. Decades after other Arab

nations sought to end our conflict, the Palestinian
leadership remains committed to the three no's. It will
not negotiate, it will not recognize Israel as the nation
state of the Jewish people, and it will not make peace.

The Palestinian leadership has said no to
negotiations. The Palestinians are under the impression
that the United Nations is their personal vending
machine: they can insert grievances and dispense claims
against Israel at will. Ever since the United Nations
voted to accept the Palestinians as a non-member
observer State in 2012, the Palestinians have discovered
that the United Nations is the gift that keeps on giving.
This institution gives and gives and does not expect
anything in return.

When it comes to making New Year's resolutions,
I can assure you that the Palestinian resolution
imposing terms for a peace deal was not what we had
in mind. I would be hard-pressed to conceive ofa more
biased proposal. It did not address Israel's long-term
security needs. It did not demand an end to Palestinian
terrorism, and it did not recognize Israel as the nation
State of the Jewish people. All it did was impose an
arbitrary one-year deadline that would have allowed
the Palestinians to run out the clock and get a State
without giving anything in return. You cannot wave a
magic wand and hope that all of the critical issues such
as borders, security arrangements, water allocation and
the "claim of return" will magically be resolved.

Rather than engage in negotiations, President Abbas
is cultivating impossible fantasies. In November, he told
an Egyptian newspaper that millions of Palestinians
wish to return, and he will not close the door to them.
Demanding that millions of Palestinians flood the
Jewish State is a euphemism - there is no other word
for it - for the destruction of the State of Israel.

The proposals put forward in this Council dictate
what Israel should do and the Palestinians should get.
Aside from being deeply biased, the Council is indulging
their delusions. Every nation that voted in favour of the
Palestinian one-sided resolution encouraged them to
continue what I would describe as a diplomatic triathlon:
running away from negotiations, placing hurdles in the
peace process, and cycling towards protracted conflict.

Some nations on this Council claim that they voted
for the Palestinian resolution to encourage Israelis
and Palestinians to resume peace negotiations. One
Government even explained that it was trying to prevent
the Palestinians from joining the International Criminal

Court (ICC). Really? You do not have to be Inspector
Clouseau to know that this is what the Palestinians
wanted all along.

The international community endorsed a road
map to peace, but the Palestinians have found every
off-ramp and detour. They are looking for shortcuts
and quick fixes where none exists, and in the process,
they are politicizing another international body. It is
extremely convenient that the Palestinian Authority
has asked that the Court's jurisdiction to extend back
to June 13, 2014. That is, surprisingly, the day after
three Israeli teenagers were kidnapped and murdered
by Palestinian terrorists. By choosing to go to the
ICC, the Palestinians have reinforced the message that
they are not interested in negotiating and they are not
willing to compromise. The international community
must stop encouraging this march of folly. It must tell
the Palestinians that the claim of return is a nonstarter,
make it clear that peace requires compromise and insist
that they return to direct negotiations.

The Palestinian leadership has said, "no" to the
recognition of Israel as the nation-State of the Jewish
people. Israel is our historical homeland. When I walk
the streets of Jerusalem, I am walking in the footsteps
of our forefathers: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. When
I stand at the Western Wall, I can feel thousands of
years of Jewish prayers and dreams. When I traverse
our small State, history comes alive. I see the valley
where David battled Goliath, the hills where Isaiah
prophesized about beating our swords into plowshares
and the mountains where Elijah saw a vision of peace.
Israel has been our land for 3,800 years, and we are
here to stay.

Nothing can change the historical facts. Yet the
Palestinian Authority has made a career of denying
the facts. Here is a fact the Council members may not
know. President Mahmoud Abbas is currently in his
tenth year ofa five year presidential term. He is willing
to say anything and do anything to cling to power.
Last year, the Palestinian Authority committed every
form of diplomatic treachery. It abandoned peace talks,
formed a Government with the Hamas terrorist group,
awarded honours to convicted terrorists and broke its
word by signing dozens of international conventions.
Its leadership delivered a hate-fuelled speech against
Israel here in the General Assembly, called for violent
"Days of Rage" and urged Palestinians to prevent
Jews from visiting the Temple Mount using "all means
necessary".
The international community has not challenged the
Palestinian leadership on any of these crimes. Instead,
it is giving them a free pass and sending a message that
they can incite violence that leads to terrorist attacks
with impunity. The international community is literally
letting them get away with murder. President Abbas's
hateful speeches have sparked dozens of violent riots.
Palestinian terrorists have shot and stabbed our citizens
and driven their cars into crowds of pedestrians. The
wave of terrorism shows no sign of abating. Just a few
weeks ago, Palestinian terrorists threw a firebomb at a
car carrying 11 year-old Ayala Shapira. The little girl
suffered third-degree burns over much of her body and
face. As we speak she is fighting for her life in hospital.
Does that disgusting attack on a child not merit
condemnation? Because I have not heard one - not
from the Palestinian leadership nor from this Council.

The international community must demand more
from the Palestinians. Make it clear that fostering a
culture of hatred is unacceptable. Make it clear that there
is no impunity for intolerance and send the message
that the path to peace begins with the recognition of
Israel as the nation-State of the Jewish people.

The Palestinian leadership has said "no", to peace.
Israel is committed to peace. No one understands what
is at stake more than we do, It is our cities and our
citizens that terrorists are targeting. At Camp David in
2000 and again at Annapolis in 2008, Israeli leaders
made far-reaching offers that could have led to the
creation of a Palestinian State. Those offers were met
by deliberate evasion, outright rejection and waves of
terrorism. Israel has made concession after concession
and received nothing in return.

Forging a lasting peace requires courage and
political capital, and the Palestinian leadership is in
short supply of both. The Palestinian Authority has no
authority over the Gaza Strip. Hence it has no authority
over nearly half of the territory and 40 per cent of the
population it claims to represent, and it certainly has not
demonstrated a willingness to assist the people of Gaza.
When this Council tried to pass a resolution to speed
up the delivery of construction materials into Gaza,
the Palestinian President dragged his feet, obstructed
the process and eventually abandoned the proposition
altogether. The Palestinian Authority agreed to take
responsibility for monitoring the crossings and then
never showed up.

What about the Arab nations? The oil-rich Arab
nations pledge funds, but the pipelines seem to have
run dry. Israel, on the other hand, is taking meaningful
steps to rebuild Gaza. The Palestinian Authority is
missing in action. Its leadership could not even find the
time to visit Gaza. They have left their people to suffer
under the tyranny of Hamas. That terrorist organization
sends teenagers to terrorist training camps, condones
honour killings, punishes homosexuality with death and
encourages public executions. Instead of condemning
Hamas for its crimes, the Palestinian leadership formed
a Government with a terrorist group that is more
interested in tearing Israel down than building the
Palestinian people up.

In December, Hamas celebrated its twenty-
seventh anniversary by burning effigies of Jews and
parading trucks carrying long-range rockets through
the streets of Gaza. At the celebration, Hamas military
spokesman Abu Obeida publicly thanked Iran and
Qatar for supplying the group with arms and support.
Those rogue regimes have enabled Hamas and Fatah to
commit countless war crimes. Over the summer, Hamas
and Fatah terrorists fired rockets from mosques, stored
weapons in schools run by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
used Gaza hospitals as military headquarters and sent
children to rooftops as human shields. The evidence
is overwhelming, yet the international community has
failed to hold the Palestinians to account.

Hamas is once again preparing to go on the offensive
by rearming, rebuilding its terror infrastructure and
reaffirming its commitment to waging war against
Israel. It has tested and fired dozens of rockets, it
is aggressively taxing its people to fund its terror
enterprise, and it is stealing cement - I will repeat
that; stealing cement - intended for humanitarian
purposes to rebuild its terror tunnels.

I find it curious that many of those facts - not
alleged facts, not reported facts, but real facts - were
omitted from this morning's report. The great American
statesman Daniel Patrick Moynihan once said,
"Everyone is entitled to his own opinion, but not his
own facts". This Council would be better served if it
would be presented with more facts and fewer opinions
in the monthly reports.

What has been the response from the international
community? The more the Palestinian leadership says
"no", the more "yes" votes it seems to garner in this
institution. European nations claim to stand for human
rights and civil liberties, but with every passing day
I am given more reason to be a Euro-skeptic. Every
European Union parliament that voted to prematurely
recognize the Palestinian State was rewarding
terrorism, and the decision by the Court of Justice of
the European Union in Luxembourg to remove Hamas
from its list of terrorist organizations was a victory for
terrorism. The Court claimed the decision was simply a
technical matter. Really? Well, I can tell you that there
was nothing technical about the thousands of rockets
that Hamas fired into Israel, or the innocent civilians
that the group kidnapped and killed. No amount of
Swiss chocolate, Belgian waffles or fine French wine
can mask the unpleasant taste this leaves in our mouths.
It is time for the nations that believe in liberty and
democracy to stand with the only liberal democracy in
the Middle East.

The results of unchecked extremism may have
just arrived at Europe's doorstep, but we have been
combatting radical groups since our establishment.
Every day we confront Hamas in Gaza, the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant in the north, Jihadi groups
in the Sinai, and Hizbullah in southern Lebanon. Iran is
bankrolling Hizbullah with $200 million a year to wage
war on its behalf. It is training terrorists and smuggling
weapons in blatant violation of resolutions 1701 (2006)
and 1747 (2007). Hizbullah has amassed well over
100,000 sophisticated missiles and rockets and senior
Hizbullah officials regularly threaten to use them.

Last month a senior United Nations official declared
that the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon had
"seen no evidence of unauthorized weapons or weapons
transfers in its area of operations". Really? Clearly the
United Nations has tuned out, because if it were tuned
in to the news it would know that Hassan Nasrallah
and other senior officials regularly boast about the size
and sophistication of Hizbullah's arsenal. Hizbullah's
Deputy Secretary General, Naim Qassem, was quoted
in an Iranian newspaper as saying that Hizbullah
was in possession of missiles with pinpoint accuracy,
and that with the Islamic Republic's support it would
be ready for any future war. The terror group even
published a map showing the locations of their Fateh
missiles in Lebanon and made the threat that they can
strike anywhere in Israel. Hizbullah has the capabilities
and it has made its intentions very clear. The threat to
our region is real and it is imminent. The international
community can no longer afford to ignore the warning
signs. Israel will not stand idly by as Iran continues
to arm its terrorist proxies. We will act to defend our
citizens.

Winston Churchill once said that all the greatest
things are simple, and many can be expressed in a
single word, such as "freedom", "honour" and "hope".
Israel stands for freedom and honour and hope. It is the
only State in the Middle East that defends the right of
all people to practice their religion as they choose. It
is the only country in the region with a free press, free
elections and free speech. It is the only country in the
Middle East where women have presided over each of
the three branches of Government. Israel is on the right
side of the moral divide.

The question is, which side will the Security
Council stand on? If it opposes terrorism and
oppression, it must stand with the Middle East's only
democracy. Tell the Palestinians that while we might
have a territorial dispute, Israel's right to live in
security is beyond dispute. Make it clear that unilateral
actions are no substitute for meaningful dialogue. And
send the message to the Palestinian leadership that they
must say yes to the recognition of Israel as the nation
State of the Jewish people, yes to direct negotiations
and through that, yes to peace.

