Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): We are grateful
to Foreign Minister Omaar, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ould Abdallah and Commissioner
Lamamra for their briefings this morning.

It is right that the Security Council remain
focused on the situation in Somalia. As we have said
before, instability there poses a clear threat to peace
and security in the region and beyond. The ongoing
violence continues to cause deep and unnecessary
suffering for a people who have, as we have heard from
each of the briefers this morning, suffered too long
already.

Three weeks ago, Ambassador Sawers set out
what the United Kingdom sees as the four priority
areas for action in addressing the situation in Somalia.
The first priority area is to tackle the humanitarian
crisis, helping the more than 3 million people in need
by supporting the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) in delivering basic security, food and health
care. The second priority area is to support the political
process, specifically the TFG's reconciliation policy,
and to build on the Djibouti peace process. The third
priority area is to achieve an improved security
situation in Mogadishu, working with the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the TFG to
expand the authority of the latter. The fourth priority
area is to address the ongoing threat from piracy. We
need to continue to work to ensure security on
Somalia's seas, as well as on land, by tackling both
piracy and its root causes.

What we have heard today from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, Commissioner Lamamra, and Minister for
Foreign Affairs Omaar confirms that those are the right
priorities. As they have made clear, the situation
remains extremely fragile.

We are encouraged to hear that progress is being
made by the TFG and President Ahmed. We welcome
the fact that the Joint Security Committee met in
Mogadishu last week for the first time. The Committee
should play a key role in ensuring a properly
coordinated relationship between those involved in
security in Mogadishu.

The long-term solution to Somalia's security,
however, remains the development of the Somali
security forces. The United Nations Development
Programme has done admirable work in training the
police, but there is still much to be done to strengthen
the joint security forces. Member States must continue
to focus on what support can be delivered in this
sector.

While the security situation remains fragile, the
role of AMISOM. in supporting the TFG remains
essential. We pay tribute once again to the
Governments of Uganda and Burundi for their
continuing commitment, and encourage other African
Union member States to play a role.

Improved security should create the space for
development. We must take advantage of stability in
the areas controlled by the TFG to show that it can
deliver essential services and economic benefits to the
Somali people. To this end, we encourage the TFG to
set out its needs and the United Nations and the
international community to respond accordingly.

Finally, we look forward to hearing Ambassador
Heller's report later this morning on the work of the
sanctions Committee. The Monitoring Group's report
sets out clear evidence that individuals and entities are
actively supporting and arming opposition groups and
seeking to undermine the TFG. Halting the illegal flow
of weapons and ammunition to rebel groups in Somalia
is an essential part of supporting the TFG and the
peace process. The Council should act quickly and
decisively in agreeing measures against those working
against peace in Somalia.

