Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Special Representative Yamamoto, Ms. Samar and the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for their
valuable briefings.

Peru has been keeping a close eye on the situation
in Afghanistan, particularly the peace process, which
has the potential to define the country's future in the
medium and long terms, especially with respect to
strengthening democracy. We therefore consider it
crucial that the solution to the current crisis be engaged
in the framework of the intra-Afghan dialogue and
Afghan leadership. We agree that direct negotiations
must be held between the Taliban and Government
representatives. As the Special Representative reminded
us, there is no substitute for the Afghan people.

In this context, we consider the recent convening
of the loya jirga for peace in Kabul to be another
meaningful step, which brought together more than
3,000 delegates from across the country, including
tribal leaders, and enjoyed the participation of a
significant and commendable number of women. Its
outcomes demonstrate the aspirations of the Afghan
people and form the consensus-based framework
for action aimed at achieving sustainable peace, the
restoration of the rule of law, respect for human rights
and the continuation of the reforms undertaken to date.

It is vital that the presidential elections scheduled
for next September take place in a spirit of dialogue,
tolerance and mutual respect. As Mr. Yamamoto
explained, this is a shared responsibility. Given the
existing technical and security difficulties, we must
avoid any additional setbacks caused by political
motivations or actions that cast doubt on the legitimacy
of the electoral process.

We wish to express our deep concern about the
precarious security situation. The deaths resulting from
air strikes by forces linked to the Government have
reached record levels, adding to the pain caused by
ongoing indiscriminate terrorist attacks on civilians. We
are particularly concerned by the presence of militants
associated with the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant-
Khorasan Province who, given their association with
drug trafficking, represent an additional example of
the link between terrorism and organized crime, which
can be classified as a regional threat. We consider it
essential to intensify international efforts to combat
these scourges, in close coordination with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

Likewise, it is imperative that all parties to the
conflict respect their obligations under humanitarian law
and the protection of civilians. We also underscore the
importance of transitional justice and accountability in
the current peace process, as highlighted by Ms. Samar.
The unscrupulous actions of criminal groups must not
go unpunished or be forgotten.

In another vein, Peru commends the recent
headway made by the Government in the fight against
corruption, as well as reforms in the justice sector and
progress in the area of women's empowerment. In that
regard, we welcome the steps taken to implement the
National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan and
the election of two women as respective heads of the
most important electoral bodies in Afghanistan. We are
confident that women's participation, together with that
of young people, in the political life of the country will

contribute to strengthening Afghanistan's capacities
for prevention, peacebuilding and peacekeeping and
the vital entrenchment of democracy in Afghan society.

I conclude by thanking Special Representative
Tadamichi Yamamoto, as well as all United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan personnel, for their
work, which we fully support.

