Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
3
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, and the countries of the
European Free Trade Association Iceland and
Liechtenstein, members of the European Economic
Area, as well as the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine,
align themselves with this declaration.

The European Union is deeply concerned about
recent violence affecting Gaza and communities in
southern Israel. While recognizing Israel's legitimate
right to self-defence, the EU calls for an immediate end
to all acts of violence, including the continued firing of
rockets into Israeli territory, and to all activities that
are contrary to international law and endanger
civilians.

The EU reiterates its grave concern at the
humanitarian situation in Gaza and calls for the
continuous provision of essential services, including
fuel and power supplies. The EU once again calls on
all parties to allow unimpeded humanitarian access to
Gaza and to work urgently for the opening of crossings
to goods and people.

The EU welcomes the commencement of
negotiations between Israeli and Palestinian officials
on all outstanding issues - including all final-status
issues - with a View to concluding a peace agreement
before the end of 2008, as agreed in Annapolis last
November. The EU reaffirms that this is a crucial
opportunity for regional and international partners to
effectively support a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East. In that context, the EU calls
for continued broad and constructive involvement by
Arab partners, building on the Arab Peace Initiative.

The European Union urges the parties to
implement their Road Map obligations in parallel to
their negotiations. The goal remains the establishment
of an independent, democratic, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State in the West Bank and Gaza that will
unite all Palestinians, living side by side in peace and
security with Israel and its other neighbours. Recent
settlement activity constitutes another EU concern in
that context, as it represents a major obstacle to peace.
The EU reiterates that the Road Map is unambiguous in
that regard.

The EU is firmly committed to remaining
actively involved in order to support the parties' efforts
to keep the negotiations on track, working closely with
other members of the Quartet and partners in the
region. The EU remains determined to contribute
significantly to this effort, as laid down in its Action
Strategy, "State-building for Peace in the Middle East",
which covers the broad range of its assistance
activities.

The EU welcomes the results of last December's
international donors conference for the Palestinian
State - namely, more than $7.4 billion in pledges -
and calls on all donors to deliver on their pledges, in
support of efforts to build the future Palestinian State
in accordance with the reform and development plan
presented by Prime Minister Fayyad. In that context,
the EU recalls the utmost importance of full
implementation of the Agreement on Movement and
Access. The EU is committed to providing substantial
financial support for the Palestinian people and to
working out the means to do so. In that context, the EU
continues to support the work of Quartet
Representative Tony Blair.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate once again the
European Union's concern at the surge of violence in
and around Gaza. The EU calls on all the parties to
exercise the utmost restraint and to refrain from the use
of force. The EU appeals to all sides, for calm,
particularly at this time of renewal of the political
process.

