Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): I warmly congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the Presidency of the
Council for this month. I also join in the tributes paid to
Ambassador Karel Kovanda for so ably chairing the affairs
of the Council in April.

Recent developments in East Jerusalem cannot but be
a cause for concern for the entire international community.
Intense negotiations and considerable sacrifices have shaped
the momentum of the Middle East peace process since its
inception in Madrid in October 1991, the historic
Declaration of Principles of 13 September 1993 and the
subsequent implementation agreements. Bangladesh has
welcomed and supported this process as a major
achievement which, we hope, will ultimately come to
fruition. Underpinning this process was respect for
provisions inherent in the peace package, resolutions of the
Security Council and principles anchored in international
law, particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention of 12
August 1949.

Current Israeli actions aimed, inter alia, at confiscating
53 hectares of land in East Jerusalem, systematically
curtailing Palestinian access to East Jerusalem and
conducting excavation works that threaten the foundation of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque constitute clear violations not only of
the provisions of the peace package but also of long-
established principles of international law. The continuance
of these actions will surely undermine confidence-building
and jeopardize and retard the peace process. We therefore
join our voice to the condemnation that has come down on
these overt and latent acts of Judaization and the unbridled
process of changing the status and demographic character
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, particularly through the illegal
expansion of existing settlements.

It is our earnest hope that the Security Council will act
urgently and forthrightly to condemn, halt and rescind these
illegal actions and prevent their recurrence in the future.
We fully support and endorse the draft resolution now
before the Council.

