Mr. Chambas: I am honoured to be here today to brief the Council on the latest report of the Secretary- General on the activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) (S/2019/1005). Since my most recent briefing in this forum, in July 2019 (see S/PV.8585), the West Africa and Sahel region has experienced a devastating surge in terrorist attacks against civilian and military targets. The humanitarian consequences are alarming. I will highlight some of these challenges as well as ongoing initiatives to tackle them. I will also address overall political developments in the region, with a focus on forthcoming elections this year. The West Africa and Sahel region has been shaken by unprecedented terrorist violence in recent months. As I emphasized during my briefing to the Security Council of 16 December 2019 (see S/PV.8685), relentless attacks on civilian and military targets have shaken public confidence. In Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, casualties from terrorist attacks have increased five-fold since 2016, with more than 4,000 deaths reported in 2019 alone as compared with an estimated 770 deaths in 2016. Most significantly, the geographic focus of terrorist attacks has shifted eastward from Mali to Burkina Faso and the Niger and is increasingly threatening West African coastal States. The number of people killed in Burkina Faso increased from 80 in 2016 to more than 1,800 in 2019. The number of displaced persons has also increased — in this case, ten-fold — to about half a million, in addition to the 25,000 who have sought refuge in neighbouring countries. The terrorist attacks are also often deliberate efforts by violent extremists to capture weapons and trafficking routes and engage in other illicit activities, including illegal artisanal mining, in certain areas that sustain their networks. Terrorism, organized crime and intercommunal violence are often intertwined. This is especially true in peripheral areas where the State’s presence is weak. In those places, extremists provide safety and protection to populations, as well as social services, in exchange for loyalty. For that reason, at the July 2019 High-level Conference on Counter Terrorism and Prevention of Violent Extremism Conducive to Terrorism, in Nairobi, the Secretary-General emphasized that counter- terrorism responses must focus on gaining the trust and support of local populations. Governments, local actors, regional organizations and the international community are mobilizing across West Africa and the Sahel to respond to terrorism and violent extremism. Indeed, many solid frameworks, resolutions and declarations already exist at the strategic level. On 21 December, at its Summit of Heads of State and Government, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) adopted a 2020-2024 action plan for the eradication of terrorism in the subregion, following the Community’s extraordinary summit in Ouagadougou in September, during which it pledged to mobilize $1 billion internally. The African Union-Lake Chad Basin Commission Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region is also a regional approach that sets the parameters for early warning and early engagement on all forms of local conflicts. Now is the time for action. Regional and subregional leaders must follow through on the pledges made, and international partners must lend their full support to the implementation of existing mechanisms. We need to prioritize a cross-pillar approach at all levels and across all sectors to ensure the most effective support for Governments in the region. The United Nations response in the Sahel serves as a template in this approach. UNOWAS also worked closely with the Mano River Union to resuscitate the basin’s cross- border security and confidence-building measures. Farmer-herder clashes remain some of the most violent local conflicts in the region. Close to 70 per cent of West Africa’s population is dependent on agriculture and livestock rearing for a living. That is why it is so important to ensure peaceful coexistence between farmers and herders. Climate change, among other multiple factors, is increasingly exacerbating farmer- herder conflicts. The impact of climate change on security also spawns a negative relationship among climate change, social cohesion, irregular migration and criminality in some places. The all-too-worrying trends in terms of security must not distract from positive political developments in many parts of West Africa and the Sahel. Dialogue with citizens and across political divides is taking place in several countries. For example, the people of the Gambia have successfully concluded the second round of public consultations on a new constitution and peacefully conducted the truth, reconciliation and reparations process. In Sierra Leone, Mauritania, Senegal and elsewhere, encouraging dialogues are under way with a view to promoting national unity. In the months ahead, the electorates in six West African countries will choose their leaders in democratic contests. In that vein, the people of Guinea-Bissau and their Electoral Commission deserve congratulations for the exemplary conduct of last year’s presidential election, which marked an important step forward in Guinea-Bissau’s democratic development. The United Nations will continue to support the Government and the people of Guinea-Bissau in their efforts towards consolidating peace and development. On 22 February, Togo will hold its next presidential election. Following recent electoral and constitutional reforms, it is urgent that any outstanding pre- and post-electoral grievances be addressed using legal channels. Burkina Faso, Céte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea and the Niger are also preparing for polls later in the year. Unresolved grievances, incomplete national reconciliation processes and the sentiment that institutions and processes are being manipulated carry risks of tensions and manifestations of political violence. The resumption of dialogue in Guinea, with the impetus generated by the United Nations and partners, has yielded timely results, including the release of political prisoners. The United Nations reiterates its calls on national stakeholders to overcome their differences in the spirit of building consensus in order to ensure the holding of peaceful legislative elections scheduled for February. In the months ahead, UNOWAS will continue working closely with all national stakeholders and regional partners, especially ECOWAS, to promote consensus and inclusiveness in all the elections to be conducted in the region. In that regard, UNOWAS will also continue to urge Member States in the region to adopt legislation or implement existing laws to promote the participation of women and youth in those important milestone polls. UNOWAS will continue to work in tandem with regional and other partners to convey consistent and firm messages in that regard, especially as we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) this year, in which, I might add, West African women played an important role 20 years ago. In conclusion, as I have just outlined, the stakes are high in the region this year, in terms of both security and political developments. As the UNOWAS mandate is renewed, we count on the Council’s continued full support to accomplish the tasks assigned to us.
