Mr. Mendez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for the presentation of the twenty-
first report on the investigation on the situation in the
Sudan, in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), and
for the work carried out by that judicial body in the
fight against impunity and the promotion ofjustice for
the victims of the crimes established in article 5 of the
Rome Statute.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, as a State
party to the International Criminal Court since its
establishment in 2002, defends the strengthening of its
institutions and the effectiveness of its operations. We
therefore encourage the universalization of the Court in
order to strengthen the rule of law at the national and
international levels. In this regard, cooperation is an
essential aspect in achieving the Court's objectives. We
call for the consolidation of the dialogue between the
Court and the African Union.

Venezuela supports the efforts of the Prosecutor
to ensure that justice and accountability are respected
and that the authorities can promote the establishment
of a comprehensive and effective justice system. For
our country, the ongoing efforts of a number of actors
to politicize the work of the International Criminal
Court are of great concern. They have affected the
principles that govern the Court, which include
autonomy, independence, impartiality, transparency
and objectivity. Failure to comply with these principles
weakens the institutional framework of the Court when
justice is applied selectively, to the detriment of the
spirit and purpose of the Rome Statute.

The issuance of the warrant of arrest by the
International Criminal Court against President Omar
Al-Bashir violates customary international law, which
guarantees jurisdictional immunity to Heads of State
in the exercise of their functions. This situation should
be addressed in accordance with the national laws of
the Republic of the Sudan. In that regard, Venezuela
shares the position of the African Union, as stated by
the representatives of Angola, Chad and Nigeria at this
meeting.

In addition, with regard to the issue under
discussion, we cannot overestate the negative impact
of the execution of this illegitimate measure on the
Sudanese peace process. In that regard, the African
Union, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
League of Arab States and the Non-Aligned Movement,
among others, have expressed their profound concern
with regard to the arrest warrant, which they believe
seriously undermines ongoing efforts to facilitate a
timely solution of the conflict in Darfur and to promote
a lasting peace and reconciliation in the Sudan, and
could give rise to greater destabilization and have long-
term and comprehensive consequences for the country
and the region.

Nevertheless, in an effort to achieve greater
harmony among opposing positions, we urge the
competent regional authorities to immediately arrest
those individuals who do not enjoy jurisdictional
immunity as Heads of State. We also encourage the
Office of the Prosecutor to pursue its investigations into
those responsible for alleged crimes against humanity,
war crimes and genocide whose arrest warrants have
been issued by the International Criminal Court in the
case in question and referred by the Security Council
through resolution 1593 (2005). That would promote
dialogue in the search for negotiated political solutions
to the conflict in favour of peace, development and
justice in that country.

We note that the African Union fulfils a fundamental
role as a facilitator of political peace processes in
the continent, in particular in the Sudan. We believe
that cooperation between the Security Council, the
International Criminal Court and the regional and
subregional organizations of Africa must be founded
on mutual respect and strict adherence to international
law.

My country is aware that the Sudanese political
situation is complex and that significant challenges
remain on the ground. Nevertheless, we reaffirm our
full support for a negotiated solution to the situation
in Darfur, through an inclusive and direct political
dialogue among the parties to the conflict, without
preconditions, that would lead to lasting stability in the
country. In that regard, we believe that the development
of an environment conducive to sincere, honest and
genuine dialogue is essential. We therefore reiterate
our call for an immediate end to hostilities. To that end,
we believe that the implementation of the provisions
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, contained
in the Constitution of the Sudan, must be accelerated
because it provides a framework that could serve as a
basis for negotiations among the parties to the conflict,
complemented by a national dialogue to be convened by
the Government.

We call on the parties to immediately cease
hostilities. In that regard, we support the mediation
efforts of the international community - particularly
the countries of the region and regional organizations,
such as the African Union, whose role, through the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel on
Sudan and South Sudan, led by President Thabo Mbeki,
as well as the Joint Chief Mediator - as fundamental
steps that will help end the onoing conflict in that
brotherly African country.

Finally, Venezuela reaffirms that the achievement
of peace and stability in Sudan require cooperation
between all stakeholders, including the African Union
and subregional organizations, bearing in mind the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

