Mr. Okamura (Japan): I thank you, Madam, for
convening this meeting. I would also like to extend
my appreciation to Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his
detailed briefing. Last week, the week of 19 September,
was the high-level week for the General Assembly. It
should have been a breakthrough for the crisis in Syria.
We had already welcomed the agreement reached on
9 September between the United States and the Russian
Federation.

We expected that the reduction in violence would
allow for expanded and unimpeded humanitarian
access and the resumption of the political process.
Instead, this year's high-level week began with the
shocking news from Oram Al-Kubra in rural Aleppo.
A warehouse of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC)
and a United Nations-SARC aid convey were attacked.
Japan extends its sincere condolences to the families
of all humanitarian workers killed while doing their
invaluable work in Syria. Japan calls upon the United
Nations to investigate this incident and to release the
results publicly. Furthermore, Japan calls upon all
of the relevant stakeholders to ensure the security of
humanitarian aid workers who engage in humanitarian

assistance in Syria.

The results of the escalation of the fighting in
Aleppo during the past few days is reported to have
been extremely devastating. We express our deepest
concern about the situation on the ground. Protection
and access must be achieved urgently. A particularly
serious test for humanitarian access will arrive on
Monday. Humanitarian convoys scheduled to deliver
items to eastern Aleppo are sitting at the Turkey-
Syria border but the food supplies will soon expire.
We strongly urge the Syrian Government, opposition
groups, and all States that have influence on them to
work to enable these trucks to enter into eastern Aleppo.

We all share the view that only an immediate
ceasefire can alleviate this devastating situation.
Without a ceasefire, the increase to humanitarian access,
the protection of civilians, and the resumption of the
political process will never be attained. The important
thing now is to get the agreement between Russia and
the United States back on track. In light of the horrible
intensification of the fighting and the catastrophic
humanitarian situation, we must overcome our
differences and unite to halt this breathtaking tragedy.

