Judge Pocar: I would like first to express my
gratitude, and the gratitude of the Tribunal, to you,
Madam President, and to all the members of the
Security Council, for their comments and for the issues
raised during the debate. I would like, in particular, to
thank members for the support that they have shown
for the work of the Tribunal and for its efforts in
adopting measures to meet the deadlines of the
completion strategy. We will take duly into account all
the comments and suggestions that have been made
with a view to improving our performance and to
speeding up the slow pace of trials that has been noted
in the past.

In that context, I would like to observe that the
speeding up of trials is not just a matter that concerns
the completion strategy. Primarily, it is a matter of due
process and respect for human rights, including those
of the accused awaiting trial.

The process of speeding up trials has been a
constant preoccupation of the Tribunal, and the
measures that we are now adopting were considered in
the past, in particular last year, when the working
group of Judge Bonomy was set up, long before the
events that unfortunately occurred last month. But
there is no doubt that the process of revising rules and
adopting measures has been accelerated by those
events.
In that connection, let me say that I fully
understand and share the concern expressed with
regard to the death of two persons in the detention
centre: Mr. Milosevic, whose trial had not been
completed, and Mr. Babic, whose trial and appeal had
been completed but who had been called back to give
testimony in another case before the Tribunal. I believe
that that concern was reflected in the report; it is also
reflected in the conclusions of Judge Parker's report
and in the measures that I myself and the Tribunal have
taken in that respect.

I wish to assure the Security Council that the
recommendations made by the independent audit
conducted by Swedish experts and the
recommendations contained in Judge Parker's report
will be fully and speedily implemented in the near
future, as will all the measures that we have adopted -
and those that we will perhaps adopt in the future - to
speed up the trials. I wish to reiterate that the Tribunal
remains fully completed to the completion strategy as
it conducts trials that fully meet the requirements of
due process.

Let me also briefly stress another issue that has
been raised by several members of the Security
Council: the transfer of cases to domestic courts and
improving the capacity of domestic courts. The
Tribunal remains fully committed to working together
with domestic courts to improve their judicial
capacities both to make the referral process effective
and to ensure that the rule of law is carried out at the
local level when the Tribunal closes, hopefully after
having fully accomplished its mission within the
deadlines established by the Security Council or by us.

