Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): I would also like
to join Council members in thanking the Russian
Federation for having convened this important debate
on United Nations peacekeeping operations.

I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, Mr. J ean-Pierre Lacroix, for his
comprehensive briefing, which once again highlighted
the Secretariat's commitment to making United Nations
peacekeeping more effective and proactive, as well as
for sharing with us a number of points where progress
has been made. Let me also thank previous speakers for
their invaluable contributions to today's discussions.

I would also like to present Rwanda's heartfelt
condolences to the people and the Government of
Burkina Faso following the most recent terrorist attacks
in the north of the country.
Today's debate is timely in that on 25 September,
we will be marking the one-year anniversary of the
launch of the endorsement of the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. It is the right time to take stock of whether
we are delivering on the commitments and pledges we
made in connection with United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), as well as
the recommendations of the Secretary-General, rightly
acknowledged the primacy of politics. It is therefore
right that peacekeeping reforms have prioritized
prevention and sustaining peace, thereby enhancing the
effectiveness and coherence of peacekeeping operations
and special political missions.

Peacekeeping is one- ifnot the most important- of
the tools that the United Nations has in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security. It is
able to create a favourable space for a nationally owned
political solution. Peacekeeping currently continues to
face several challenges, including capabilities issues,
and at times, especially recently, a lack of sufficient
resources and incongruities between mandates and
resources. Rwanda continues to play a critical role in
peacekeeping, and, as a top troop-contributing country,
it reaffirms its unwavering commitment to United
Nations peacekeeping. In that regard, I wish to make
the following points.

First, we recognize that the primary responsibility
for the protection of civilians lies with countries. We
also know that in the absence of capabilities or the
will of countries to protect their populations during
conflict, that same absence can threaten regional and
international peace and security. In such situations, it
is the responsibility of the Security Council to engage
all possible means, measures and resources to protect
civilians. That requires a unified understanding of the
protection of civilians among peacekeeping partners and
collective support for protection-of-civilian initiatives.

Rwanda is one of the advocates of the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians. The Principles
address all key aspects necessary to ensure the effective
protection of civilians, including assessment, planning,
force generation, training, equipment, performance and
accountability. We encourage all Members to implement
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians.

My second point concerns the performance and
accountability ofUnited Nations peacekeeping, which is
a broad yet essential area ofpeacekeeping. Peacekeeping
is an undertaking predicated on partnership. Therefore,
performance assessment should not be exclusively
focused on uniformed units. Performance can be
jeopardized by a number of other factors, including
ambiguous mandates, excessive delays and arrears in
the reimbursement of troop-contributing countries and
restrictions imposed by host nations. We would like
to have a comprehensive performance assessment that
does not focus on only some partners, while leaving
out others.

Indeed, troop and police units require the right
capabilities and equipment to meet the challenges faced
on the ground - an endeavour that cannot fall short of
adapting to new technologies. Additionally, we must be
resolute in ensuring that we have the necessary data,
particularly with regard to situational awareness, to
inform all operations. That can minimize threats and
reduce peacekeeper fatalities and injuries.

Training is central to performance. United Nations
peacekeeping requires training that is tailored to the
peacekeeping operation environment at hand. In
that regard, we would like to commend the proactive
involvement of a number of partners in the wake of
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. They have
become much more proactive in terms of entering
new partnerships.

In July, the Rwanda Police Academy, in partnership
with Sweden, concluded a training course for United
Nations military experts that involved 26 countries, in
particular officers from the East African Standby Force.
We believe that such triangular partnerships should be
further encouraged. Similarly, in August, the Rwanda
Defence Force, in partnership with United States
Army, African partner military allies and international
organizations, successfully concluded Exercise Shared
Accord in Rwanda. Once again, we believe that such
exercises increase readiness, interoperability and
partnership-building among participating nations in
peacekeeping operations.

My third point concerns women in peacekeeping.
We cannot overemphasize the importance of women's
involvement at all levels of peacekeeping. Evidence
shows that having women in meaningful roles increases
the effectiveness of peacekeeping and improves
missions' abilities to protect civilians. Rwanda is
proud to be a contributor of female police personnel
in peacekeeping missions, but we agree with Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix that we can, and must, do
much more. My country's Mission and police division
and the United Nations Police Division are currently
finalizing arrangements to send a United Nations
selection and assistance assessment team solely for
female peacekeepers and police experts before the end
of this year.

Recruiting women in peacekeeping reduces the risk
of conflict and community confrontation. It provides a
larger sense of security to local populations, including,
and especially, women and children. In that regard, we
are taking practical measures to support the United
Nations ambition to increase the percentage of female
peacekeepers deployed.

We welcome the efforts to incentivize the
deployment of a greater number of women in military
and police contingents in United Nations peacekeeping
operations and would recall resolution 2242 (2015) as
well as its aspiration to increase the number of women
in such contingents.

My fourth point concerns United Nations
cooperation with regional organizations. We welcome
the strengthening of the cooperation framework between
the United Nations and the African Union, and we
would like to see the spirit of that partnership extended
to all aspects ofpeacekeeping missions in Africa. Such
enhanced cooperation should be based on the African
Union and United Nations respective authorities,
competencies and capacities. The partnership should
respect the principles of burden-sharing, consultative
decision-making processes, comparative advantage,
division of labour and mutual accountability. We
understand that strengthening that partnership is
not uniquely shouldered by the Secretariat. We call
on Council members to consider more seriously the
elements of burden-sharing.
With regard to my fifth point, allow me to commend
the role of the United Nations Police in facilitating the
protection of civilians, strengthening and extending
the rule of law and contributing to the proper and
coordinated peace transitions of peacekeeping
missions. We support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General contained in his report to the
General Assembly entitled "Assessment of the Police
Division" (A/74/223).

Peacekeeping transition is a critical moment
for both the host nation and the United Nations. The
United Nations Police plays a necessary and very
important role in ensuring that host nations' authorities
are prepared for and capable of upholding peace and
security. There is a great need to reinforce the support
provided in terms of the necessary capabilities and
resources for the police division and police components
in the field missions.

