Mrs. Viotti: Mr. President, I would like to thank
you for the invitation to address the Security Council
in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.

I also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Joseph
Mutaboba, for his presentation on the current situation
in the country.

Since my briefing to the Security Council on
7 October 2008, there have been a number of
developments in the country - some encouraging,
others deeply disturbing - that impact international
efforts to support peacebuilding. On the positive side,
elections were held, a new Government was installed
and its programme approved by the National Assembly.
The members of the National Steering Committee for
Peacebuilding were appointed.

Such progress was marred by the tragic events of
1 and 2 March. The country-specific configuration has
joined the international community, including this
Council, in strongly condemning the assassinations of
President Vieira and General Tagme Na Waie. We also
invited all partners and friends of Guinea-Bissau to
maintain their commitment to the country, in particular
through assistance in organizing the presidential
elections called for in the national Constitution.

Fortunately, in the aftermath of these dreadful
events, the Speaker of the Parliament, Mr. Raimundo
Pereira, took over as the interim President, in
accordance with the applicable constitutional
provisions. In addition, a Commission of Inquiry was
promptly set up.

However, the political situation was once again
disturbed by recent episodes of violence and
intimidation against well-known figures in Guinea-
Bissau, including the President of the Audit Court and
the lawyer of a former Navy Chief of Staff. Detentions
of other persons, including senior military officers,
have not yet been fully explained.

This is all extremely relevant to the work of the
Commission. The assassinations and the latest
developments are a reminder of the fragility of Guinea-
Bissau and the need for the international community to
muster political and financial support for the country. It
is also a reminder of the need for the country's
Government and society to take full advantage of
international willingness to assist them in surmounting
the manifold challenges they face.

Among these challenges, I would single out two
Where the Peacebuilding Commission can make a
significant contribution in the short term. The first is
the organization of the presidential elections, which,
according to a political agreement recently achieved,
could take place on 28 June. Its estimated cost is
around $5 million. The country-specific meeting will
make an effort to help mobilize the funds needed to fill
the gap. For its part, the Government is expected to
take all measures to ensure a fair, transparent and
credible electoral process. I am confident that the
Bissau Guinean leadership - civilian and military -
fully understands that the preservation of the
constitutional order and effective democracy are
essential elements of peacebuilding and an
indispensable component of our partnership.

Another issue of critical importance is the reform
of the security and defence sectors. The Peacebuilding
Commission will convene a meeting dedicated to that
matter next week, with the aim of listening to all
relevant actors on their current activities on the ground.
The meeting is expected to feed into the Praia
conference scheduled for 20 April, at the initiative of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). The objective of the Commission's
meeting is to take stock of current undertakings in
security sector reform, assess the main gaps and
bottlenecks, and envision how we can best assist actors
on the field to respond to Guinea-Bissau's concrete
needs.

Security sector reform should be undertaken in a
holistic manner. It should be seen not merely as a
means of reducing the number of military personnel,
but rather as a process that would allow Guinea-Bissau
to rely on professional and republican armed forces.
Adequate living conditions for those who will remain
in the active service are also essential. Equally
important, effective mechanisms to reintegrate those
demobilized into civilian life are needed to ensure the
political sustainability of the reform. These were key
messages conveyed by the Minister of Defence at the
Commission's last meeting on 25 March. The
suggestions and ideas put forward just now by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General are
very welcome and constitute, I think, an interesting
basis for our discussions in the Peacebuilding
Commission.

As acknowledged in the Strategic Framework for
Peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau, security sector reform
should neither be undertaken in isolation, separate
from other important reforms, nor considered a
panacea. The stability of the country will require a
broader effort aimed at consolidating its institutions,
strengthening the State and overcoming the hurdles
that have been preventing Guinea-Bissau from
embarking on a self-sustained process of economic
growth over the past years.

Needless to say, strengthened State institutions
are also key in the fight against illicit drug trafficking
in Guinea-Bissau and in the region. We recall the
support of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries in making Guinea-Bissau a pilot country, in
implementation of the ECOWAS Praia action plan
agreed upon last year.

In conclusion, the scenario for peacebuilding in
Guinea-Bissau remains quite challenging. The situation
calls for sustained political and financial support from
the international community and further and better
technical cooperation. To this end, the strengthening of
the United Nations presence on the ground is
absolutely indispensable. We look forward to the
Secretary-Generai's recommendations on how to
upgrade the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) into an integrated
office that is adequately staffed and endowed with the
necessary resources to assist the Government in
tackling the country's challenges. All the support that
the Security Council can provide to UNOGBIS will be
most welcome.

