Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Like other speakers I
should like to emphasize the gravity of the present situation
in East Timor. Shortly before this meeting I spoke to Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, who had just returned from Dili with
the Security Council mission. He confirmed at first hand
the extent of the destruction in the city and the urgency of
the humanitarian crisis we face in East Timor. The
mission's meeting with President Habibie tomorrow in
Jakarta will indeed be of crucial importance.

The United Kingdom warmly welcomed the holding
of the popular consultation of the East Timorese people on
30 August this year. We also welcomed the process that led
up to it. We respect the boldness of the Indonesian
Government's new approach to East Timor, which seems to
us very much in accordance with the values of the new
democratic Indonesia. The elections held recently in
Indonesia were indeed a model of their kind.

We would also have wanted to congratulate the
Government of Indonesia on the Tripartite Agreements of
5 May. This was a courageous step in implementing its
new policy. And it seemed to us that with this Agreement
we could expect an end to more than two decades of
dispute between Indonesia and the international
community, and to more than two decades of bloodshed
within East Timor.

In the run-up to the ballot there were very serious
concerns about order and security in East Timor. We
were therefore relieved that the day of the ballot itself
was peaceful and orderly. The Indonesian Government
deserves credit for that too.

Nobody has any doubt about the outcome of the
ballot. The wishes of the people of East Timor could not
have been clearer. In spite of attempts by some factions
in East Timor to intimidate the people, they courageously
turned out in large numbers - more than 98 per cent -
to take their chance for the first time in 24 years to have
a say in their own future. More than three quarters of
them voted for independence for East Timor. We salute
their courage in voting, and - above all - we must
respect their decision. The international community must
stand by the people of East Timor and ensure that their
democratic choice is turned into a political reality. The
political leadership in Indonesia has accepted the
implications of the consultation. Not just President
Habibie, but leaders of all of the other major Indonesian
parties have accepted the decision of the East Timorese:
that East Timor must in due course become independent.

In the light of these events, which seemed at one
time so encouraging, what has happened after the ballot
in East Timor is all the more tragic, horrible and
unnecessary. We have all seen on our television screens
the violence and brutality taking place each day in East
Timor. We have all read the horrifying stories. We have
unimpeachable evidence from United Nations and other
observers of what is going on. Militia forces have
rampaged, even attacking schools situated near the United
Nations compound. There are reports of women and
children being forced into trucks to be taken to West
Timor while men and boys are left behind. We know and
we fear, from Kosovo, what that may mean. One report
from a Catholic nun describes children being butchered,
including one young boy who had nails hammered into
his head and strips of flesh cut off him. We know how
terrified some of the people are. We saw them climbing
over the razor wire to try to get into the United Nations
compound. There are now thousands of people in the
hills. Starvation is beginning to take effect, especially on
young children.

 
Under the Agreement signed on 5 May, Indonesia took
on the responsibility for maintaining law and order in East
Timor. So far it has failed to do so. The imposition of
martial law has done little to restore order. Indeed, reports
suggest that the situation may have even gotten worse, if
that is possible. They indicate that the Indonesian armed
forces are either turning a blind eye or are themselves
assisting in the acts of barbarism going on in East Timor.

If Indonesia is unable to meet its obligations under the
5 May Agreement, it must allow the international
community to assist in restoring order and in securing an
orderly transition to independence for East Timor. The
United Kingdom has repeatedly made clear to Indonesia its
willingness to provide practical help and support for a
multinational force to restore security in East Timor. These
offers have so far been declined by Indonesia on the
grounds that it is capable of restoring security itself. But its
attempts to do so to date have - to put it charitably -
done little to improve the situation on the ground.

The Indonesian Government says that more time is
needed. We understand that. Order cannot be restored
overnight. But every day means more deaths, more homes
destroyed, more innocent people wounded, more refugees,
more violence and more personal tragedy. How long does
the Indonesian Government think we should wait? And how
many more people will have to die before action is taken?

Every country in the Asia-Pacific region is calling for
action to restore order. Every television station is
broadcasting pictures of atrocities. Every newspaper is
printing pictures of the horrors of East Timor. How can the
Indonesian Government assure us that things are under
control and that nothing needs to be done?

We look forward to receiving the report of the
Security Council mission following its visit to Dili. We
welcome the Government's agreement to allow international
humanitarian assistance to enter East Timor. Humanitarian
flights and humanitarian workers must be allowed in as a
matter of urgency. But it is not enough to allow the
international aid agencies in, although that is welcome. The
Indonesian Government must provide security for them, or
it must allow others to do so.

Above all, the Indonesian Government must meet its
obligations under the Tripartite Agreement of 5 May. It
must allow the United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET), which has a legitimate and agreed role, to
operate throughout the territory. UNAMET is central to the
process to which Indonesia has agreed - leading through
phase II to phase III and eventually to independence. I
should like here to pay tribute to the courage with which
the staff of UNAMET have carried out their mission, in
circumstances that can only be described as most difficult
and most dangerous.

It remains essential that the Indonesian military take
immediate steps to restore safety and security in East
Timor in accordance with their international obligations.
If they do not meet these requirements, Indonesia must
understand that it will be held responsible by the
international community.

The United Kingdom is a long-standing friend of
Indonesia. We want to see a strong, united and
democratic Indonesia. We do not question Indonesian
sovereignty or unity. But we are horrified at the tragedy
going on in East Timor. We fear that if it continues it
will undermine all of the remarkable progress in
Indonesia which we have so much admired over the last
12 months. We appeal to the Government of Indonesia, in
the name of its obligations to the international community
and in the name of humanity, to take action or to accept
the help of others to do so.

