Mr. Antonio: First of all, I would like to thank the
delegation of Lithuania for organizing today's open
debate and for giving us the opportunity to present the
African Union's perspectives on the very important
question of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
and the High Commissioner for Human Rights for
their comprehensive briefings. I thank my brother,
Mr. Karamoko Diakite, for the very profound and
moving testimony he offered on behalf of victims.

One of the major threats to peace and security in
Africa is the presence and continued proliferation of
small arms and light weapons (SALW). According to
2004 statistics, out of the approximately 500 million
illicit small arms and light weapons in circulation
worldwide at that time, more than 100 million were
in Africa. In the light of arms flows within and from
outside the continent, irresponsible trade and diversion,
porous borders between countries and the absence of
effective measures to control illicit proliferation, this
number is growing.

Although they do not in themselves trigger
conflicts or cause the criminal or terrorist activities
in which they are used, the widescale availability,
accumulation and illicit flows of such weapons
contribute to the escalation of conflicts and serious
human rights violations, undermine peace agreements,
put peacekeepers and humanitarian workers at risk
and impede economic development, social stability,
democracy and good governance in post-conflict
settings. Furthermore, the destructive continued
existence of many non-State actors, including
insurgents, armed gang members, pirates and terrorists,
has been strengthened by the easy availability of these
weapons. We therefore support the position expressed
on this specific issue by the Permanent Representatives
of the three African non-permanent members of the
Security Council - Angola, Chad and Nigeria - and
we hope that the draft resolution under consideration by
the Council will adequately address the important issue
of non-State actors, especially since United Nations
reports have consistently corroborated this fact.

As already note by Mr. Diakite, it is indeed well
known that countless arms have flowed from Libya
into other North and West African countries as well
as the Middle East, fuelling conflicts, terrorism and
crime, and causing further instability. It has also been
reported that illegal small arms and light weapons from
Yemen have been flowing into Somalia, where they
are now boosting the terrorist activities of Al-Shabaab.
It should also be noted that, at the heart of the Arms
Trade Treaty, adopted after years of negotiations and
hard work by all Member States, lies the true desire of
all States to prevent the irresponsible trade in arms and
their diversion into the illicit sphere. The African Union
Common Position on an Arms Trade Treaty, adopted by
the Assembly of the African Union prior to the March
2013 United Nations Conference, called for a treaty that
explicitly prohibits the transfer of conventional weapons
to non-State actors. The principled position of the
African Union on this matter is therefore undisputable
and unwavering.

In the face of these challenges, the African Union
continues to press forward in its efforts aimed at
addressing the scourge of illicit small arms and light
weapons on the continent. In addition to its long-
standing support for the different instruments adopted
within the United Nations framework, the African
Union has made significant progress over recent years
in establishing the mechanisms needed to control the
circulation, transfer and use of small arms and light
weapons in Africa. In that regard, the African Common
Position on the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and
Trafficking of Small Arms and Light Weapons, also
known as the Bamako Declaration, which was adopted
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization
of African Unity in December 2000, remains the
main policy document. In the Declaration, member
States undertook to identify, seize and destroy illicit
weapons. By so doing, the African Union succeeded
in bringing together the different regions to build
synergies and collaborate to address the issue through
the establishment, in 2008, of the AU-Regions Steering
Committee on Small Arms and Lights Weapons.

Charged with the task of coordinating the
implementation of continent-wide agreements related
to small arms and light weapons, as well as with
promoting the exchange of experiences and research
and data collection, the Steering Committee developed
the African Union Strategy on the Control of Illicit
Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small
Arms and Light Weapons, which was adopted by
member State experts in September 2011.

Furthermore, with the support of the European
Union, the AU embarked in 2010 on a three-year project
on the fight against illicit firearms in Africa, managed
by the Regional Centre on Small Arms. That project was
renewed for a further three years in July 2013, thanks to
the substantial support of the European Union.

Currently, the African Union is working with
the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany,
within the framework of it Group of Seven presidency,
on developing and launching a project focused on
enhancing physical security and stockpile management
in the Sahel region. Physical security and stockpile
management is an area in which substantial work needs
to be done and in which immediate gains can be made
to prevent the diversion to the illicit market of arms
procured for legitimate security needs.

Before concluding, allow me to stress that, for the
African Union, the problem of the illicit proliferation
of small arms and light weapons requires the
commitment of all States in order to achieve a holistic
and integrated solution through improved cooperation
and coordination, as well as by reinforcing capacities to
regulate compliance with all aspects, as provided for in
existing international and regional instruments.

