Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Cyprus and Malta, as well as Iceland, align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes this fresh
opportunity to review the important work undertaken
by the Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). This meeting provides us with an opportunity
to present the principal developments in the common
action against terrorism undertaken by the member
States of the European Union and the European
Commission, in fulfilment of resolution 1373 (2001).

I wish once again to underline the historic
significance of this resolution as well as the European
Union's commitment to its objectives and instruments.

We congratulate the CTC for the work it has
done, and especially for the resolve and dedication
demonstrated by its members and by the experts who
advise it. The United Nations Secretariat also deserves
special mention for its collaboration with the CTC and
with the Member States.

I must also commend the Committee's
transparency. Open briefings are now a common
practice of the CTC. Those briefings involve a
presentation by the Chairman of the Committee on
significant activities as well as on key decisions and
progress made in the area.

Thirdly, we commend the CTC's concern for
facilitating States' compliance with resolution 1373
(2001), particularly by providing information on offers
of assistance.

According to the information presented, 142
national reports had been received by the end of
March, but more than 46 States had not yet complied
with that obligation. The European Union calls upon
those States to submit their reports as a matter of
priority.

The European Union understands that, in many
cases, non-compliance may be due more to practical
difficulties than to lack of political will. Therefore, it is
important to facilitate assistance to those States that
face this type of problem. Several of the member States
of the European Union and the European community
are included in the directory of assistance offers
published by the CTC.

The European community has, through the
European Commission, informed the CTC about the
assistance available to third States in areas related to
the fight against terrorism, such as finance, customs,
immigration, extradition, police, the judiciary and so
on. We encourage all potential providers of assistance,
advice and expertise to submit an entry to the CTC's
directory of assistance.

The CTC recently presented its work plan for the
next 90 days, in which it states its confidence in its
ability to complete, within a specific time-frame, the
evaluation of the first series of reports and to begin
reviewing supplementary ones. The Union supports
this proposal for continuity in the review of compliance
with resolution 1373 (2001).

The assessment of national reports may prove
beneficial in helping States to identify areas in which
they should strengthen or supplement their domestic
legislation or administrative measures. In keeping with
the Committee's spirit of transparency, lessons learnt
from this evaluation process must be shared with all
States, and we trust that the CTC will know how best
to do so. The main goal of the CTC should be to
achieve a uniform, full and comprehensive application
of the resolution.

Measures against terrorism must accord with the
Charter of the United Nations, including the obligation
to promote and respect human rights. That obligation
should be taken into account fully in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

The CTC is very active in its contacts with
regional and subregional organizations. In addition to
exchanging information about their respective work in
the fight against terrorism, the CTC can contribute very
effectively to achieving a coherent approach by those
organizations and coordination with their member
States. We stress the need for a coordinated
international approach to the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). Furthermore, we underline the
role of regional organizations in facilitating assistance
to their member States.

The European Union presented a common report
to the CTC in addition to those of its member States,
and it will soon join with other organizations that have
maintained direct contact with the CTC in order to
brief them on its joint anti-terrorist activity.

The Secretary-General has created a working
group to review and improve actions undertaken by the
various departments of the Secretariat in the fight
against terrorism. We support that initiative.

The European Union takes note of the Secretary-
General's appointment of the new head of the United
Nations Vienna-based institutions. We welcome the
efforts of the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the
Centre for International Crime Prevention as part of
United Nations system-wide counter-terrorism efforts.
In this regard, the European Union awaits the report of
the Secretary-General requested by paragraph 103 of
General Assembly resolution 56/253, which will

"make proposals to strengthen the Terrorism
Prevention Branch to enable it to carry out its
mandate as approved by the General Assembly".

Even before 11 September, the European Union
had been undertaking significant coordinated efforts,
on the understanding that terrorism takes advantage of
every loophole and of legal or administrative
differences among countries.

The European Union gives maximum importance
to the fight against terrorism, which is the top priority
of the Spanish presidency. The European Union
common action is focused on the areas where it can
contribute an added value to the national efforts of its
members, complementing them.

This common European initiative stems from a
common position and an action plan adopted by the
heads of State and Government of the European Union.
In the spirit of transparency, we have submitted that
action plan to the Security Council for dissemination.
The Union's goal is to develop concrete common or
concerted measures against terrorism within and
outside the European Union.

The Union's response includes a broad range of
actions. Some are political, others legal or operative.
Many entail a greater dialogue and closer cooperation
within the European Union and with third countries.

The implementation of our action plan is being
carried out very actively. In the field of justice and
home affairs, an important set of measures has been
agreed. They include the European Arrest Warrant; a
common definition of terrorist crimes; a common list
of terrorist organizations; a new judicial cooperation
unit called Eurojust; and Europol, an anti-terrorist task
force within the joint police unit.

With respect to the fight against the financing of
terrorism, compliance with resolution 1373 (2001) is
well under way. The list of terrorist individuals, entities
and organizations annexed to the common position of
27 December is being revised and updated. Just
yesterday, a major suspect was detained in Spain who
is believed to be responsible for the financing of
Al Qaeda.

The European Union is also carrying out an
assessment of its relations with third countries in the
light of their attitude towards terrorism.

In the desire for transparency that the European
Union shares with the Committee, we have sent the
plan of action to the President of the Council, as I
mentioned earlier.

In closing, the European Union believes that
terrorism is a very real threat to all States. International
cooperation is therefore crucial in combating it and in
ensuring that perpetrators are brought to justice. The
actions of the European Union are aimed at individuals
or groups of terrorists, never at peoples, religions or
cultures. The goal is to strengthen international
security, the rule of law and human rights.

