Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica): As Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I am pleased to brief the
Security Council on the main developments in the
work of the Committee covering the six-month period
since the last joint briefing on 26 May 2009
(S/PV.6128). The focus is mainly on the
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and on the open meetings
that were held in that framework from 30 September to
2 October 2009. The Committee also carried out other
activities regarding outreach, assistance and
cooperation with relevant organizations.

In response to a request made by the Security
Council in resolution 1810 (2008), the Committee
decided to conduct a comprehensive review and to
report the outcome to the Council by the tentative date
of 31 January 2010. The review is a process using the
Committee as a forum for all States and relevant
intergovernmental bodies to share experiences and
express their views on various aspects of
implementation of the resolution. The mandate for
conducting the review, as presented to the Council in a
modalities paper (S/2009/ 170), outlined three
objectives: first, to assess the evolution of risks and
threats; secondly, to address specific critical issues that
have not yet been resolved; and thirdly, to identify
possible new approaches for the implementation of the
resolution.

In order to facilitate that task, the Committee
invited inputs from the wider membership of the
United Nations and relevant international and regional
organizations, and identified eight specific elements to
be examined with the benefit of substantive
background papers prepared by the Committee's group
of experts. The topics included: assessing the impact of
the resolution, including through measures taken after
its adoption, such as the establishment and
enforcement of appropriate criminal or civil penalties
for violations of export control laws and regulations;
conducting a regional analysis of implementation;
assessing existing examination tools and creating new
ones to address gaps in implementation; evaluating, as
appropriate, the impact of national implementation
measures on individuals and due process standards;
and developing methods for improving cooperation
with individual States, international and regional
organizations and relevant entities within the United
Nations system. Special emphasis was placed on
assessing the level of cooperation with the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1373 (2001).

During the three days of open meetings,
comprising a general debate and three interactive
thematic sessions, participants addressed the broader
issue of risks and threats of the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and their means of
delivery. The interactive sessions provided
opportunities to debate specific issues emerging from
the analysis of challenges and options for action,
including those presented in the background papers. I
would also like to mention the fact that, during the

comprehensive review, a side event gathering
representatives of relevant industries, academic
institutions and non-governmental organizations,
offered an overview of areas in which civil society can
add value to official efforts to implement the
resolution.

The broad participation during the comprehensive
review included formal statements on specific issues
made by the representatives of 41 States and 21
intergovernmental organizations and other entities. On
the basis of the sharing of experiences and the
articulation of views and proposals made during the
review process, the 1540 Committee is currently
preparing an outcome document with recommendations
to enhance the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

(spoke in Spanish)

Since May 2009, the representatives of the 1540
Committee and its group of experts have actively
participated in 20 workshops and other meetings held
outside United Nations Headquarters to promote the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Those
outreach activities were held throughout the world: in
Africa and the Middle East; in South-Asia and East
Asia, including the Pacific Island States; in Latin
America and the Caribbean; and in Eastern and
Western Europe. The level of representation varied in
accordance with the types of issues included in a
meeting's agenda and the extent to which aspects of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) were
addressed.

The 1540 Committee has continued to participate
in the following four types of outreach activities. First
are regional workshops devoted specifically to
resolution 1540 (2004) and organized by the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA).
One such workshop was held on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), focusing on capacity-building
in terms of border and export controls; it was held for
the Central American States in San Jose, Costa Rica,
from 8 to 10 September. The Committee expresses its
thanks to the Government of Costa Rica, as host; to
UNODA, as the organizer; and to the European Union
and the Governments of United States of America and
Norway, as sponsors of the event.

Secondly, regional workshops have been
organized in collaboration with other United Nations
bodies. Following the experience in Africa in 2007 and

2008, the experts of the 1540 Committee cooperated
with the Monitoring Team of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate in organizing, together with the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), two regional
workshops on a common strategy for countries of the
Middle East and the Caribbean. Those workshops,
aimed at addressing the problems posed by submitting
reports or other responses to the three Security Council
Committees, were held in Abu Dhabi, United Arab
Emirates, from 28 to 30 June and in Basseterre, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, from 7 to 9 July. The Committee
thanks the UNODC for its sponsorship of and role in
organizing those events, as well as the Governments of
the United Arab Emirates and Saint Kitts and Nevis for
hosting the workshops.

Thirdly, regional workshops have been organized
by Member States, in cooperation with the 1540
Committee. Among the new thematic outreach
activities are the regional workshops on the
implementation aspects of resolution 1540 (2004), held
by Member States with the cooperation of the
Committee's group of experts and the UNODC. The
Government of Sri Lanka hosted a regional workshop
from 23 to 25 June in Colombo, organized by the
Government of the United States, in cooperation with
the Office for Disarmament Affairs, on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in South
Asia, focusing specifically on border and export
control issues. The Governments of France and the
United Arab Emirates facilitated the holding of a
regional workshop on 5 and 6 October in Abu Dhabi,
sponsored by France's Foundation for Strategic
Research and the Emirates Centre for Strategic Studies
and Research. Its subject was the problems posed by
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in the
Gulf region, with particular reference to measures to
account for and guarantee the security of related
materials, as referred to in operative paragraph 3 of the
resolution. The Committee expresses its thanks to the
sponsors, organizers and hosts of those workshops.

Fourthly, meetings have been organized by other
organizations or by Member States. Most of the other
conferences and workshops to which the Committee
and its experts have been invited have addressed a
variety of subjects of interest to the 1540 Committee.
The subjects of the meetings have ranged from more

general issues related to proliferation threats to more
specific threats of nuclear, chemical or biological
terrorism; from problems in proliferation financing to
export controls and the prevention of illicit trafficking;
and from the implementation of relevant international
instruments by means of domestic legislation to the
facilitation of assistance for capacity-building. The
sponsoring organizations have included the Regional
Forum of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
the Caribbean Community, the European Union, the
Financial Action Task Force, the League of Arab
States, NATO and the Pacific Islands Forum, as well as
the UNODC. The sponsoring or co-sponsoring
Governments have included Argentina, Austria,
Canada, Chile, China, Japan, New Zealand, the
Russian Federation, Singapore, Switzerland, Turkey
and the United States. The wide-ranging sponsorship of
the workshops has provided new opportunities for the
1540 Committee and its experts to raise awareness
about the requirements of resolution 1540 (2004) in
various contexts and to initiate a network of
relationships.

In addition to regular dialogue with workshop
participants from individual countries, one event was
held on the eve of a workshop in Chile at which the
1540 Committee experts held intensive consultations
with officials from the host country on the issue of
national legal frameworks.

Another aspect to be developed is the design of
country-specific missions to facilitate States'
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), to include
identification of priority areas and assistance
requirements to facilitate implementation.

(spoke in French)

As encouraged under resolution 1810 (2008), the
Committee is intensifying its efforts to develop its
clearing-house function for channelling assistance to
Member States. To that end, the Committee's working
group on assistance met to outline a strategy on
moving forward. By taking stock of requests for
assistance, the Committee's experts have been
authorized to engage in follow-up dialogue with the
States concerned to encourage the submission of more
developed and specific requests using the assistance
template, as appropriate, as was done with the most
recent requests.
The close cooperation developing among the
1540 Committee, the 1267 Committee and the 1373

Committee was outlined in the joint statement
delivered on behalf of the three Committee Chairmen.
We look forward to furthering those joint efforts,
especially in engaging relevant intergovernmental
organizations to enhance cooperation in the areas of
common interest, such as information exchange and
technical assistance. The cooperation of the 1540
Committee with other entities of the United Nations
system is also important. In this regard, we recognize
the special role of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force as a catalyst of cooperation
and coordination in relevant areas.

As Chairman of the 1540 Committee, in October
I visited three headquarters of international
organizations in Europe. I had fruitful discussions with
the Secretary General of the World Customs
Organization in Brussels, which will serve as the basis
for more detailed dialogue at the expert level. A
meeting in The Hague with the Director-General of the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
resulted in a mutual understanding about the need to
identify specific areas for collaboration.

My second visit to International Atomic Energy
Agency headquarters in Vienna gave me the
opportunity to participate in detailed discussions with
senior officials from different divisions, in the context
of the nuclear security programme of the Agency. An
exchange of letters will outline the steps needed to
build closer relationships. On 13 October, I met in
Vienna with representatives of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe to discuss
cooperation with that regional organization.

