Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): France, through its highest authorities,
immediately welcomed the successful outcome of the
talks in Dayton under the auspices of the Contact Group,
which is a decisive stage in the progress towards peace.

This success is the fruit of the efforts of the Contact
Group negotiators and an illustration of the courage and
vision of the parties, who in the final analysis chose the
path towards reconciliation. The international conference
shortly to be held in Paris will place the seal on the cycle
of negotiations with the signing of the Peace Agreement
and open the way for a process of stability and good
neighbourliness.

France has spared no effort on the ground and in the
diplomatic negotiations to contribute to this result. It
remains determined to take steps to reaffirm the identity
of a united, multicultural and democratic Bosnia and
Herzegovina that can take its rightful place in Europe. It
will continue to lend its full support to the establishment
and maintenance of a fair and lasting peace.

Today, our thoughts go first and foremost to the
refugees, those who have been forced onto the roads of
exodus, and the relatives of the countless victims whose
grief we share and whose will for justice we understand.

But how can we fail today also to pay tribute to
those who, in the service of the United Nations, gave
their lives in the former Yugoslavia? How can we fail to
thank the neighbours of the parties to the conflict, which
have had to bear a weighty burden to prevent the war
from spreading and to ensure respect for the decisions of
the international community? And how can we fail to
express our gratitude to all the United Nations participants
who, in circumstances that were always difficult and often
thankless, worked tirelessly to save lives, strove to renew
the dialogue and sustained the conditions for and hopes of
a peaceful settlement?

The role of the United Nations has been and remains
a vital one. The resolutions we have just adopted attest to
that role. They turn a page of history: from the page of
war to the page of peace. They are the first phase in the

 

implementation of the final agreement, which the Council
will be addressing in due course.

Four years ago the United Nations Security Council
decided to impose an arms embargo in order to prevent the
spread of the conflict. Today, we have just adopted a
resolution which, in the very different context of the
Dayton commitments, provides for the gradual lifting of
that embargo.

Yet peace cannot be achieved through the arms race,
but only through the quest for stability and arms control.
That is why, in resolution 1021 (1995), the Council
welcomes the commitments of the parties set out in the
Agreement on Regional Stabilization, in terms of arms
control, ceilings for categories of weapons and confidence-
building measures. The lifting of the embargo will be
phased. The Security Council will receive a report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the Agreement
on Regional Stabilization, and the Council will assume its
responsibilities on the basis of that report. For once again
it is important to couple peace with stability by seeking a
balance in arms at a reduced level, rather than carrying on
a destructive race to acquire new weapons.

Three years ago the Council decided to put in place a
system of binding sanctions to enforce its decisions on a
peaceful settlement. These sanctions have successively been
tightened, eased and maintained. Today we are able to
agree on the immediate suspension of the sanctions
imposed on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, a
suspension that only a significant failure to comply with the
provisions of the Agreement can cut short.

This decision reflects our assessment of the positive
role played in recent months by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. France is particularly gratified by this decision,
which will enable the population of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to return quickly to normal life, while affording
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia the opportunity fully to
rejoin the international community. In this connection,
France supports the appeal to all States concerned to work
promptly in the competent international forums to resolve
issues relating to succession in the former Yugoslavia, with
respect for the legitimate interests of all those States.

The suspension of the sanctions imposed on the
Bosnian Serbs, once forces have been withdrawn to agreed
lines, is another gesture of encouragement towards that
community.

I wish, however, to recall in this connection a key
provision to which France attaches the highest value.
Resolution 1022 (1995), on sanctions, notes the
Concluding Statement issued at Dayton, in which all
parties undertook to do everything possible to assist in
locating the two French pilots missing in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to ensure their immediate and safe
return. This is a formal undertaking by the parties
concerned, which we mean to see fulfilled. The resolution
on sanctions refers to this undertaking in its paragraph 2.
France will see to it that this provision is implemented.
We are grateful for the solidarity and sympathy expressed
in the Council.

The final lifting of sanctions can take place only
after a certain lapse of time. Key phases of the
Agreement will first have to be achieved. Respect for
these phases will enable us to confirm the firm
commitment of the Bosnian Serbs to a peaceful settlement
of the conflict by democratic means.

The two resolutions the Council has adopted today
constitute a balanced whole. They reflect the turning-point
marked by the results achieved at Dayton. They provide
a positive incentive to all parties to implement, faithfully
and fully, the provisions of the Peace Agreement that will
soon be signed at Paris. France is pleased at their
adoption.

