Ms. Del Ponte: It is a great honour to be here
again to provide an assessment on the progress made in
the implementation of the completion strategy. A
written assessment has been distributed, and I now
intend to concentrate on the major issues.

Significant progress can be reported on the key
components of the completion strategy. All
investigations were completed and the last indictments
issued by the end of 2004. However, the Council
should know that many victim groups, as well as
representatives of civil society, simply do not
understand how investigations can be closed at this
stage. I receive many NGO reports and letters from
victims arguing that there are many more individuals
who should be indicted and expressing concern about
the capacity of the domestic jurisdictions to render
justice fairly and effectively. While there is no going
back and we are fully committed to the completion
strategy, I simply want to underline to the Council the
importance of supporting the national jurisdictions and
following their work closely to ensure that justice is
indeed done.

There have been a number of positive
developments since my last report. No fewer than 20
accused have been surrendered since November,
including ten who had been fugitives for an extended
period. The prosecution has continued to file motions
under rule 11 bis for referring indicted cases involving
mid- and lower-level perpetrators to domestic
judiciaries. Motions were also filed proposing the
joining of cases with the same crime base so as to
avoid repeating trials with similar evidence and
witnesses. Last but not least, the lifting of the
recruitment freeze has allowed my Office to hire the
staff necessary for efficient preparation for and conduct
of the remaining trials and appeals.

Unfortunately, those positive developments are
overshadowed by the continuing failure of the relevant
authorities to arrest and transfer ten fugitives,
including those mentioned several times by the
Security Council in resolutions adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter. As long as Radovan
Karadzic, Ratko Mladic and Ante Gotovina manage to
escape justice and defy the international community,
the work of this Tribunal will remain unfinished.

Ten days ago, I visited Belgrade, Zagreb and
Sarajevo to discuss cooperation with the relevant
authorities. In Sarajevo, I also met families of victims
of the Srebrenica genocide. Despite all the progress
made, it is obvious that the great expectations placed
by the victims in the international community and in
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia have not been met and will not be realized
until Karadzic and Mladic are in The Hague. In less
than a month, ten years will have passed since
Srebrenica happened. There will be commemorations
in Srebrenica itself and elsewhere. All those attending
will wonder why the individuals primarily responsible
for the genocide are still at large, ten years after the
fact and ten years after they were indicted. As a sign of
protest and in respect for the victims, I have thus
decided not to participate in any commemoration of the
genocide unless Karadzic and Mladic are arrested.

There has been a major change in the attitude of
the Serbian authorities. Access to documents, including
military files, and to witnesses is continuously
improving. However, the process remains very slow
and cumbersome. Most importantly, following my last
address to the Council, Serbia has finally started to
transfer fugitives and newly indicted persons. Since
December 2004, the Serbian Government, alone or
with the assistance of the Minister of the Interior of
Republika Srpska within Bosnia and Herzegovina, has
transferred 14 accused, including half a dozen who
have been indicted for Srebrenica. Another seven
fugitives are within reach of the Serbian authorities,
alone or in cooperation with Montenegro and
Republika Srpska within Bosnia and Herzegovina:
Karadzic, Mladic, Tolimir, Hadzic, Milan and Sredoje
Lukic, and Zupljanin. Karadzic, Mladic and Tolimir are
the three accused most responsible for Srebrenica.
Prime Minister Kostunica gave me assurances that his
Government will deliver on these remaining fugitives,
and I expect him to fulfil his commitment. However, I
understand he is not willing to carry out arrest
operations. Since 25 April, when Nebojsa Pavkovic
was transferred to The Hague, there have been no
further transfers. That seems to indicate that the policy
of voluntary surrenders preferred by the Serbian
authorities has reached its limits.

It is essential that the authorities in Podgorica and
Banja Luka cooperate more closely with Belgrade and
also with NATO and the European Force (EUFOR) in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is the most promising
way to locate Radovan Karadzic. Also, the political
support of the international community remains of
paramount importance. It is encouraging that in
Brussels and Sarajevo I was assured by NATO and
EUFOR commanders of their full commitment in
respect to this issue.

All my information continues to show that two
fugitives, Vlastimir Djordjevic and Dragan Zelenovic,
are in Russia. I have passed the relevant information on
those two fugitives to the Russian authorities and have
expressed my readiness to travel to Moscow to further
discuss the matter with them. On 7 June I received a
reply from them informing me that the competent
authorities continue to conduct their investigative
actions with regard to the persons accused by the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), including Mr. Djordjevic and
Mr. Zelenovic. The Russian authorities are confident
that the persons who have committed grave crimes to
be tried at the ICTY should be the subject of search
and prosecution. The Russian authorities also
expressed their readiness to further render their
assistance to the Tribunal in the investigation and
prosecution of the indicted persons.

I remain concerned that the Croatian authorities
have not fulfilled their obligation to locate, arrest and
transfer Ante Gotovina. In the first part of this year, the
efforts made by the authorities were neither proactive
nor focused, and several incidents occurred when
sensitive information was manipulated so as to obstruct
the investigation against Gotovina and his protective
networks. There were also media campaigns,
sometimes based on confidential documents leaked to
the media, that tried to discredit the Tribunal or our
partners in Zagreb. That indicates that Gotovina can
still count on active support networks, including within
the State institutions.

In April, Croatia presented an Action Plan aimed
specifically at locating Gotovina. It is my assessment
that further serious progress in the implementation of
the plan should lead to Gotovina. Prime Minister
Sanader assured me of his strong personal commitment
in that regard. A few more months will, however, be
needed to determine whether the Croatian authorities
are, this time, indeed doing their utmost to arrest and
transfer Gotovina. Until Gotovina is in The Hague, or
until Croatia provides the precise whereabouts of that
fugitive, it is impossible to say, however, that Croatia
is fully cooperating with the ICTY.

The transfer to The Hague of the 10 remaining
fugitives is the most serious obstacle to the completion
strategy. It creates uncertainties that are hampering the
proper planning of the trials. It may oblige the Court to
conduct several trials where a joint trial would have
been possible. For instance, Djordjevic could be joined
with the six other indictees accused of crimes
committed in Kosovo by Serbian forces. Tolimir could
be joined with eight other indictees accused of the
Srebrenica genocide. Karadzic and Mladic - should
they be transferred in the same time period - could be
tried together.

Joining cases is a method that my Office intends
to use whenever possible so as to save court time while
preserving all guarantees of due process. Joining cases
is clearly more efficient, since the same crime base
does not have to be proved repeatedly and, therefore,
the witnesses need to come to The Hague only once.
Three motions for joinder were presented so far; a few
others are under consideration. This is one of the areas
where my office has placed emphasis so as to do the
maximum to implement the second phase of the
completion strategy.

Another major development in that context is the
referral of cases to domestic jurisdictions. My Office
has continued to help build credible domestic
jurisdictions by contributing its expertise to training
judges and prosecutors. Furthermore, we have
participated in the significant efforts made to improve
judicial cooperation among prosecutors from Croatia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia and Montenegro.
Last week, we took part in a meeting held in Brijuni,
Croatia, aimed at reaching agreements regarding the
transfer of proceedings between the countries of the
former Yugoslavia. The objective is to ensure that
those countries' legal impediments to the extradition of
nationals do not lead to impunity.

As a result of those combined efforts, capacities
have been developed throughout the region to take over
mid- and lower-rank cases that, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions, cannot be tried at The
Hague. Moreover, in response to my request, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) decided on 19 May to cooperate with my
Office in the monitoring of cases transferred to the
region. Those positive developments have allowed my
Office to further implement its policy of submitting
rule 11 bis motions to the Chambers for the referral of
such cases to local jurisdictions. Four additional
motions have been filed since I last reported. All in all,
10 such motions have been filed so far concerning 18
accused.

Very recently, I decided to withdraw one of those
motions, concerning three persons accused of crimes
committed in Vukovar. That case long ago drew the
attention of the international community, since it was
the object of Security Council resolution 1207 (1998),
back in 1998. During my recent trip to the region, I
became convinced of the fact that the so-called
Vukovar Three case is extremely sensitive and that any
decision by the Chambers to transfer it would provoke
deep resentment in one or the other country considered
for the transfer - Serbia and Montenegro or Croatia.
Therefore, I came to the conclusion that a transfer
either to Belgrade or to Zagreb would not be in the
interests of justice. In View of these new developments,
the best option is to try the "Vukovar Three" at The
Hague.

The Chambers took their first decision on a rule
11 his motion on 17 May, whereby they granted the
prosecution motion to transfer the Stankovic case to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. My Office is still considering
the transfer of a few additional cases.

By completing all its investigations by the end of
2004, my Office has demonstrated its commitment to
the completion strategy. We have also immediately
taken the necessary actions in terms of resources. More
than a third of the posts in the investigation division
were abolished. Redeployments from the investigation
division to the prosecution division are proposed in the
context of the 2006-2007 budget, so as to keep within
the investigation division only those staff members
necessary for the support of trials and for the transfer
of cases to domestic jurisdictions. Those movements of
personnel will also allow us to cope with a heavier
workload in the prosecution division and in the appeals
section. Our attention is now fully focused on the
conduct of efficient trial and appellate proceedings.

While these internal measures increase the
chances that the completion strategy will be successful,
we have in past months seen dramatic improvements in
external conditions with a strong impact on the
completion strategy. Serbia and Montenegro, Croatia
and Republika Srpska within Bosnia and Herzegovina
are not yet cooperating fully with the ICTY. However,
all of them have shown considerable progress in their
cooperation. Prime Minister Sanader in Zagreb, Prime
Minister Kostunica and Minister Ljajic in Belgrade,
and Minister Matjasevic in Banja Luka have
demonstrated a genuine commitment to resolving all
remaining issues in their cooperation with the Tribunal.
The current momentum has to be used so as to bring
the remaining fugitives to justice. The international
community must play its part in this process to ensure
the success of international criminal justice. NATO and
the European Union Force's (EUFOR) assets will be
invaluable in bringing Karadzic and others to justice.
The European Union's power of attraction remains a
key political motivation for the countries of the former
Yugoslavia, and this should remain the case. The
Security Council must focus constant attention on our
work.

In mid-July, 10 years will have elapsed since
more than 7,900 Muslim men and boys were
summarily executed in what has been recognized by
the ICTY as a genocide. A few weeks later, it will be
10 years since two main authors of that genocide,
Karadzic and Mladic, have been at large. This situation
cannot be tolerated any longer. Now is the time to end
impunity. There is momentum now, and we must build
on it.

