Mr. Mimouni (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Madam President,
and the delegation of South Africa on your tireless
efforts in presiding over the Council, especially while
addressing important international developments,
such as those unfolding in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the Middle East.
I would also like to thank the Ambassador of the
Russian Federation for successfully presiding over the
Council last month.

Allow me to also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing on the developments on the ground.

We meet today as the Middle East is undergoing a
delicate and precarious phase. A number of brotherly
countries have been hit by crises and suffer from the
presence of terrorist organizations that threaten their
very existence. Regrettably, we must acknowledge that
the situation has deteriorated because the international
community has been unable to adopt an appropriate
approach that would allow for the settlement of those
crises, according to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. That has led to
greater chaos and confusion and an increased risk of
the collapse of some Arab States.

The Palestinian question remains at the core of the
Islamic and Arab world. In remaining unresolved, it
has led to greater tension and violence in the Middle
East and the wider world. The most recent tragic
developments and the suffering of the Palestinian people
indicate that prospects for a peaceful settlement have
become elusive, as the occupying Power continues to
defy international legitimacy, insists on imposing a fait
accompli, reneges on its commitments and disregards
all agreements with a View to eliminating the goal of
establishing a sovereign Palestinian State.

We express our deep concern about the general
situation of the Palestinian question. In the light of the
continued violations committed by the Israeli occupying
Power, the international community must make greater
efforts to ensure that the United Nations, in particular
the Security Council, shoulders its full responsibility.
The United Nations must honour its legal obligations,
uphold the law and defend international order. It
must act according to the law. It must fulfil its moral
obligations to ensure accountability for those crimes
and provide protection for the Palestinian people.

The settlement activities carried out by Israel in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem
and the occupied Syrian Golan, are attempts to impose a
fait accompli, in flagrant violation of international law,
including resolution 2334 (2016). It is regrettable that
Israel seeks to dictate erroneous terms of reference and
to suggest half solutions, claiming that they are realistic,
even as it seeks only to undermine the legitimate right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination. The
world has shown broad solidarity with the Palestinian
question and condemned certain countries for the
relocation of their embassies to Jerusalem. That is a
hostile and provocative act against the national rights
of the Palestinian people and is in flagrant Violation of
international law as well as an aggression against the
international system including the United Nations.

The unarmed Palestinian people are unable to
enjoy their most basic national rights - including the
right to return to their usurped land. We also condemn
any attempt to alter the character of Jerusalem. Algeria
again expresses from this Chamber its principled
position regarding in support of the just question of the
Palestinian people. We hope that the United Nations
will shoulder its historic responsibility and allow the
Palestinian people to decide their own fate. It must
reject any unjust actions targeting the Palestinian
people. It must put an end to the practices and arbitrary
occupations by Israel in Jerusalem, the Gaza Strip and
the West Bank.

Against the backdrop of a complete impasse in the
peace process, which has been obstructed for years,
Algeria calls for intensifying diplomatic efforts in the
Council and, at the level of international and regional
organizations, taking practical steps to defuse tensions
in the region and creating the necessary conditions
to break the current deadlock. We hope that such
discussions will constitute an incentive for the United
Nations to shoulder its responsibility and support
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people
as they seek to regain their territory and establish an
independent and sovereign State, on the basis of the
4 June 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Ever since Algeria gained its independence, we
have adopted a clear and steadfast position based on
two main principles in our foreign policy. The first is
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States,
which is a core rule ofinternational relations. The second
is support for consensus-based political solutions that
uphold the sovereignty and unity of Arab countries
and meet the aspirations of the Arab people, without
sectarian strife or foreign intervention, regardless of its
manifestations or source. That is why, with regard to
the situation in sisterly Syria, it is important to focus
on the political solution and on national reconciliation
so as to enable all Syrians to return to their homeland
and start reconstruction in the context of preserving
the unity and sovereignty of that fraternal country and
safeguarding it from external intervention, pursuant to
the Charter and international law.

In conclusion, Algeria assures its unconditional
support for all genuine initiatives aimed at achieving
lasting peace and stability in the Middle East. We are
aware that the international community must ensure
unity among the members of the Security Council and
bear its historical and legal responsibility to restore
lost justice. Their failure to do so will have an adverse
effect on international and regional peace and security.
We hope that our deliberations will pave the way for
a courageous resolution that will end the current
precarious situation in the Middle East.

