Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): The United
States is proud to cast its vote today in favour of this draft
resolution to expand the 986 humanitarian programme in
Iraq. It is, quite simply, the largest United-Nations-
sanctioned humanitarian programme in the history of the
Organization. As such, it is a concrete demonstration that
the United Nations, and in particular the members of this
Council, remains committed to meeting the essential
humanitarian needs of all of Iraq's people.

Let me make our position very clear. The United
States is deeply concerned about the welfare of the Iraqi
people and we want to do everything we can to make
sure their basic needs are met. For that reason, we
welcomed the Secretary-General's recommendations. We
strongly supported expansion of the 986 programme to
make it more effective and more efficient. We favoured
an increase in the dollar amount of oil sales permitted
under the programme in order to finance the importation
of additional humanitarian goods. We believe that
expanding the scope of the programme is desirable and in
fact essential to its humanitarian goals.

Our position and that of all the other members of the
Council stands in stark contrast to the policies of Iraq's
leadership. While Iraqi children have gone hungry,
Saddam Hussein has diverted scarce resources to build
more palaces and weapons of mass destruction. While
Iraq has ceaselessly complained about delays in the
sanctions Committee, it has submitted hundreds of 986
contracts that fail to meet the criteria and procedures that
Iraq agreed to with the United Nations Secretariat and has
routinely stooped to political favouritism in the 986
contracting process. And after the Council extended the
986 programme twice in 1997, the Iraqi Government
twice delayed new oil sales under the resolution,
needlessly slowing the delivery of humanitarian goods
and forcing the Council to adopt resolution 1129 (1997)
to avoid further deterioration of the humanitarian
situation. Indeed, Iraq refused even to provide input to the
Secretary-General' s report, a report intended to provide to
the Council recommendations on ways to improve the
delivery and increase the supply of humanitarian goods to
Iraq. On 5 February Iraq sent its official observations on
the Secretary-General's report, in which it rejected many
of his proposals and recommendations. Most notably, it
rejected his call for an ongoing distribution plan and his
practical expectation that Iraq would contribute local
resources to infrastructure projects.

The use of one's own resources to help one's own
people is a basic moral obligation that should form the
cornerstone of a responsible Government's response to
real humanitarian needs. Iraq's failure to provide
information for the Secretary-General's report and its
failure to commit its own resources to support his
humanitarian recommendations are telling reminders of
the Iraqi Government's true attitude toward the plight of
its people. That is why the United States stands ready to

 

work closely with other members of this Council to ensure
that this resolution works as intended - works not for the
benefit of the Iraqi regime, but for the welfare of ordinary
people in Iraq.

We must give the Secretary-General our strong
support and clear guidance as he implements this massive
programme, including a significant expansion of the United
Nations observation and monitoring function in Iraq. We
must make certain that food and medicine, and
infrastructure improvements directly related to their
distribution, remain the top priorities under this new
resolution. Nothing is more important to the basic welfare
of Iraqi citizens. We must make certain that the goods
imported into Iraq under this resolution are carefully
observed and monitored so that they cannot be diverted to
military purposes or used for the personal benefit of the
Iraqi leadership. We must make certain that the other
commitments Iraq agreed to when it accepted resolution
986 (1995) - for example, paying a certain percentage of
oil revenues to fund the United Nations Special
Commission, the United Nations Compensation
Commission, and other important functions - are
honoured. We must make certain that the sanctions
Committee acts quickly yet responsibly to approve contracts
in a manner consistent with the intent of this and other
relevant resolutions. And we must wait until we have more
and better information before authorizing any oil
infrastructure improvements under this resolution, and do so
only after careful consideration on the basis of the
Secretary-General's forthcoming report and of the
humanitarian objectives of this resolution.

Let me remind everyone that resolution 986 (1995)
was intended by the Security Council as a temporary
measure to provide essential humanitarian assistance to the
Iraqi people, not as a vehicle to refurbish Iraq's economy.
That will be possible only when the sanctions authorized by
the Council are lifted. And that, in turn, will happen when
Iraq complies fully and unconditionally with all relevant
resolutions of the Council.
It is sad that the Iraqi leaders have postponed that day
for so long by consistently and flagrantly flouting their
obligations under the resolutions, obligations that they
themselves agreed to under the terms of the Gulf War
ceasefire. Unfortunately, as long as the Government of Iraq
persists in its mistaken belief that it can defy the will of the
international community and that of the Council, the
sanctions must remain in place, and the United Nations will
continue to bear the burden that the Iraqi Government has
refused: caring for the welfare of the people of Iraq.

