The Deputy Secretary-General: It is almost a
year since United Nations troops arrived in Haiti. The
Council sent them there to ensure a secure environment
after civil violence erupted in the country. Armed
gangs were roaming the streets. Police had abandoned
their stations. Civilians had fled in fear of their lives.
The combination of violence and floods had caused a
near collapse of Haiti's already impoverished health
and education systems. Three people in five could not
get basic medical care.

The tragedy that unfolded last year in Haiti was
bad enough. But it was made worse by the fact that we
were witnessing history repeat itself. For this was the
second time in 10 years that United Nations troops had
been sent to Haiti to establish security in the country.

The unfortunate truth is that Haiti is not an
anomaly. On the contrary, roughly half of all wars that
come to an end relapse into violence. An organization
such as ours, set up to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war, must improve that record.

It is worth stressing, as the report of the High-
Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change
(A/59/565) noted, that the surge in mediation,
peacekeeping and humanitarian operations that
followed the end of the cold war has helped to reduce
the number of wars worldwide by almost 40 per cent.
Indeed, more wars have been ended through mediation
in the past 14 years than in the previous 200. Those are
major accomplishments.

But our strategies for ending war must also tackle
the question of relapse. We must ensure that peace
agreements are implemented in a sustainable manner.
We must make sure that critical stabilization activities,
such as the reintegration and rehabilitation of
demobilized combatants, are adequately financed and
carefully implemented. We must help societies and
markets recover their vitality. And we must strengthen
the capacity of State and social institutions to provide
security and justice based on the rule of law, an area
where the United Nations can make a real difference
and on which the Secretary-General is taking steps to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations system to
provide rule of law assistance.

If we are to improve our peacebuilding success
rate, four things are vital. First, we must make sure that
we build on existing national institutions and
capacities, both of the State and of civil society.
National ownership is a vital foundation for sustainable
peace and development.

Secondly, especially in our operations on the
ground, the United Nations system must function in a
coherent fashion. So too must its principal organs. In
recent years, the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council have each extended the scope of
their activities in post-conflict situations. Both have
critical roles to play.

Thirdly, the international financial institutions,
bilateral donors and regional actors must all be
involved in United Nations peacebuilding efforts. Their
contributions are vital if post-conflict recovery is to be
resilient and if the right foundation is to be laid for
sustained economic recovery and political stability.
That is why I am very glad that the Council had
decided to invite Mr. James Wolfensohn, President of
the World Bank, to join this meeting today.

Fourthly, both immediate needs and medium-term
recovery require more resources. In the early post-
conflict phase, funding for national institution-
building, including rule of law programmes, is often
inadequate. Financing for rehabilitation is
unpredictable. And after the first two or three years,
just as societies are beginning to develop the capacity
to absorb resources and make the most use of them,
financing tends to decline. These funding gaps are
penny-wise and pound-foolish. When we do not invest
adequately in peacebuilding, we find ourselves paying
much more for renewed peacekeeping efforts down the
line.

In his report "In larger freedom" (A/59/2005), the
Secretary-General has proposed the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission, together with a
Peacebuilding Support Office, to help meet these
needs. The Commission would fill a gap within the
machinery of the United Nations, and would focus
attention on the vital task of peacebuilding. By
bringing together the international financial
institutions, bilateral donors and regional actors, it
would harmonize peacebuilding activity across the
multilateral system.

Peacebuilding is one of the most direct and vital
contributions that the United Nations makes to freeing
people from fear and want and enabling them to live
lives in larger freedom. We have had important
peacebuilding successes, but we have also seen too
many failures. We must implement the lessons of the
past and equip ourselves to create the conditions for
long-term peace in societies emerging from conflict.
And of course, we must also pay more attention to
prevention so that societies can address their tensions
and problems in ways that will avoid the descent into
armed conflict in the first place.

I therefore welcome this debate on peacebuilding
and hope it takes us a step further towards freeing more
people from the deadly cycle of civil violence.

