Mr. Fernandez Revollo (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
Ambassador Umarov, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and Permanent
Representative of Kazakhstan, for his briefing and for
his work on the Committee. We greatly value the efforts
of the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group, which
was established to support the Committee's work. It
is an essential tool for keeping the Security Council
informed about the situation on the ground. It should
operate with complete impartiality and respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of both countries.

The sanctions regime on Somalia and Eritrea is
one of the Council's longest-running such regimes.
The modifications that have been made to it have not
necessarily resulted in any marked progress. In our
view, the time has come to consider the effectiveness
of the sanctions and whether they are worth continuing.
We would like to emphasize the political advances
in Somalia, of which this year's elections are proof
positive of the progress that it has made in the past
four years. It is vital that efforts continue to ensure that
elections will also be conducted beyond the capital and
that by 2020 the country will be able to count on having
a one-person, one-vote system.

We continue to be very concerned about the
presence of Al-Shabaab, which is still a threat to peace
and security in Somalia. According to the Monitoring
Group's report, that terrorist organization continues
to maintain a presence in some of the most remote
areas of Puntland. It is a threat not only to Somalia
but to the stability of the entire region. Its presence
has also been confirmed by representatives of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. We
would like to emphasize that AI-Shabaab's presence
is also a threat to all the organizations that are
providing humanitarian assistance in the area, thanks
to the obstacles it presents to their efforts. We urge the
Government of Somalia, the African Union Mission in
Somalia and all international stakeholders to provide
the protection that those humanitarian efforts need and
ensure that the international embargo on the export of
charcoal is respected.

With regard to Eritrea, we are pleased that once
again there has been no proof that its Government has
given support to the terrorist group AI-Shabaab. The
Security Council should take note of that and respond
accordingly. As for the regional and border issues,
the countries concerned should end all support to any
armed or rebel groups that undermine their internal
stability. We welcome Eritrea's release of four prisoners
of war to Djibouti and urge both parties to continue to
work through Qatar's mediation efforts to resolve their
existing problems.

Bolivia hopes sincerely that the countries of the
region can continue to keep in mind the overarching
goal of peace and stability in the Horn of Africa and
their peoples' fundamental interests. We hope they can
strengthen their good-neighbourly relations, promote
unity and cooperation and settle their differences
through dialogue and consultation, benefiting the
common interests of every country in the region.
We hope that the Security Council will take into
consideration the changes that have occurred on the
ground, continually review the relevant provisions of
its resolutions and make appropriate adjustments.

