Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate the representative of
Cameroon for the effective way in which he presided
over the work of the Council during the month of
October, and to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I am
convinced that, under your competent leadership, the
Council will be in a position to successfully assume its
important responsibilities for the month of November.

I also wish to thank you for taking the initiative
of holding an open discussion on this important report
(S/2002/1146), to which Belgium attaches special
importance. I hope this debate will enable us to better
understand this complex material and to give a more
detailed response to the questions it raises. My
statement supplements the one made by the presidency
of the European Union, which we fully endorse.

I wish to commend the efforts made by
Ambassador Kassem and other members of the Panel in
drawing the attention of the international community to
the illegal exploitation of natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to their
disastrous effects on the peace process, as well as on
the opportunities to rebuild the country.

This report is also an important contribution to
the consideration of the causes and stakes involved in
the illegal exploitation of resources in general.

Belgium welcomes the special attention paid by
the report to the economic dimension of the search for
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Therefore, we strongly support the Panel of Experts'
first recommendation, that:

4c

a set of agreements or initiatives on
reconstruction and sustainable development are
needed to address the economic dimension of the
Lusaka peace process and provide incentives for
continuing progress." (S/2002/JI46, para.]61)
We also support the Panel's suggestion whereby
economic integration and regional trade should be the
subject of regional consultations aimed particularly at
organizing the conference on peace, security and
sustainable development in the Great Lakes region.

As members know, the Belgian Government,
particularly the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Louis Michel, have spared no
effort to encourage internal political dialogue in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and respect for the
commitments made by all the parties in the Lusaka,
Pretoria and Luanda Peace Agreements. But in order
for current progress to be consolidated and to lead to
lasting peace and for democratic institutions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to be gradually
established, it is absolutely necessary that the economic
pillaging of the country, as described in the Kassem
report, be denounced and all efforts be made to put an
end to it.

Belgium is convinced that the re-establishment
and reform of institutions of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are crucial in order to enable the
transitional government to control the country's natural
resources. Belgium supports the recommendation of
the Panel of Experts in that regard, and, in fact, it has
made that objective a priority of its bilateral
cooperation, advocating greater substantial official
development assistance in that respect.

Addressing problems of illegal exploitation of
resources requires first and foremost a structural
approach. The Security Council should thus, and above
all, seek normative solutions that make possible the
continuation of legitimate economic activity in the
region by establishing well-defined criteria. Those
criteria should allow, for example, for a better
definition of the term illegality and should avoid a
situation whereby companies would find themselves,
ex post facto, faced with ill-defined concepts of
morality and legitimacy.

Such a normative framework would also enable us
to clarify the scope of criticism levelled by the Panel
against individuals, companies or Governments. Respect
for those norms and possible controversial differences in
that regard could therefore be evaluated on a more
thorough and objective basis. In that regard, it is
regrettable that the right to be heard and to defend
oneself has not been respected in the cases of cited
individuals and companies, and for which sanctions are
proposed. Therefore, the criteria and the evidence on the
basis of which individuals and companies are included
on the annexed list are not clear. Moreover, in some
cases they are not contained in the body of the report.

The Kimberley Process of certification could
serve as an example of a structural approach such as
the one I have just mentioned. From the outset,
Belgium firmly committed itself to that process in
order to find exhaustive arrangements regarding the
diamond sector. In fact, we hope that the Security
Council will assume its responsibilities in that regard
by supporting that process in due course.

Above and beyond the normative approach, there
are other ways of reacting to the situations described in
the report. The establishment of a sanctions regime is a
possibility. There are also broader options with regard
to their coverage, but they must all be applied
judiciously. That is true in the case of reducing official
development assistance, which runs the risk of having
negative consequences, particularly for people who are
often innocent victims.

For a possible sanctions regime, as well as for
other options, it is essential that the actions decided
upon be part of a framework of a peace process and
that they not affect it negatively. Indeed, the Panel was
established primarily to contribute to restoring peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

At the national level, the Belgian Government has
firmly committed itself to the resolution of the
problems stemming from the illegal exploitation, and
the economic situation, of countries in conflict. My
Government adopted in July a plan of action in this
regard. Our Minister for External Trade, Ms. Annemie
Neyts-Uyttebroeck, came to New York in October to
consult with the Chairmen of the sanctions Committees
established by the Security Council, as well as with the
Chairmen of the Monitoring Mechanisms.

Belgium overall advocates greater uniformity in
the expert panel system as well as the establishment of
clear-cut rules for professional conduct and
confidentiality. In this context, it held, on 30 October
in Brussels, a seminar aimed at an in-depth
consideration of the issue at the national level and at
consolidating the initiatives taken by our country in the
context of the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development.

Regarding the specific case of the Great Lakes
region, Belgium has set up a Senate Committee on the
situation in the Great Lakes and the illegal exploitation
of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which is investigating the problems related
to the illegal exploitation of natural resources in that
region. The work of that Commission is under way, and
its members will soon be going to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to Rwanda. The
Commission's conclusions are expected by the end of
the year. Along with the Security Council's conclusions
on the report of Ambassador Kassem, they will enable
Belgium to fine-tune its own plan of action.

In conclusion, we fervently hope that the Security
Council will give in-depth consideration to this report
and remain seized of these problems, as there is so
much at stake for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and for the region as a whole.

We are therefore in favour of the recommendation
of the expert panel that a monitoring body be created
that could report to the Security Council on a regular
basis about developments on the ground and make
whatever recommendations it deems appropriate. Such
a body should, inter alia, continue the group's
investigative efforts and update the relevant lists of
individuals and companies, once it has heard all those
who wish to be heard. It seems to me that this should
be done before more concrete measures are taken in
this respect. The monitoring body should also take into
account the new context created by the withdrawal of
foreign troops from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and focus on those situations that continue to
present obstacles to the return of peace and to the
success of the inter-Congolese dialogue.

