Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): With regard to the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, my delegation has mixed
feelings and reactions.

On the positive side, we note with satisfaction that the
three-year siege on the enclave of Bihac has been lifted and
that a supply line for humanitarian assistance to its
population has been established. It is a welcome
development also to read reports and see pictures of the
population of Bihac who, for the first time in three years,
have cause to breathe the air of freedom and, hopefully,
look forward to a semblance of normal life.

We also hope that the lifting of the siege of the safe
area of Bihac from the occupation by the Bosnian Serbs
will not be short-lived.

On the other hand, however, the inhabitants of the safe
areas of Srebrenica and Zepa were not as lucky as those of
Bihac. Their towns have been occupied by Bosnian Serb
forces, and they have been forced out of their homes and
been made to join the teeming ranks of refugees and
displaced persons.

My delegation joins other Council members in
reaffirming the total unacceptability of the occupation of
these safe areas by the Bosnian Serb forces.

Of more immediate concern, however, are the
reports of grave violations of international humanitarian
law in and around Srebrenica. As of today over 7,000
young and middle-aged men, former inhabitants of
Srebrenica, have not been accounted for. We therefore
support the call in paragraph 1 of the resolution that the
Bosnian Serb party give immediate access for
representatives of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) and other international agencies to all the
persons in its custody so that they can be duly
documented as a first step to their immediate and
unconditional release.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate
what we have said in respect of Croatia: that the only
hope for a durable and lasting peace is a negotiated
settlement which accommodates the concerns of all the
constituent groups.

In this connection, the Contact Group must redouble
its efforts and demonstrate better unity of action in the
promotion of a settlement on the basis of the Contact
Group Peace Plan as a starting point.

Finally, it is our View that the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina must be spared further horrors of war. They
have suffered too much and too long from the atrocities
committed by those who are also committed to the
destruction of their multi-ethnic country.

