Mr. Fulci (Italy): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and of the following
associated countries that wish to join with it in this
statement: Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia.

The Security Council's adoption of the resolution to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH) will represent a positive step towards further
consolidating Haitian democracy and institutions. The
European Union has repeatedly emphasized the need for
the Haitian situation to evolve in such a way as to assure
stability, security and peaceful coexistence for all
members of Haitian society, fostering economic growth
and allowing that country to reap the benefits of the
efforts made by the international community.

The election of President Preval was a decisive
moment. As the European Union has stated, this made
possible the transfer of office from one democratically
elected President to another for the first time in Haiti's
history. On that occasion, the European Union expressed
its confidence that President Preval will complete, in a
framework of national reconciliation and justice, the work
that his predecessor undertook in difficult conditions.

The Secretary-General's report of 14 February notes
the new President's request for the Council to take
appropriate steps with a view to bringing about an
extension of UNMIH's mandate so that a gradual
withdrawal may take place in the months ahead. This
request deserves a positive response. The draft resolution
proposing the extension of UNMIH's mandate is
particularly welcome, as it is in the spirit of completing
a process that began with such difficulty.

A positive outcome for the Haiti operation relies also
on it being possible, over the next few months, for the
various sectors of the population to be made aware that
there is no better solution to their country's problems than

 

properly functioning democratic institutions and full respect
for human rights. In fact, as has been said on many
occasions in the Council, the final outcome of this peace-
keeping operation remains in the hands of the Haitian
population.

However, it is important to recognize the significant
roles played by regional cooperation in solving the Haitian
crisis. Of the factors that have led to the success already
achieved, the initiatives undertaken by the Organization of
American States and its close cooperation with the United
Nations have certainly contributed to today's results.

The Secretary-General's report notes the elements of
fragility in the creation of an efficient, modern judicial
system and an adequate civilian police force. The need for
a renewal of UNMIH's mandate is specifically based on
such considerations. But we trust that this further
commitment of resources by the United Nations at such a
critical moment for the financial situation of our
Organization will also convey to international public
opinion the message that the United Nations has a unique
and irreplaceable role.

