Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Like my
colleagues, I wish to convey to you, Sir, our sincere
condolences and profound sympathy in connection
with the two aviation catastrophes that have left behind
so many bereaved families in Russia.

I welcome Mr. Jean Arnault and thank him for his
excellent presentation of the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2004/634)
and for the valuable information he has given the
Council, in particular with regard to the election
calendar and the stakes involved.

The peace process in Afghanistan has reached a
crucial phase today - perhaps the most crucial
phase- with the holding of the first presidential
election, on 9 October, and the legislative elections, to
be held in April 2005. These elections, so long awaited
by the Afghan people, are an important step in
implementing the Bonn process because they will
enable the country to lay the first foundations for
democracy and to move towards political and
institutional stability. We hope that this democratic
exercise will lead to the establishment of a
representative Government and that the elections will
take place in optimal conditions of equity and
transparency, as well as of security, whose importance
for the success of the elections is evident.

In that context, we welcome the rate of
registration. Almost 10 million voters have been
registered - 41 per cent of them women. That clearly
demonstrates the determination of the Afghan people to
fully engage in the process of rebuilding the country. In
that context, special tribute should be paid to the
members of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), in particular the electoral
workers, who have done outstanding work in extremely
difficult conditions, sometimes risking their lives.

We welcome the Afghan Government's progress
in implementing the work plan adopted at the Berlin
conference, in particular in the areas of public
administration, budgetary management and economic
and social development. However, emphasis must be
put on eliminating poverty, strengthening the rule of
law and promoting and protecting human rights.

We note that the security situation is increasingly
worrisome, and, in fact, we are witnessing an ongoing
deterioration of the situation. This risks a negative
impact on the holding of elections, a weakening of the
peace process and a hindrance to reconstruction efforts.
The south and south-east zones, where Taliban and
other extremist groups remain militarily active, have
seen a renewed outbreak of attacks against the police,
the Afghan National Army and humanitarian workers.
That has led, among other things, to the withdrawal of
Doctors without Borders, whose activities were valued
by the entire population. Those attacks have served to
deprive the population of the benefits of reconstruction
and have slowed the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). Tensions
related to the existence of such factions are another
source of concern in the north and north-west of the
country - previously considered low-risk regions -
where grave acts of violence have been committed.
That is why it is urgent to vigorously implement the
DDR programme and to accelerate the cantonment of
heavy weapons - since the progress made in those
areas has been insufficient - and to expand the
presence of international forces.

Another factor destabilizing the political process
is drug production and trafficking, which are a grave
threat to the development and security of Afghanistan
and require stronger support for the eradication and
interdiction measures adopted by the Afghan
Government to put an end to illicit poppy cultivation.
We must also encourage the promotion of alternative
crops as well as cooperation between Afghanistan and
its neighbours aimed at creating a security zone along
its borders.

Finally, international support must continue in the
area of security to complete the process begun by the
Bonn Agreement and to ensure the success of the
coming elections. It is also essential to work to
discourage inter-factional Violence, to facilitate the
deployment of Afghan security forces and to help them
put an end to the illicit drug trade. In that regard, the
decision taken by NATO to increase the forces
deployed in Afghanistan is, as the Secretary-General
indicated in his report, very encouraging. However, it
is important that that decision be implemented swiftly.

