Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the leadership of the
Tribunals for their briefings on their work, their
completion strategies and the transition to the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. We have noted the recent trial and acquittal
in the Stanisie and Simatovic' case. We see in that
decision and overall in the acquittal by appeal in the
Perisie case a certain positive trend helping to remedy
the anti-Serb leanings of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). We believe
that a similar potential with regard to such verdicts lies
in a number of similar cases on the Tribunal's docket.

However, the ICTY continues to suffer from serious
judicial administration problems. The latest unjustified
extension of trial deadlines is completely unreasonable.
Despite the reasons cited, it is clear that well-organized
judicial activities should preclude instances such as the
Seselj trial, which is now in its tenth year. We continue
to believe that the ICTY stalemate could be broken with
the help of an independent expert - in line with the
model of the Special Court for Sierra Leone - as we
proposed in December. We reiterate that only following
such expert analysis will we consider any proposals
to extend the work of the Tribunals beyond 2014, or
extend the terms of the judges or any budget proposals
going beyond that deadline. It might also be worth
considering inviting not just the ICTY President but
the ICTY's other judges, including its senior judges, to
participate in the next debate at the end of this year.

Restoring trust in the Tribunal and its role in
national reconciliation would be boosted by a positive
decision by the Security Council with respect to Serbia's
request to be inscribed on the list of countries where
ICTY-convicted persons can serve their sentences. We
believe that Serbia's request isjustified, both legally and
politically. The situation in that country since 1993 has
changed greatly. The country has established modern
legal institutions, has seen its civil society develop and
has strengthened the rule of law. We support Serbia's
request, given the relevant guarantees provided by it.

We are disappointed by the information from
Rwanda Tribunal, which we had always considered
to be a model for responsible implementation of the
completion strategy and an example for the ICTY in
that respect. When it comes to granting an extension
in the Butare case beyond the timeline set forth in
resolution 1966 (2010), taking 18 months to translate
the file in the case into French is unacceptable. It is
hard to imagine that the problem could not have been
foreseen six months ago, prior to the December briefing
to the Security Council (see S/PV.6880), when the ICTR
promised to conclude all cases in a timely fashion. We
believe that the ICTR has the necessary capacities
and financial resources to remedy the situation by the
deadline in conformity with the time frame stipulated
in resolution 1966 (2010). I hope that we will not have
to return to the issue once more at the end of the year.

Very soon we will see the opening of The Hague
branch of the Residual Mechanism, the latest milestone
in the history of the ICTY and ICTR. We will soon see
whether the outcomes of the work of the Tribunals will
be a heritage acceptable to the whole of the international
community. In that regard, going to every length
to ensure that the history of the Tribunals ends on a
positive note, we will strictly adhere to the compromise
scheme for the completion of the work of the Tribunals
and the model of the Residual Mechanism as an organ
with a limitedjurisdiction and life cycle, as set forth in
resolution 1966 (2010).

