Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I had honestly not expected to be taking the
floor for a second time this evening, but after the usual
statement by the representative of Israel- the usual
statement made in many forums - which included lies
and false accusations against my country, I feel obliged
to reply, and I beg the Council's indulgence.

That representative made several allegations and
offered many unsubstantiated accusations against my
country. Outside the Council Chamber I expect that; I
am used to it. That representative may have forgotten
that his country always attempts to cover up its crimes
by trying to assign blame to others by any means
possible. The Council has heard many statements made
by Arab and other representatives, condemning Israel's
aggression and violations; these fill volumes of the
records of the United Nations, quite apart from the
voluminous resolutions adopted by the Organization,
which go unheeded by Israel. And today, he spoke
again. One must wonder about the reasoning behind
this.

All representatives have called for an end to
Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people; they
have all demanded that Palestinian civilians be
protected from repeated Israeli aggression; many
pictures have been painted - enough to convince the
Security Council today.

Israel must cease committing genocide, lest Israel
itself fear genocide. Israel's daily behaviour in the
occupied territories; its actions in southern Lebanon; its
actions today in the Syrian Golan: these are genocidal
actions. There is no need for the world to unmask this;
it is clear for all to see.

The fact of the matter is that Palestinians are
trying to defend themselves with stones against the
most advanced weaponry. The same is true of the
Lebanese resistance, which is trying to liberate their
occupied land. The occupier is Israel, but Israel blames
others. In April, Israel and Hezbollah agreed on a
memorandum of understanding; Israel and Hezbollah
have traded secrets and information. Israel must
withdraw from Shabaa Farms, whether it be Syrian or
Lebanese. By Israel's own admission, Shabaa Farms is
not Israeli, so why is Israel there? Why does Israel
remain there? Why does Israel subject its people to
daily humiliation?

Ought not the aggression recently perpetrated by
Israel against Syrian military elements inside Lebanon,
approximately 40 miles from the "blue line" drawn by
the United Nations, be called by its true name? That
aggression took place in the heart of Lebanese territory,
against Lebanese sovereignty and against Syria. It was
a threatening message to peace and security in the
region. My country has repeatedly affirmed the need
for Israel to withdraw from all Lebanese territory,
including Shabaa Farms.

Syria is not ashamed of the agreement on
cooperation and brotherly relations between Lebanon
and itself. The aforementioned aggression reaffirms the
need for us to support Lebanon, to stand with it,
especially following the civil war that had threatened to
transform Lebanon into another Kosovo.

The country of Israel is based on occupation. It is
a country that kills children daily. The picture of
Muhammad Al-Durrah is but one of many pictures that
can be seen on television screens all around the world.
Is that not genocide? Israel must realize that security
can be achieved only through peace. Peace can be
achieved only through a full Israeli withdrawal from all
Arab occupied territories to the lines of4 June 1967. If
the representative of Israel cites statements made
angrily in the face of Israel's behaviour, are we to reply
in kind? If many Israeli parties, including Rabbi
Ovadia Yosef, a so-called man of religion, described
Arabs as snakes to be beheaded, are we to reply in
kind? Israel is built on such racist myths.

Does he expect President Assad to respond to
aggression, Israeli settlements and the killing of Arab
children in occupied Arab lands with rose petals? I do
not think so. I really do not think anybody would
accept that. Israel has to realize that peace is the only
path. A just, comprehensive peace is the preferred
means to achieve security, freedom and dignity for all
peoples of the region.

