Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in French): It is my
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
I would like to thank the Security Council for having
invited me to take part in today's important Council
meeting.

Allow me to begin by congratulating the Security
Council on its unanimous adoption of resolution 2134
(2014), on the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA),
which also contains a mandate for a European Union
military operation in that country in crisis.

The European Union commends the activities of
the African Union through the swift deployment of
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic (MISCA) and the support
provided to it by the France's Operation Sangaris,
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013). Those efforts
together have allowed for progress on the security front
to shore up the conditions necessary for a return to
stability in the country.

In that context, the Foreign Affairs Council of
the European Union indicated its political agreement
on 20 January 2014 on the prospects of a military
operation in the Central African Republic in support
of MISCA and the French forces and approved the
concept of operations to put an end to the crisis. The
authorization for the operation by the Security Council
in the resolution adopted today will allow for the swift
establishment and deployment of that operation.

The end goal of the EU operation will be to
make a contribution with MISCA to the regional and
international efforts to protect the most vulnerable
populations and to facilitate the movement of civilian
stakeholders. That will create conditions conducive to
providing humanitarian assistance to those in need. By
contributing to security in Bangui, the EU operation
will allow for MISCA and the French troops to be
gradually deployed to the provinces. That goal takes
fully into account resolution 2127 (2013) and MISCA's
mandate.

The European Union highlights the need for close
cooperation with partners, in particular with the
authorities of the Central African Republic, the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the United Nations and France, so as to ensure
high quality cooperation and complementarity in the
efforts undertaken to restore stability in the Central
African Republic.

The European Union would urge the international
community to continue to mobilize in favour of the
Central African Republic, in particular in the context of
the donor conference on MISCA to place in Addis Ababa
on 1 February upon invitation of the African Union.
All of the European Union's activities in the Central
African Republic are in step with its comprehensive
approach to the situation on the humanitarian, security
and development aid fronts. Accordingly, the high-
level meeting jointly organized by Commissioner
Kristalina Georgieva and Assistant Secretary-General
Valerie Amos mobilized more than $500 million for
humanitarian activities in the Central African Republic.
Moreover, the European Union has already bilaterally
pledged €50 million for the financing of MISCA.

As the leading contributor to official development
assistance in the Central African Republic, the
European Union is committed to swiftly reviewing, in
coordination with international financial institutions,
all the measures that would allow for rebuilding the
State and prevent an exacerbation of the effects of the
crisis on the civilian population. The European Union
undertakes to start considering right away modalities
for cooperation in the areas of the rule of law and
security sector reform. The EU is also planning to
resume its cooperation projects as soon as security
conditions allow it, in order to fully play a role in the
rebuilding of the Central African Republic.

The European Union would urge the international
community to provide a substantial response to
the basic needs of the Central Africa population,
using a comprehensive approach that clearly sets out
emergency aid and development aid and coordinates
players in development with the international financial
institutions.

