Mr. Van Schalkwyk (South Africa): We welcome
you as President of the Security Council today, Madam,
and South Africa would like to thank the Republic
of Indonesia for organizing this open debate on an
important matter. We also thank the Secretary-General,
Lieutenant General Elias Rodrigues Martins Filho,
Force Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), and Mr. Bjorn Holmberg, Director
of the Challenges Forum International Secretariat, for

their comprehensive briefings.

South Africa aligns itself with the statements to
be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, and by the observer of the
African Union (AU).

My delegation recognizes and reaffirms the
importance ofpeacekeeping as one ofthe most effective
tools available to the United Nations in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security, as
well as in the prevention, management and resolution
of conflicts. As the body entrusted with the deployment
of United Nations peacekeeping operations and in the
context of new emerging threats faced by our troops
and United Nations personnel, the Security Council
must ensure that operations are fully resourced,
entrusted with the appropriate mandate to respond to
the context-specific environment in which they are
deployed and adequately equipped with troops that are
able to protect themselves in the process of carrying out
their mandates.

In our View, the safety and security of the
peacekeepers should also be strengthened by adopting
the use of modern technology in peacekeeping
operations. The United Nations should use smart
technology and heightened key capabilities to enable
peacekeepers to counter any attack by armed groups
or other forms of the asymmetrical threats that are
increasingly prevalent in peacekeeping.

South Africa reaffirms the primacy of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34) in
making United Nations peacekeeping policy. We regret
the fact that the substantive session of the C-34 that
concluded in March was unable to adopt its annual
report. We urge all Member States to work together
to reach consensus on issues that are pertinent to
the discharge of the Council's mandate. The C-34's
chapters on the enhancement of African peacekeeping
capacities and best-practices training are relevant to
our discussion today.

South Africa acknowledges the increased and vital
role that regional organizations play in peacemaking and
peacekeeping efforts. Regional organizations such as
the African Union are first responders, deploying early
where necessary in order to stabilize crisis situations
and thereby enabling the United Nations to deploy
when conditions are more favourable. As is envisaged

in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
partnerships with regional organizations will therefore
address some of the constraints that the United Nations
faces in implementing successful peace operations. It is
our firm view that the efforts of regional organizations
are indispensable, and there is merit in having the
United Nations develop and strengthen their capacities.
South Africa would like to reiterate the importance
of enhancing the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of the financing for AU-led peace support
operations authorized by the Security Council. That
principle has been endorsed by the Council and we
must continue to support it.

We must also ensure the availability of the
necessary training and capacity required to increase
the number of women in peacekeeping operations.
South Africa will therefore continue supporting efforts
aimed at advancing women's meaningful representation
and participation in peacekeeping missions, such as
the opportunities presented by the Elsie Initiative for
Women in Peace Operations, ofwhich we are a member.
Programmes aimed at female military officers have
been undertaken in partnership with UN-Women and
the Government of Norway, with the assistance of the
Department of Political Affairs and the African Union.

South Africa is fully committed to the zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation in peacekeeping
operations. We have deployed a comprehensive,
institutionalized predeployment programme on
preventing sexual exploitation and abuse in order to
raise the level of consciousness of that scourge among
our deployed troops. We are also providing continuing
additional in-mission training interventions to
reinvigorate troops' situational awareness and mission
readiness in terms of command-and-control matters, the
use of leisure time, the protection of civilians, human
rights standards and, once again, sexual exploitation
and abuse. We are a member of the Secretary-General's
Circle of Leadership on the prevention of and response
to sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
operations, and we fully endorse it.

In operationalizing Action for Peacekeeping,
enhancing partnerships and strengthening performance,
South Africa is sharing its expertise and training
competencies with the Force Intervention Brigade
partners in MONUSCO. The tactical intelligence unit
course presented for six weeks in South Africa for our
own troops, as well as those from Tanzania and Malawi,
as preparation for predeployment to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, is a case in point, aimed at
ensuring a common operational picture and solidifying
operational effectiveness.

In conclusion, and in reply to the questions in
the concept note for this debate (S/2019/359, annex),
South Africa would like to make the following
recommendations. With regard to predeployment
verification, we propose that the United Nations
consider establishing technical training teams that
will provide workshops for the peacekeeping training
institutions of the troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
and police-contributing countries (PCCs) to assist them
in translating United Nations doctrine with a view to
improving field training, as well as identifying and
correcting capacity gaps, during the preparation of
forces prior to deployment. Furthermore, TCCs and
PCCs must analyse the scope of intervention operations
as they relate to the security landscape in the theatre
of conflict. That will help guide the development of
scenarios for military units and form a baseline for
mission-specific training according to the real-time
situations that military units are deployed to.

The Secretariat should further expand the reach
and number of United Nations peacekeeping training
centres on the African continent, as well as in other
regions, which would supplement the activities of both
the Member States and the United Nations in building
peacekeepers' capacities and training them. Lastly,
consideration should be given to standardizing the
peacekeeping doctrine between the United Nations and
regional peacekeeping training institutions, with a view
to developing a common doctrine on peacekeeping.
We believe that these recommendations can contribute
to improving the training and capacity needs of
our peacekeepers.

