Judge Joensen: I would like to begin by extending
my sincere congratulations to the representative of the
Russian Federation presiding over the Security Council
in June. I would also like to thank and congratulate
the representative of Chile on assuming the role of
Chair of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. I wish both of them successful tours of duty.
I would also like to take this opportunity to renew
my thanks to the Office of the Legal Counsel for its
continued work over the past six months as a very able
and neutral interlocutor between the Tribunals and the
Security Council.

It is as always a great honour to address the
members of the Council and present it with a current
update on the progress being made towards completion
of the work of the International Criminal tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). I wish to express the gratitude of the
entire Tribunal to all Governments represented on the
Council for their continued support as we approach the
conclusion of two decades ofjudicial work.

I am happy to report that the Tribunal's judicial
workload, which or some time has been only in the
Appeals Chamber, remains on schedule since my last
report (S/2013/663) in December 2013. The Appeals
Chamber has delivered two judgements concerning four
persons and heard appeals in three cases concerning
four persons during the six months since the last report.
Appellate proceedings have now been concluded with
respect to 50 persons, and the Appeals Chamber is
expected to render a judgement on the sole remaining
accused in the Ndindiliyimana et al. ("Military II")
case in June, while three other appeal judgements
concerning four persons are projected to be delivered
in September. This leaves only the Nyiramasuhuko et
al. ("Butare") case, concerning six persons, in which
the appeal is still scheduled to be heard before the
end of 2014, with the judgement still not projected for
completion before the end of July 2015.

As I have previously reported, the projected delivery
of the appeal judgement in the Butare case reflects the
delays in the briefing schedule, the fact that the scope
ofthe appeals in this case has expanded since the initial
notices of appeal, and the voluminous and complex
pre-appeal litigation. I remain in contact with the
Presiding Judge on the Butare appeal, and I am happy
to report that the allocation of additional resources to
this case has helped to prevent the additional delays that
could potentially have occurred due to the continued
volume of pre-appeal litigation. The Registrar and I
continue to work closely with the Presiding Judge on
Butare to try to ensure that the judgement in our final
case will be delivered without any further delays.

I feel it is incumbent on me at this time to bring
to the Council's attention, as I have in the past, the
tireless work and dedication of the appeals judges and
support staff of the Appeals Chamber, who have once
again worked during this reporting period to very tight
deadlines to ensure that the Tribunal's work remains on
schedule. As the Council is well aware, however, the
Tribunal is more than just its judicial component, and
I would therefore be remiss ifI did not also thank all
the current and former ICTR staff outside the judicial
teams. Their contributions to international justice have
helped us reach the stage we are at today and will not

soon be forgotten. As we look back on almost 20 years
of work, it is Clear that the staff of the Tribunal, some
of whom have committed large parts of their working
lives to it, represent a significant part of the ICTR's
legacy and what it will leave for posterity.

I now turn to the issue of relocating the acquitted
and convicted released persons still residing in
Arusha. I note that during the reporting period, the
number of acquitted persons increased from seven to
nine, following the acquittal of two individuals in the
Ndindiliyimana et al. case in February, and the number
of convicted released persons rose from two to three,
following the release of Innocent Sagahutu after we
filed our written report (see S/2014/343) on 5 May.
Mr. Sagahutu was released following a reduction in his
sentence by the Appeals Chamber in February and was
eligible for consideration for early release, which was
granted on 9 May.

The issue of relocating the now 12 individuals
currently residing in Arusha has been brought to the
Council's attention on numerous occasions and is an
issue that I continue to believe represents a serious
challenge to the credibility of the enforcement of
international criminal justice. Despite numerous
Security Council resolutions calling upon Member
States to assist the ICTR in its relocation efforts, all
attempts made by the ICTR to relocate the remaining
individuals have proven unsuccessful.

Since the last report to the Council (S/2013/460),
and consistent with the framework of the strategic
plan submitted to the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals in the past year, the Registrar
and I met with representatives from European countries.
The Registrar also visited countries in Africa and held
discussions with the African Group and the Chair of the
African Union Commission in Addis Ababa to present
the idea of the relocation of one or more acquitted or
released persons. Unfortunately, as more time passes
without positive results, it becomes less likely that
those individuals will be relocated before the ICTR
closes, and, as such, the Tribunal must once again call
for urgent assistance from the Security Council to find
a sustainable solution to the issue.

I will now update the members of the Council
on the progress regarding the issue of reparations for
victims of the genocide. I am pleased to announce that,
following a request from victims' associations and initial
discussions between my Office and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), which I explained
in my last report to the Council (S/2013/460), IOM. has
secured funding through a generous donation by the
Government of Finland to undertake an assessment
study on how the issue of victims' reparations could
be taken forward. In February, the IOM. and my
Office held very promising initial meetings with
key stakeholders in Rwanda, including the Rwandan
Government, victims and survivors associations and
civil society. Further consultations and preparations
for the next stage of the project are expected to begin
shortly, following the conclusion last week of a formal
memorandum of understanding between the IOM. and
the Rwandan Government.

I will now provide the Council with an overview
of the progress that has been made with respect to the
transition to the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010).
During the reporting period, the administration of
the monitoring of all ICTR cases referred to national
jurisdictions became fully the responsibility of the
Mechanism. However, ICTR staff members continue
to assist the Mechanism as interim monitors, pending
the finalization of the Mechanism's arrangements with
an international organization or body to monitor all
referred cases.

In accordance with article 27 of the Rome Statute,
the Mechanism is responsible for the management of
the archives for both Tribunals. The ICTR continues
to work in close cooperation with the Mechanism to
ensure that the records are prepared in a manner that
will facilitate effective management by the Mechanism
after the transfer. I am happy to report that, as of 5 May,
the Tribunal has transferred to the Mechanism a total of
approximately 630 linear metres of records with long-
term to permanent retention value, out of an estimated
total of 2,621 linear metres of records that are being
appraised for transfer by the end of the ICTR mandate.
After a great deal of work done on assessing records in
the past six months, additional records will be ready for
transfer to the Mechanism during the coming months.
However, records still in active use, including records
related to the Butare case, will remain the responsibility
of the ICTR and will be transferred only once they are
no longer in use. The Tribunal remains hopeful that the
preparation and transfer ofits records will be completed
prior to its closure.

I will conclude by recalling that, since April,
Rwanda has been marking the twentieth anniversary
commemoration and honouring the victims of the 1994

genocide. Overwhelmingly, the Victims of the atrocities
in 1994 were Tutsi, against whom the ICTR has stated,
as a fact of common knowledge beyond dispute, that
a genocide was committed. But they were also Twa,
moderate Hutu and others who stood in opposition
to the genocidal campaign, all of whom suffered the
same tragic fate as their Tutsi brothers and sisters. Very
fitting efforts to honour the victims of the genocide
have already taken place, and further efforts are being
planned to continue the commemoration for all victims
of the genocide.

In April, representatives from the ICTR, including
myself, the Prosecutor and the Registrar, participated
in commemorative events in Kigali, Arusha and Dar es
Salaam. Those events very fittingly reminded the world
of those 100 dark days that took the lives of more than
800,000 people and ofthe resiliency ofa country whose
determination to rebuild a society after unspeakable
devastation represents a monumental achievement that
will not soon be forgotten.

Rwanda's achievements over the past 20 years are
quite impressive, including the creation of a stable
and functioning Government, whose commitment
to national reconciliation and the strengthening of
the rule of law can be seen in, as one example, its
vigorous efforts to rebuild its justice system. The
development of Rwanda's judicial system, including
holding accountable those who participated in the
atrocities in 1994, remains a crucial part of the peace
and reconciliation process in Rwanda, and there can be
no question that the ICTR has played an important role
as an accountability mechanism.

It is a testament to Rwanda's dedication to
accountability that, as the Tribunal's mandate draws
near to a close, Rwanda is currently in the process of
trying two cases referred to it by the ICTR and has taken
over responsibility for six of the remaining fugitives.
As Rwanda and other countries continue to work to hold
those responsible for international crimes accountable,
it is clear that the jurisprudential legacy of the ICTR
will live on until, as Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
appropriately put it, "genocide is consigned, once and
for all, to history". The Secretary-General's message
was delivered by Bongani Majola, ICTR Registrar, in
Arusha at the 10 April commemoration (SG/SM/15763).

As we look ahead, it is also important to note
that 8 November 2014 will mark 20 years since the
Council saw fit, initially at the request of Rwanda,
to create an international tribunal. We hope that the
international community will use the occasion as an
opportunity to mark Rwanda's achievements, as well
as to further study the lessons learned from what was
only an experiment in international justice in 1994.
The great experiment has faced some adversity over
the years, but it has also proven to be an integral part
of the evolution of post-conflict justice. We plan to
recall all of the Tribunal's achievements and challenges
through a series of international events surrounding
the 8 November anniversary. We sincerely hope that
the international community will fully engage in and
support those efforts.

It has been my distinct honour to address the
Council once more, and on behalf of the Tribunal, I
wish to express our gratitude for the support that the
States Members of the United Nations have shown us
throughout the past two decades. Continued assistance
from Member States is crucial to the efforts that we are
making to ensure that the Tribunal can close its doors
with its mandate completed and its legacy secured.

