Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, former Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and thank him for
presenting the Commission's report (S/2015/174). We
praise the work that Brazil has been doing for some time
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration and all of
the efforts that have been made to ensure a meaningful
process of peace consolidation in that brother country.
We also welcome and thank Ambassador Olof Skoog,
the Commission's current Chair.

The Peacebuilding Commission has scored
undeniable successes in countries on its agenda.
However, we recognize that much remains to be done
and that further efforts will be needed to maintain post-
conflict gains in some of those countries.
The issue under consideration in today's meeting
is critical to ensuring lasting and sustainable peace in
countries emerging from conflict. Last year, the United
Nations peacebuilding framework deployed substantial
resources in support of countries to help them move
towards peace consolidation and to strengthen the nexus
between security and development. The Peacebuilding
Commission pursues its activities based on advocacy,
mobilizing resources, strengthening partnerships,
forging coherence in policy development and ensuring
national ownership of the peacebuilding processes.
Additionally, the Commission must strengthen its
advisory function with regard to the Security Council
and the General Assembly and make its actions more
coordinated and incisive.

The Peacebuilding Commission plays a mediating
role between the United Nations and the international
community by helping countries in post-conflict
situations build their national institutions, strengthen
social cohesion and carry out structural, social and
economic reforms. The Commission also plays a
crucial role in helping them to overcome outstanding
challenges. In that regard, we mention the Commission's
outstanding intervention in assisting Liberia, Guinea
and Sierra Leone, the three West African countries
most affected by the Ebola outbreak.

With regard to mobilizing resources, the
Commission plays a crucial role in assisting in the
consolidation of peace and stability. In the case
of Guinea-Bissau, for example, it is helping the
Government to implement its priority agenda. It also
contributed to holding a donor conference for Guinea-
Bissau, which took place in March in Brussels with
remarkable success. That conference was an example
of how the Peacebuilding Commission can strengthen
partnerships by playing a key role in bringing together
the international community, regional organizations,
financial institutions and Member States to address the
needs and concerns of the countries on its agenda.

We welcome the Commission's efforts to involve
women in peacebuilding processes and to empower and
include them in all peacebuilding efforts. Overlooking
the contribution of women and the crucial role they
can play in peacebuilding and social and economic
development is a mistake and a recipe for failure.
Women, youth and civil society organizations are
powerful driving forces in peace consolidation
processes and in social development in general. The
review of resolution 1325 (2000) is an opportunity to
take stock of that reality.

As has already been said, the Peacebuilding
Commission must strengthen its advisory role with
regard to the Security Council and the General Assembly
on issues pertaining to post-conflict countries. For
instance, in countries with ongoing demobilization,
disarmament, reintegration (DDR) and security-sector
reform programmes, the Commission must provide
pertinent information to the Security Council on the
implementation and follow-up of such programmes in
order to ensure that ex-combatants are not excluded and
to create the best possible conditions for their better
integration into civilian life, which is a crucial element
in the peace consolidation process.

In countries where the Security Council intends
to terminate, draw down or reduce the personnel of a
peacekeeping mission, the Peacebuilding Commission
must draw the attention of the United Nations and the
Security Council to the appropriateness of such moves.
The peacekeeping operations review takes into account
that fundamental element in strengthening the advisory
role of the Commission.

We would like to share Angola's experience as a
post-conflict country and to offer some Views on aspects
that we consider essential to a successful peacebuilding
process.

In political terms, in taking into account the
principal of national ownership, peacebuilding demands
trust and good faith on the part of the main stakeholders
and requires that they work to achieve genuine national
reconciliation. In Angola, the peace and reconstruction
process required, first, the extension of the State's
authority to the whole country, institution-building,
respect for human rights and the rule of law.

Social and political inclusion is a fundamental
feature of any peacebuilding process. The efforts
deployed by the Angolan authorities to reach out to
former adversaries and integrate them into society
are well documented, as is the restoration of State
institutions and economic life in general. That was a
determining factor in the success of our peace, national
reconciliation and reconstruction process. Furthermore,
the full participation of political actors, women, young
people, civil society and the media in the national
debate led to the adoption of constitutional and legal
mechanisms associated with peacebuilding.
In social and economic terms, peacebuilding
required the reconstruction of all the infrastructure
destroyed by the war and especially the restoration
of basic services to the population - roads, bridges,
railroads, airports, ports, schools and hospitals. The
success of the disarmament, demobilization and social
reintegration of more than 100,000 members of the
military was pivotal to the consolidation of peace, which
laid the foundations for sound social and economic
recovery. A lot still remains to be done in social and
economic development, social democratization and
inclusion, but we can say that in general the country is
on the right track.

We fully support the review of the peacebuilding
architecture, adapting peacebuilding to the dynamics of
the situation in each post-conflict country and working
more closely with the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the United Nations system and regional and
subregional organizations in preventing relapses into
conflict and working in coordination with regional
organizations to consolidate peace and stability. The
review of the peacebuilding architecture offers a unique
opportunity for a clearer definition of the partnership to
be established with the African Union and the African
subregional organizations. However, the debate that has
been going on for quite some time in the African Union
has not yielded tangible results, a shortcoming that
we hope the present review will address. In addition,
we expect that this year's review of peacekeeping
operations will afford a better understanding of the
related challenges and insufficiencies and lead to the
formulation of recommendations for rendering the
cooperation between the peacebuilding architecture
and the peacebuilding operations more effective.

Finally, we are of the View that the Security
Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and regional
organizations should establish a more complementary
and tangible partnership in securing peace and security
in the world by strengthening the nexus between
security and development.

