Mr. Palous (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Montenegro, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia align themselves with this statement.

Let me start by welcoming the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko in his capacity of High
Representative and Special Representative of the
European Union and thanking him for his report (see S/2009/246) and briefing on the latest developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would also like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Since the signing of the Stabilisation and
Association Agreement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the European Union a year ago, some
progress has been made by Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The European Union welcomes the adoption of an
amendment to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution providing Brcko District with access to
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court.
Further reform priorities, such as the National Justice
Sector Reform Strategy, continue to be implemented.
The National War Crimes Strategy was adopted in
December 2008. The European Union also welcomes
the provisional agreement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). We hope that the conditions set by the IMF will
be implemented in a constructive manner and without
delay, and that Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities
will take all necessary and effective measures to
counter the repercussions of the global economic and
financial crisis.

Despite some positive developments, many
challenges remain. Nationalist, anti-Dayton rhetoric
challenging the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina
undermines efforts of its political leaders to find
common language and compromise. State institutions
have made inadequate progress in relation to European
Union reforms. Therefore, we call upon local political
leaders to engage thoroughly and with stronger
determination on the reform agenda in order for the
country to make substantial progress towards EU
accession. Membership in the EU of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a single and integral State remains the
ultimate goal, which will serve the stability,
reconciliation and the future not only of that country,
but also of the whole region of the Western Balkans.

The European Union fully supports and is ready
for the transition from the Office of the High
Representative to the reinforced Office of the EU
Special Representative, which includes increasing local
ownership after the five objectives and two conditions
set by the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board are met in full. We urge the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities to maximize efforts to deliver
the remaining objectives - the acceptable and
sustainable solution to the state and defence property
issues 4 and to achieve full compliance with the
second condition: a positive assessment of the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina based on full compliance
with the Dayton Peace Agreement.

We also consider the full cooperation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to be a priority, as
well as an important element in the country's
association process with the European Union, in line
with international law and relevant Security Council
resolutions.

The European Union is actively involved in
promoting stability in the whole Western Balkans
region. The security situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains stable. EU-led police and
military missions continue to provide reassurance and
play an important stabilization role in the country.

The European Union remains committed to
assisting Bosnia and Herzegovina to reach its ultimate
goal of full integration into European structures. We
fully support the work of the High Representative and
EU Special Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko, and his
Office - and of Mr. Miroslav Lajcak before him - in
their endeavours to help Bosnia and Herzegovina on
the path towards European Union integration.

