Ms. Mushikiwabo (Rwanda): I would like to
commend the President of the Council for convening
this important debate on the protection of civilians
and for the draft presidential statement which will be
adopted today. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his informative briefing, as well as High Commissioner
for Human Rights Pillay and Mr. Spoerri for their
valued contributions and briefings this morning.

The protection of civilians is a very personal issue
for my country, Rwanda. In 1994, a genocide claimed
the lives of nearly 1 million Rwandans. Rwandans
wince in sympathy when they see images of civilians
under threat elsewhere in the world today.

My country's core message today is that enhancing
the protection of civilians in armed conflict requires
action before the conflict starts. The proliferation of
non-State armed groups makes civilian protection both
more urgent and harder to achieve. In particular, I wish
to emphasize the importance of increasing investments
in the professionalization of military and police forces,
especially adequate training in the protection of
civilians. Only when the leadership of armed forces
shares the international community's preoccupation
with civilian protection will we see decisive progress
made.

As a result of the experience of Rwanda, we feel a
moral obligation to participate as vigorously as possible
in activities, such as United Nations peacekeeping
operations, that increase protection for civilians
in armed conflict. We also take very seriously all
efforts, such as that in which we are engaged today, to
strengthen international norms to reduce tolerance for
such crimes.

In that regard, I would like to begin my remarks
on a note of optimism. Significant progress has indeed
been made in the evolution of international norms since
the genocide in my country 19 years ago. Normative
progress is slow, built year by year and resolution by
resolution, almost imperceptibly. It can sometimes
seem like we are just repeating ourselves, but the
cumulative effect is dramatic. Each year, the consensus
grows stronger that the protection of civilians and the
prevention of crimes, ethnic cleansing, and crimes
against humanity are a fundamental duty of each State,
as well as a legitimate and necessary focus of collective
action in the international system.

The impetus to rethink international norms
comes in large part from the effort to comprehend
what happened in conflicts such as the tragedy of
Rwanda in 1994. The world's response to crimes has
been to withdraw international forces, particularly
in my country 19 years ago, and in some cases to
refuse outright to provide protection. Yet I believe
that the course of action adopted by the international
community in 1994 and the concepts used to justify it
would not be acceptable today - hence, my optimism.
Rwanda would be pleased ifthe end result of the process
of introspection were to be a world that is much more
resistant to crimes and mass atrocities. And if we keep
working together, I believe that we can get there.

Evidence that progress is possible should encourage
us to redouble our efforts, yet we must not neglect the
urgent challenges that confront us at this very moment.
Civilians are at serious risk today in Syria, the Sudan,
South Sudan, Mali and the Democratic Republic
of Congo - right in our neighbourhood - and the
Council is likely to face new situations of armed
conflict in the months and years ahead. My country's
experience explains why we are proud to co-chair,
together with the Netherlands, the Group of Friends on
the Protection of Civilians. Indeed, I would like to take
this opportunity to connect our debate on the protection
of civilians more concretely to the evolving norm of the
responsibility to protect.

Two features of that norm - prevention and the
danger of incitement, as set out in paragraph 138 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) - have not been emphasized often
enough. I believe that the best way to enhance the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts is to move
from a mindset of conflict management to one of
prevention. Moreover, individual States and United
Nations peacekeeping missions must become more
sensitive to often subtle forms of incitement that lay the
groundwork for crimes against humanity, and work to
curtail it before it is too late.

I would like to address two further aspects of the
core challenges identified by the Secretary-General
in his 2009 report (S/2009/277) - first, enhancing
the implementation of protection mandates by United
Nations peacekeeping missions, and secondly,
enhancing accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.

On peacekeeping, my country Rwanda welcomes
the continued development of strategies to protect
civilians and operational baselines through the guidance
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
Rwanda currently contributes to seven United Nations
peacekeeping missions. In line with the lessons we
learned about rebuilding after the genocide, we do not
approach peacekeeping as an exclusively military task.
We believe that early peacebuilding is critical to the
success of missions, and that adequate resources should
be directed to complement uniformed personnel as they
fulfil their mandate to protect civilians.

Effective measures need be neither costly
nor controversial. For example, within their areas
of patrol with the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, Rwandan peacekeepers
have introduced an energy-efficient stove that was
developed in Rwanda back in the year 2000 to protect
the environment. Because the stoves use less firewood,
women and children do not have to venture as far to
collect wood, thereby reducing the risk of brutal attacks
and rape that often accompany their search.

Another example is increasing the number of
trained female peacekeepers. Female peacekeepers
are often better able to intervene in specific situations
concerning women and children, particularly in
specific cultural contexts. Rwanda is a leading
contributor of female police officers to United Nations
peacekeeping missions, and we have seen these officers
combat gender-based violence and raise awareness in
the communities they serve in ways that have made
peacekeepers better able to do so.

Ensuring that all necessary capabilities are
deployed in support of peacekeepers is critical to their
ability to protect civilian populations. In late 2012,
Rwanda contributed military utility helicopters to
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan , extending the Mission's area of influence and
contributing to a safer environment for civilians.

We also support calls for peacekeeping missions
to work with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to preserve the civilian and humanitarian
character of refugee camps.

On accountability for crimes against civilians, I
wish to emphasize four important points. First, justice
must be timely. Nearly two decades after the genocide
in my country, the international judicial process
has yet to conclude. Secondly, rendering justice to
victims should be the only objective of accountability
mechanisms, keeping political considerations out
of the process. Justice should not be and cannot be
selective or used for political expediency. Thirdly,
more careful attention should be paid to the principle
of subsidiarity when choosing the most appropriate
venue for judicial proceedings. Justice is best rendered
at home. Fourthly, and related to subsidiarity, is that the
international community should increase investment in
strengthening national judicial capacities, which is the
best way to make justice relevant to local communities
and sustainable.

I conclude by once again restating Rwanda's firm
commitment to enhancing the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and we express gratitude to the women
and men protecting those in need, especially on our
continent, as well as those who have laid down their
lives in the name of international peace and security.

