The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia.

We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2379 (2017), on ensuring the accountability ofmembers
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/
Da'esh for their crimes in Iraq, including those that may
amount to crimes against humanity. We would like to
thank the penholder, the United Kingdom, for all its
efforts on this text.

The adoption of this resolution today is indeed
an appropriate response to the request made by the
Iraqi Government calling for the assistance of the
international community to ensure accountability
for members of Da'esh and the crimes that they have
committed. We would like to take this opportunity
to express appreciation to the Government of Iraq for
all its efforts in that regard. The presence today of the
Foreign Minister of Iraq demonstrates the importance
that his Government attaches to this matter.

Without any doubt, ISIL/Da'esh continues to pose
a global threat to international peace and security, and
that does not require lengthy explanations. It is self-
evident. Through the commission of acts involving
murder, kidnapping, hostage-taking, suicide bombings
and the destruction of cultural heritage, Da'esh has
committed very serious crimes that may amount to
war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide. We
will never forget the loss of our Ethiopian compatriots
who were mercilessly massacred by ISIL in Libya, and
that is why we supported this resolution, which aims
to hold members of ISIL/Da'esh accountable for the
crimes committed in Iraq. Its resolution is indeed very
significant not only in its role to address the plight ofthe
victims and serve justice, but also to assist significantly
in countering terrorism and violent extremism. The
proper collection and preservation of evidence related
to crimes that have been committed by ISIL/Da'esh is
indeed critical to ensuring accountability.

In that regard, we support the establishment of
an investigative team, headed by a special adviser, to
support Iraqi efforts through collecting and preserving
evidence of acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide committed by ISIL/
Da'esh in Iraq. We therefore believe that should be
done with full respect for the sovereignty of Iraq and its
jurisdiction over crimes committed in its territory. In the
light of the severity of the crimes committed by Da'esh
and the magnitude of the challenges that the country is
facing, Iraq will need the appropriate technical support
and capacity-building. We understand that it is in that
context that the resolution encourages Member States
and regional and intergovernmental organizations to
provide the appropriate legal assistance and capacity-
building to the Government of Iraq so as to strengthen
its courts andjudicial system.

Let me therefore conclude by expressing our full
support for efforts to ensure accountability for members
of ISIL/Da'esh for all the crimes they have committed
not only in Iraq, but also in other parts of the world.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq.

