Mr. Matussek (Germany): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf of the European Union (EU).
Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Albania, Montenegro and Serbia, Iceland
and Norway, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this declaration.

The EU welcomes this debate on the work of the
three Security Council committees dealing with various
aspects of counter-terrorism. We thank the Chairmen of
the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for their
informative briefings on the ongoing work.

Terrorism is a global threat that requires a global
and comprehensive response. In that regard, the United
Nations has a unique role to play. The 13 United
Nations conventions and protocols against terrorism,
together with Security Council resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), as well as other
relevant resolutions, provide the legal framework for
multilateral action. The EU continues to be committed
to reaching an agreement on a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism as soon as
possible. In September 2006, the General Assembly
and the States Members of the United Nations
demonstrated their unity and resolve in combating
terrorism by adopting the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288) by consensus. We believe that that
was an encouraging step towards unified United
Nations action.

The EU unequivocally condemns all acts of
terrorism as criminal. Terrorism can never be justified,
irrespective of its alleged motivations, objectives,
forms or manifestations. At the same time, we
underline that respect for international law,
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law is an essential element of effective and
legitimate action to counter terrorism. Our action must
be firmly based on due process and the rule of law.

We commend the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) for the considerable progress
made with regard to improving the effectiveness of the
Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions regime over the past few
months. In doing so, the Committee was effectively
supported by the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team.

The EU welcomes measures taken by the
Committee to improve the listing, notification and
delisting of individuals and entities, to keep the
consolidated list updated and to enhance public
outreach. Let me name just a few improvements. The
revised guidelines foresee the possibility of reviewing
on an annual basis all listings more than 4 years old.
Requests for listing have to be presented in a new
format ensuring clarity and consistency. The
notification of listed individuals and entities has been
speeded up. Individual requests for delisting may now
also be presented via the focal point established at the
Secretariat in March 2007.

The 1267 Committee has been the first of the
sanctions committees to include this new procedure
into its guidelines. The EU hopes that all the
Committees will follow that example as soon as
possible. Thus, sanctions regimes could be harmonized
with respect to the need to ensure that all individual
requests actually reach the Committee and are
thoroughly considered by its members. We would like
to point out that Member States may also declare that
they will refer all delisting requests from their
respective countries to the focal point.

The EU has always emphasized the need to
strengthen the fairness and clarity of procedures
regarding targeted sanctions in order to enhance their
effectiveness. Several EU member States have
contributed to that process. We note that tangible
progress has been achieved over the past months, in
particular in the 1267 Committee. The EU will observe
the implementation of the new guidelines and
procedures. In the light of that experience, other
challenges may be identified.

Let me add that the credibility and effectiveness
of United Nations sanctions regimes might also benefit
from greater harmonization of various procedures in
place. In that regard, the EU would draw attention to
the recommendations developed by the Security
Council's Informal Working Group on General Issues
of Sanctions. A one-day seminar held on 30 April and
sponsored by Greece highlighted those aspects.

The European Union welcomes the recently
published work programmes of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) (see S/2007/254, annex). They focus on monitoring and
promoting the implementation of resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005), as well as facilitating
technical assistance to States and maintaining a
constructive dialogue with them. The CTED's
programme also includes deadlines for the performance
of specific activities.

In that regard, the EU recalls the substantive
review of the work of the CTED undertaken by the
Council at the end of 2006. We are pleased to learn that
the recommendations contained in that review are now
being followed up. We have also noted that the CTED
recently conducted a number of successful country
visits and that it is developing a more tailored approach
to dialogue with the countries concerned.

On this occasion, the European Union would like
to commend Assistant Secretary-General Javier
Ruperez, Executive Director of the CTED, for his
valuable efforts in leading the setting up of the CTED
and its work until June 2007. The EU also notes that
the CTED's current mandate will expire at the end of
2007. The Counter-Terrorism Committee will have to
review the mandate in the second half of this year.

The EU strongly supports the work of the CTC
and the CTED to promote and monitor the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). Those resolutions set ambitious standards with
regard to international cooperation and the issue of
incitement to terrorism. However, implementing them
is and will remain, first and foremost, an obligation of
United Nations Member States.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery is a growing threat to
international peace and security. In that context, the
European Union fully acknowledges the relevance of
resolution 1540 (2004) as an important international
instrument to deal with that threat in an integrated and
comprehensive manner.

The EU remains determined to lend full support
to the 1540 Committee in its endeavour to implement
resolution 1540 (2004). That includes the provision of
assistance to States in preparing and submitting
national reports.

Let me mention at this point the EU's own
strategy against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, which is one of the pillars of the EU's
non-proliferation policy and which contributes to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). It includes,
among other things, a programme of assistance to
States in need of technical knowledge in the field of
export control, thus reinforcing the efforts by the 1540
Committee.

I would also like to draw attention to some specific
measures undertaken lately by the European Union in this
context. In 2006, the EU and member States held a
number of seminars providing export control training and
assistance to States in need of technical knowledge. In
addition, cooperation and assistance programmes under
the 2005 pilot project programme of the European
Commission were advanced in several countries. Finally,

the EU co-sponsored and, together with the Office for
Disarmament Affairs, co-financed three regional seminars
through a joint action of all EU member States to support
regional implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In
giving assistance to the implementation of the resolution
in third countries, the EU will continue to cooperate and
coordinate closely with the 1540 Committee and the
Governments involved.

Today's debate is an opportunity to look
ahead, beyond the second implementation phase of
resolution 1540 (2004), which ends in April 2008.
Developing a step-by-step approach consisting of
concrete measures that will lead to its fully fledged
implementation might be a promising prospect. Here,
the 1540 Committee will have a coordinating role.

To conclude, I would like to thank the Chairmen
of the three committees for their dedicated work. We
believe that presenting their work in an open debate at
the Security Council can only strengthen the
transparency and legitimacy of the Security Council's
efforts in the field of counter-terrorism and the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The
EU will continue to support the implementation of the
resolutions concerned.

