Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Mr. President, my delegation
expresses its appreciation to you for convening this open
meeting of the Council for the purpose of listening to His
Excellency President Chiluba on a subject of great
importance to Members of the Organization. Malaysia
considers the holding of such open meetings of the Council
an important contribution to the process of openness and
transparency in the work of the Council and as a welcome
step in the process of increased consultation on the part of
the Council.

My delegation would also like to express its deep
thanks and appreciation to President Chiluba for his
comprehensive briefing on the question of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and to convey to him our strong
and continued support for his tireless efforts to find a
peaceful resolution to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Malaysia considers the Lusaka
agreement, or the Lusaka process, as critical and crucial for
the restoration of peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - indeed, in the entire Central
African region. Malaysia reiterates its support for the
signing of the ceasefire agreement among the various
parties to the conflict. We hope that with the adoption of
resolution 1258 (1999) there will be an early deployment of
the 90 military and civilian United Nations personnel in the
region. We look forward to further progress in the process
of setting up a United Nations peacekeeping mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo during the next phase,
based, of course, on the recommendations of the

Secretary-General - a mission that would have an

appropriate mandate, with adequate numbers, and one that

could be set up expeditiously, as in other conflict areas.

We have listened very carefully and attentively to
President Chiluba, particularly to the six points he has just
outlined. We trust that these will be considered by the
Council with the seriousness that they clearly deserve.

To conclude, I should like to ask President Chiluba
whether or not he is optimistic that it is possible or
realistic to demobilize and disarm the Interahamwe in the
given period of six months, in view of the general
expectation that the task of their dismantling and
demobilization will prove to be extremely difficult.

