Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Today
Chile voted in favour of this resolution, in order to
send a clear political message. We want to see full
compliance on Sudan's part with its commitments, and
we want to halt the humanitarian catastrophe in Darfur
pursuant to the obligations undertaken in resolution

1556 (2004) and in the joint communique with the
Secretary-General of 3 July. While we duly appreciate
the fact that the Government of Sudan has cooperated
by complying with some of its promises, as stated in
the resolution, those relating to the disarmament of the
Janjaweed militia, the protection of the civilian
population and bringing to trial those responsible for
humanitarian crimes regrettably remain unfulfilled.

At the same time, this resolution gives firm
backing to the work of the African Union, both its
efforts in facilitating a political agreement between the
Government and the rebel groups and the role of the
African Union mission. The mission is going to be
extended and expanded, which is welcome and is
compatible with the regional approach favoured by this
Council.

Our message both to the Government of Sudan
and to the rebel groups is that we want to see peace in
the country, an end to the slaughter and punishment of
those responsible. Our country's intention is to see the
commitments fulfilled so as to save lives, and not to
apply sanctions. Sanctions in themselves have no
value. They are, rather, tools with which to achieve
higher purposes. We voted for a serious statement of
our purposes. The Council will consider further
measures only if those conditions are not fulfilled.

Lastly, the request that the Secretary-General set
up an international commission of inquiry into every
reported case of violations of international
humanitarian law seems to us to be essential and urgent
in order to establish the facts on the ground.

In short, this resolution is consistent with what
the Council has decided in the recent past, and we hope
that it will contribute to bringing about a speedy
solution to the humanitarian situation in Darfur.

