Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset, Sir, to join other speakers in congratulating
you, your country and your Permanent Representative to
the United Nations for organizing this meeting. Your
uninterrupted presence in this Chamber throughout this
debate, Mr. Prime Minister, shows more vividly than any

 

statement the depth of the commitment of the Netherlands
to the cause of development and peace in Africa.

I should also like to extend my thanks to the
Secretary-General for the excellent quality for his report,
which is an extremely useful assessment as we consider the
recommendations that were made in the April 1998 report
(S/1998/318).

We have also heard a very clear statement from the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU). I take this opportunity to thank him for his tireless
activity, to further the cause of Africa and for his efforts to
resolve the conflicts there.

We also listened carefully to the statement by the
representative of Algeria, the country that currently holds
the office of chairman of OAU. I believe that he gave us a
very full picture of the situation in Africa, both the bright
spots and the darker shadows.

Since the Security Council asked the Secretary-General
for a report on Africa and thereby demonstrated its
heightened interest in the future of that continent, criticism
of the Security Council have resurfaced about how its
degree of commitment to crises in Africa may not be the
same as in crises elsewhere. Certain comments have been
made on the differing levels of our commitment depending
on the region involved. This has been said quite forcefully
by many speakers; as the representative of Malaysia has
pointed out, however, our world is one and indivisible.

We must heed the criticism, of course. However, the
meeting we are holding today is indeed a welcome initiative
because it will without a doubt try to respond to these
justified comments, some of them critical and in any case
it will enable us to renew our resolve to be as objective and
impartial as we resolve to be when we met on the
suggestion of the Secretary-General two years ago.

The picture has not been as bleak since then as is
sometimes painted. The Secretary-General quite rightly
made this very point: it is not all negative. The Secretary-
General's report lets us see the areas where there have been
positive and encouraging developments. It also allows us to
see clearly the areas where much still remains to be done.
I shall not speak about the economic and social side
of the situation: the representative of Algeria this morning
painted a very accurate picture of it. I believe that the
information he gave us justification for what we already
take as given: we must keep on giving development
assistance. However dynamic some sectors may be, it is
still absolutely certain that assistance is still needed, and
as we have undertaken to do, we must make a sustained
effort to provide official development assistance.

Today, though, we are focusing on what has
happened since April 1998 in the area of conflict
prevention and settlement as well as maintenance of peace
and security, which are very directly within the Council's
remit. First of all, it is encouraging to see how vitally
alive the regional and subregional organizations in Africa
are. They have been encouraged to play a part and they
have done so. Often, the part they have played has been
a determining factor in settling conflicts. Let me just give
a few recent examples.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), thanks to the persistence and the
effectiveness of several of its leaders, and particularly its
Togolese presidency, achieved the Peace Agreement for
Sierra Leone which was signed in Lome on 7 July last.
We hope that it will be both definitive and lasting.

ECOWAS was also able to achieve the Peace
Agreement for Guinea-Bissau in Abuja on 1 November
1998. This was subsequently supplemented by an
additional protocol signed in Lome on 15 December that
year. Unfortunately, the commitments made were not
lived up to, and violence broke out again in May this
year.

Another regional organization that played a positive
role was the Southern African Development Community
(SADC). In particular, President of Zambia, Mr. Chiluba,
with a mandate from SADC, succeeded in negotiating a
peace agreement for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which was signed on 10 July this year in Lusaka
by the States concerned, subsequently by one party to the
rebellion and finally, on 31 August, by the Congolese
Rally for Democracy. The Agreement is certainly a
fragile one, but at least it offers a realistic chance of
peace, a chance we must not miss, a chance for arriving
at a settlement.

The Organization of African Unity as a whole has
become involved in seeking a solution to the conflict
which has pitted Ethiopia and Eritrea against each other
for one and a half years now. The peace plan it prepared,
thanks to the efforts of its secretariat and its Chairmen, is
now recognized by everyone as the only option, although
agreement has yet to be reached on the technical
arrangements for implementing it.

 

Finally, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development is continuing its efforts to find a way out of
the internal conflict which has been ripping Somalia apart
for too many years now.

This enhanced and often fruitful intervention by
regional organizations is commendable. It is what we urged
here two years ago. This is progress, but the part played by
the regional and subregional organizations of course outside
Africa does not release the United Nations and partners
from their responsibilities. Here again, the experience of the
past 18 months has shown that unless there is key support
from the international community, the progress achieved by
the Africans themselves is likely to be fragile.

For example, in Guinea-Bissau, the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) was unable to deploy early
enough or in sufficient numbers to carry out effectively the
tasks assigned to it by the Abuja Peace Agreement and the
Lorne protocol. France made a logistical and financial
contribution, but other material assistance would certainly
have been needed also. But the speed and scale of
deployment of peacekeeping forces are often the key to
success and to the solidity of a peace agreement,
particularly when, as in the case of Guinea-Bissau, the
atmosphere is very tense and fragile.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Lusaka
Peace Agreement provides for intervention by a United
Nations peacekeeping force. The initial stage has just
started with the deployment of military liaison officers. The
second stage will be to deploy military observers within the
country. Just now we have heard SADC members express
the hope that the Security Council will shoulder all its
responsibilities without delay. Certainly SADC members are
prepared to make an effort, and they are eager to do so; but
I think that they are right in asking for the entire
international community, through the United Nations, to do
its part. We must not disappoint these hopes that have been
fostered by the peace Agreement properly negotiated by the
countries of the region.

In Sierra Leone, the Lome Peace Agreement provides
for expanding the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL), in collaboration with the Economic
Community of West African States Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG). This would involve adapting UNOMSIL's
mandate and significantly increasing its resources. The
United Kingdom yesterday presented the Council with
certain proposals in this connection, and here again this is
a simple, concrete case in which we are called upon to act
in a manner that is consonant with our stated positions,
which are often quite general and sometimes lofty, but
which must be translated into action.

In the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic has been able to
preserve peace and security, protecting that country from
being infected by the fighting in the neighbouring
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Mission has also
been able to create a favourable climate so that the
legislative elections in late 1998 were able to take place
in conditions of peace and integrity - and we hope for
as much for the presidential election scheduled for this
month.

Once an agreement is reached between Ethiopia and
Eritrea, the United Nations will be asked to make a
contribution to the deployment of observers, as foreseen
in the OAU framework agreement.

Finally, where peace has been restored, the mission
of the United Nations is to stimulate and coordinate the
reconstruction of the economy and the rule of law. This
is, for example, the very useful role that the Secretary-
General's Representatives and the United Nations Offices
in Liberia and Guinea-Bissau are playing, and we believe
that the human and material resources of those
Representatives and Offices deserve to be increased.

At a time when there is, quite rightly, talk of the
need to strengthen African capacities for peacekeeping,
we should draw the lessons from how recent crises have
been handled. An African multinational force is viable
only if an African country is willing and able to act as the
lead nation - something like the part played and still
being played by Nigeria within ECOMOG in Sierra
Leone. And an African multinational force is viable only
if it has external logistic and financial support. It is in this
context that we have to consider the joint efforts of the
United States, the United Kingdom and France over the
last few months, under the joint auspices of the United
Nations and the OAU, to help interested African countries
strengthen their peacekeeping capacities. This is, I
believe, a good illustration of how cooperation among
various countries can provide concrete assistance to
development in Africa. Some of these countries, such as
France and the United Kingdom, have had particular
responsibilities in Africa, with all that has entailed in the
form of positive involvement, and also of aspects that at
times may have deserved further review.

If there is no regional solution that can establish a
multinational African force, as would seem to be the case

 
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, then the lesson
of past months and years is that the Security Council itself
must be ready to shoulder its responsibilities and to send a
United Nations peacekeeping force where it is needed to
ensure respect for a peace agreement. Here the problem is
quite simple. It is not just a question of speeches, but of
making contributions, in accordance with the rules of the
Organization, so that financial obligations can be fulfilled.

Of course, apart from these positive developments,
problems remain. Angola remains immersed in armed
confrontation, and unfortunately, it must be admitted that
for the moment the United Nations still has only a marginal
role there. Nonetheless, this tragic situation has led the
Security Council to think seriously, encouraged by the
Chairman of the relevant sanctions Committee, Ambassador
Fowler, about ways and means of ensuring real respect for
sanctions against UNITA, particularly with regard to the
arms embargo, in the spirit of resolution 1196 (1998).

As was emphasized in last week's debate, the
destabilizing effects of the circulation, accumulation and
sale of small arms and light weapons are particularly
devastating in Africa. In his report the Secretary-General
reviews public-awareness measures that have been taken,
but this is not enough; we have to act much more
concretely and vigorously, in the spirit of the appeals we
made in resolution 1209 (1998) and the presidential
statement of last 24 September.

Finally, in the shadows of several conflicts in Africa,
we often see illicit trafficking in precious materials -
diamonds in particular - and sometimes we also see large-
scale looting of the natural resources of a country by
foreign armies and armed groups, which in this way finance
their war efforts and buy weapons. Although it is clearly a
difficult challenge, any effort to combat this trafficking and
looting must be encouraged, not only by improving the
application of any existing sanctions that deal with such
trafficking, but also by trying to expose such incidents of
organized looting.

The Secretary-General was right to say at the end of
his report that "Afro-pessimism" is a dead end. Given the
crises and conflicts that are ripping the continent of Africa
apart, we need to show the political will to resolve
problems and to acquire the resources to do so. And we
need coherence between the general, lofty ideas that we
proclaim in debates such as today's and the decisions that
we must take on a case-by-case basis when we really try to
resolve a crisis. In this connection, it is good that, thanks to
you, Mr. President, we are having this debate, which allows
us to confront realities and to see what we are really
resolved to do at a time when the Security Council must
take very concrete action in Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to demonstrate - if
it is really serious - its commitment to peace in Africa.

