Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I express my thanks
to France and to you, Madam President, for having
arranged this meeting. I also thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for her briefing on this very
sobering occasion.

I join others in condemning, in the strongest
terms, today's attack on the United Nations convoy in
Benghazi. We send our deepest sympathy to the families
of the victims. The United Nations exists to help and
protect people. An attack against its representatives is
an attack on the international community at large. We
salute the work that the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) is doing in Libya.

At the same time, as the Assistant Secretary-
General said, scores of Libyans have also been injured.
I would like, therefore, through the representative
of Libyan, to convey my country's condolences and
sympathies to his country and to his people and to the
families and friends of the victims. It was an appalling
act, and we agree that it should be investigated and that
those behind it should be identified and held to account.
It was particularly cruel and did great disrespect to the
Libyan people to conduct such an attack on the Bid
Al-Adha holiday.

Until this moment, we all had very high hopes for
the truce that the Security Council and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General had called
for. We call on all the parties to ensure that the truce
takes place, that it holds and that the parties commit
to confidence-building measures. In that connection,
I want to reiterate our full support for the leadership
of Special Representative Ghassan Salame' and to
thank him for his efforts in securing this truce, which
I think we all know is badly needed. As the Assistant
Secretary-General said, among all of the sadness and
violence, it is a welcome step. We need to go further.
I agree with the representative of France that this is a
critical moment for the Libyan conflict. The parties
need to go beyond the truce to commit to a permanent
ceasefire and a return to political dialogue.

There can be no military solution to the conflict
in Libya. What do we mean by that? Well, first of all,
we salute the United Nations for not evacuating in the
face of all these dangers. I echo what the Assistant
Secretary-General said to the effect that the potential of
Libya cannot be unlocked while the violence continues.
What it means to have no military solution is that we
must all call in a unified voice for the truce to take
place and to be followed by a ceasefire. We need to
implement the arms embargo and call on all States to
do so. We need to hold to account groups that violate
our resolutions or do not support the United Nations-led
process, and we need to get back into international and
then local dialogue.

