Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would first of all like to welcome the President, the
Foreign Minister of Benin, a very friendly country,
who has come here to personally preside over today's
open debate. The Chinese delegation would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the issue
of children and armed conflict. We also thank
Ambassador Otunnu for his presentation.

Children are the future of the world, and they
represent humankind's hopes for tomorrow. However,
as the most vulnerable group, they are often adversely
affected by armed conflict. All countries and parties
have an obligation to try their best to protect children
from the harm of armed conflict. In recent years, the
United Nations adopted a series of measures to
promote the protection of children in armed conflict. It
has also achieved positive results in this area. The
Security Council has adopted a series of resolutions -
namely, resolutions 1261 (1999), 1314 (2000), 1379
(2001), 1460 (2003) and 1539 (2004) - that provide a
very important legal framework for the protection of
children.

Some United Nations peacekeeping operations
have also taken the protection of children very
seriously, including by appointing child protection
advisers and by assisting countries emerging from
conflict to give full consideration to the special needs
of children as part of their disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
In addition, some of the peace agreements that the
United Nations has promoted or participated in contain
provisions on the protection of children. And some of
the countries concerned have taken active steps to
provide legislative safeguards for the protection of
children. All of that has, to a certain degree, reduced
the harm that armed conflict causes children, and such
steps should be affirmed.

But despite that progress in the protection of
children in armed conflict, countless children continue
to suffer from the effects of such conflict. The situation
of encroachment upon children's rights by parties to
armed conflicts has not improved a great deal. The
international community must make sustained efforts
to truly change the situation. In that connection, we
agree that, in the context of the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
should intensify its efforts to prevent and curb conflicts
and actively address the root causes of the phenomenon
of child soldiers in order to achieve our goal of
protecting children.

The United Nations should collect its experience
in the area of protecting children during peacekeeping
operations and give it special treatment so that future
peacekeeping operations can benefit from that
experience.

At the same time, all parties to armed conflicts
should strive to meet their obligations under relevant
international law and to respect and safeguard the
legitimate rights of children. Post-conflict
reconstruction should solve the problem by prioritizing
the return of children to their families, schools and
communities and by providing sufficient resources to
that end.

We appreciate the fact that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
United Nations agencies are playing an active role in
protecting children in armed conflict. We agree that
coordination and cooperation between the United
Nations and the relevant regional organizations and
among United Nations agencies should be
strengthened. We must adopt an integrated strategy in
joining efforts to help countries in conflict to increase
their ability to protect children.

China will continue to work with the international
community in making its due contribution to the
protection of children.

