Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): First of all,
my delegation associates itself with the condolences
addressed to the families of the victims of the Kenya
Airways crash, which took place off of the coast of
Abidjan.

 

I would also like to hail the presence at this meeting
of President Chiluba and thank him for his important
statement. I also welcome Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, President
of the General Assembly, and Ms. Dlamini-Zuma, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa. They have
both made very enlightening statements.

I would also like, Mr. President, to reiterate to you
and to your delegation the appreciation of the delegation of
Mali for your initiative to devote, during the American
presidency of the Security Council in January 2000, the
highest priority to the consideration of issues related to
Africa.

The convening this month of open meetings of the
Security Council on the impact of HIV/AIDS on peace and
security in Africa, on the question of humanitarian
assistance to refugees in Africa, on the situations in Angola
and Burundi and on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has made it possible to assess the
magnitude of the challenges facing Africa. But above all
these meetings made clear the urgent need to make
determined and concerted efforts to meet those challenges.

The presence at those meetings of seven African heads
of State, of United States Vice-President Al Gore, of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity, as well as of
numerous ministers and other eminent individuals gave our
work during this "Month of Africa" a particular dimension
of which we must take full account.

Allow me here to make a few comments before
drawing a few conclusions.

Our deliberations during this "Month of Africa" were
useful, first of all because they provided a global View of
the problems affecting Africa and secondly because they
served as a call to action. Moreover, it is through such
means - that is, public debate - that issues are grasped
and specific measures devised to resolve them.

From that point of View, each of the public meetings
held this month reflected a specific dimension of Africa's
present challenges. The meeting devoted to the impact of
HIV-AIDS on peace and security in Africa made it possible
on the one hand to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the burden that the AIDS epidemic represents
for the development of Africa, and on the other hand to
plan for security in a broader context. The meeting on the
question of humanitarian assistance to refugees in Africa
dealt with one of the major challenges facing Africa today
and echoed the very strong appeal made to the Security
Council to respond by shouldering its responsibilities.

The meetings devoted to the consideration of the
situations in Angola, Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo illustrated that in those cases, as
in others, the primary responsibility for African problems
rests first and foremost with the Africans themselves.

Thus, faced with the AIDS epidemic, the African
countries must, as was emphasized by President Alpha
Oumar Konare in his message of 10 January 2000 to the
President of the Security Council, wage a campaign
through which the African leaders would shoulder their
share of responsibility. In Angola and Burundi, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Sierra Leone in
particular, it must be understood that lasting peace and
national reconciliation can be brought about only through
political dialogue.

Our deliberations throughout this "Month of Africa"
have made clear the hopes and expectations for greater
solidarity and support on the part of the international
community in continuing the efforts of the African
countries. Those hopes and expectations must, as we see
it, be based on an international partnership that is
reflected in specific actions.

Thus the international community must, as it is being
urged to do by President Konare, step up the global quest
to resolve the issue of AIDS, enhance prevention and
provide the necessary support for the millions of persons
affected by HIV and AIDS, in particular the men, women
and children of Africa.

In that same context, and in keeping with the
demands made by Council members at the meeting held
on 10 January, high priority must be attached to the
follow-up measures advocated by the secretariat of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) in close cooperation with that body's
sponsoring organizations, the Member States and other
international partners. We believe also that there must be
an early implementation of the recommendation regarding
the convening, under the auspices of the Economic and
Social Council, of a partnership meeting with the
participation of the donor countries, the countries of
Africa, pharmaceutical industries and UNAIDS, in order
to facilitate access to medicines by those affected by
HIV/AIDS in the developing countries, in particular in
Africa.

 

We believe that it is also pivotal for the international
community to provide the bodies charged with providing
humanitarian assistance with sufficient financial resources,
taking into account Africa's considerable needs in this area.

The expansion of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and the rapid deployment of a
peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are two priority measures which the international
community must fully support. Subsequent resolutions
must, in my delegation's view, be adopted as quickly as
possible.

Stepped-up assistance for the Arusha peace process is
needed to support President Mandela's efforts as Facilitator
to achieving a peaceful solution to the conflict in Burundi.
The international community must also provide its full
support to Sir Ketumile Masire as facilitator of the inter-
Congolese dialogue.

As regards the situation in Angola, while reaffirming
the support of my delegation for the activities of the
sanctions Committee against UNITA under the leadership
of Ambassador Fowler, I would like to emphasize the need
to finalize, as soon as possible, formalities for the
implementation of the Status of Mission Agreement
regarding the United Nations Office in Angola, and the
official in charge must be appointed as quickly as possible.

What lessons can we learn at the end of this "month
of Africa"? The first is that our deliberations doubtless will
contribute to an intensified mobilization of the international
community to bring about the establishment of peace and
stability in Africa. This is why it is of the greatest
importance that appropriate follow-up mechanisms be
established. The Council must see to this. We hope that the
Argentine presidency will intensify this dynamic already
begun. Secondly, our deliberations have illustrated, it seems
to me, the complexity of African issues, in particular as
regards the consideration of the situation regarding the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The support of the
international community for holding an international
conference on peace, security and development in the Great
Lakes region under the aegis of the United Nations and the
OAU seems to us a timely initiative. Thirdly, it is clear that
Africa needs the United Nations, particularly to support its
regional initiatives, as is the case in Sierra Leone, or to
cope with the AIDS epidemic.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the American
presidency for having initiated this "month of Africa". I
warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, on your talent and
your personal efforts that have made it possible for the
Security Council, at each of these meetings, to reach
effective conclusions. I would also like to thank the other
Council members for their constructive participation in
these debates that are so important for Africa.

