Mr. Ozawa (Japan): My delegation would like to
express its gratitude to you, Madam, and to the
Security Council, for having provided us with an
opportunity to address the issue of children and armed
conflict. This debate comes at an opportune time, as
new post-conflict situations are emerging in Africa,
and as new actions - in the form of the creation of
political missions or peacekeeping operations - may
be taken by the Security Council.

Currently, a major newspaper in Japan is running
a series of feature articles on the real experiences of
child soldiers in Sierra Leone and Liberia,
accompanied by photographs showing them carrying
Kalashinikov rifles. For many of us living in peace, the
concept of child soldiers - 11-year-old girls and
10-year-old boys - is almost surreal, almost
incomprehensible. Yet those images are real. We need
to help, and we can do so more effectively once the
conflicts have ended.

Japan believes that the "Back to School"
campaigns run by the United Nations Children's Fund
are among the most important ongoing efforts to
rebuild societies in post-conflict situations. We are
proud to be supporting those programmes in
Afghanistan and, now, in Iraq. They help alleviate the
trauma of individual children who have endured so
much during armed conflict and give hope to their
communities for a better future. As a nation promoting
the concept of human security, Japan will continue to
work together with relevant United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes to promote the empowerment of
communities, with an emphasis on children and
women.

A number of international instruments exist that
aim to protect children in armed conflicts: I need
hardly mention the historic significance of the
comprehensive framework of the Geneva Convention.
The international community has striven to improve the
level of protection for children in armed conflict. Two
Protocols additional to the Geneva Convention - for
which we intend to obtain parliamentary approval this
year - include specific provisions concerning the
protection of children. The basic principle behind such
provisions evolved into the Rome Statute establishing
the International Criminal Court. The Rome Statute,
the establishment of which Japan consistently
supported, stipulates that the use of children as soldiers
in armed conflict is a war crime. In line with such
developments on the legal front concerning the
protection of children, Japan signed, in May 2002, the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, and we intend to obtain parliamentary
approval for its ratification this year. We sincerely hope
that other nations that have not yet ratified that
important instrument will do so soon.

My delegation would like to thank Mr. Olara
Otunnu, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, for the
exemplary work he has done over the past six years in
raising the awareness of the international community of
the issue of children and armed conflict. Child
protection advisers are now appointed to relevant
peacekeeping operations, and United Nations agencies
are now better prepared to deal with this issue.

At the same time, the issue of children and armed
conflict is becoming more and more complex. In order
to better tackle those complexities, a more
comprehensive approach and better collaboration
among United Nations agencies are necessary. In this
context, we welcomed the decision of the General
Assembly, at its fifty-seventh session, to request the
Secretary-General to undertake a comprehensive
assessment of the United Nations system response to
this issue. That report has yet to be submitted. We hope
that it will be issued in the near future and that it will
provide us with useful guidance in our discussions on
this issue.

We believe that on the issue of children and
armed conflict, the time has come for us to move from
advocacy to implementation.

