Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): The political and
security situation in the Middle East has rarely been
more dramatic. The worst possible humanitarian crisis
is unfolding there, and the most brutal and savage abuses
of human rights are being committed as conflicts flare
and radical extremists seek to strengthen their foothold
in the region. As the conflict in Syria enters its fifth
year, the situation in that country could not be more
dire. We have lost count of the dead, and the Syrian
Government continues to fail in its responsibility
to protect its own people, instead waging a war on
its own population, using barrel bombs, mortars,
shelling, torture and forced disappearances. While
the dismantling of Syria's declared chemical-weapons
programme is nearing completion, reports of repeated
chlorine attacks on civilians raise new concerns. The
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
should urgently investigate all such reports, and the
perpetrators must be brought to account, including
through referral to the International Criminal Court.

Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165
(2014) and 2191 (2014) remain largely unimplemented.
The lack ofhumanitarian access in Syria is devastating.
As we have discussed twice this month in Council
consultations, the situation of the Palestinian refugees
in the besieged camp of Yarmouk in Syria remains
horrific, and the suffering there defies description.
There are other besieged locations to which access
has been cut off for even longer periods of time, such
as Darayya, where United Nations aid last arrived in
October 2012. We can only imagine the situation there.
This already unbearable situation has been compounded
by the spread of Da'esh, whose extreme savagery has
shocked the world time and again.

The four long years of the Syrian crisis have put
the Council's credibility increasingly in question.
A political solution could not be more urgent or
imperative. Relaunching a political dialogue in line with
the Geneva communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) is paramount. The Council should stand united
behind the efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
to alleviate the suffering and plight of the Syrian people
and find a viable and inclusive political solution to the
crisis. Ensuring justice and accountability should be
an integral part of that process. The commission of
inquiry has suggested possible avenues to be followed
to make sure that all those who have committed serious
violations of human rights, crimes against humanity
and war crimes are brought to justice. The onus is on
the Council to act.

Hailed as a success story only a year ago, Yemen
is now on the brink. The Council must do everything
it can to prevent Yemen from falling into the abyss
of sectarian strife, civil war and fragmentation. We
welcome the adoption of resolution 2216 (2015), which
has imposed an arms embargo and expanded sanctions
measures against the spoilers and their associates. The
resolution also includes an important call to resume
and accelerate inclusive United Nations-brokered
negotiations. It is our firm beliefthat the United Nations
remains indispensable to efforts to bring Yemen back
on a track towards a peaceful transition.

In Iraq, political leaders, led by Prime Minister
Al Abadi, are working to promote national unity
and reconciliation. Those efforts are taking place in
the shadow of the deadly presence of Da'esh, which
has managed to grab large parts of Iraqi territory
and launch savage attacks on ethnic and religious
minorities, including torture, executions, enslavement,
gang rapes and child recruitment. Last year, the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria torched ll of 35 churches
and monasteries scattered around the city of Mosul,
destroyed the statues of poets and literary and historical
figures and dug up the grave of the prophet Jonah. In
March, Da'esh militants stormed several churches and
Christian graveyards, smashing hundreds of crosses
and headstones on Christian graves. Historic cities,
the monuments of Khorsabad, Nineveh, Nimrud and
Hatra, and Sufi shrines, all forming a precious and
irreplaceable part of the world's historical and cultural
heritage, have been destroyed. Unique artefacts are
being trafficked to finance criminal terrorist enterprise.

As they chase Da'esh out, the Iraqi people are now
discovering mass execution sites in areas liberated
from the terrorists and are mourning their loss. It must
be stressed, however, that the lingering grievances that
preceded Da'esh's onslaught should not be compounded
by new abuses directed at Sunni communities, which
would undercut the progress that the country so badly
needs. We take note of the Prime Minister's calls to
the Iraqi armed forces and Shia militias to refrain
from violence. Progress must be made in the areas
of genuine inclusiveness, reconciliation and just and
adequate revenue- and wealth-sharing. We also urge
the Government of Iraq to reaffirm its commitment to
international justice by acceding to the Rome Statute.

Moving on to the Middle East peace process, we
welcome the appointment of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov as
the Special Coordinator and Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General, as well as that ofthe new Special
Representative of the European Union, and wish them
all the best in their exceptionally important and difficult
tasks. The challenges are enormous, but the process
must move forward. Wait-and-see is not an option. There
can be no solution other than an immediate resumption
of peace negotiations aimed at reaching a final political
settlement based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles - including land
for peace - the road map, the agreements previously
reached by the parties and the Arab Peace Initiative,
leading to two democratic and sovereign States living
side by side within established borders, in peace and
security and mutual recognition. That is the only way
to address both the aspirations of the Palestinian people

to viable statehood and Israel's concerns about genuine
and lasting security. The current stalemate is not
sustainable, and it is explosive. Any unilateral action or
incident could lead to renewed and dangerous violence
that would close the remaining window of opportunity
for reaching a peaceful settlement of the conflict.

In Lebanon, multiple challenges collide. The
refugee burden is huge. The country's policy of
dissociation from the Syrian crisis must be maintained.
The presidential vacuum has lasted too long and must
be solved without further delay. The international
community should continue supporting the Lebanese
security and armed forces and helping the country to
manage the impact of the influx of Syrian refugees,
including the provision of essential services such
as education and health care. That is vital to the
preservation of Lebanon's stability and security. We
welcome the strong presidential statement on Lebanon
that the Council issued on 19 March (S/PRST/2015/7).
We call on all concerned to implement its provisions
and the relevant Council resolutions in full, including
by working to ensure stability along the Blue Line.

Finally, I would like to express our appreciation
for Jordan's tremendous efforts in tackling the Syrian
refugee crisis and maintaining a balancing, constructive
role in a highly volatile and fragile region.

