Mr. Grant (Canada): I would like to begin by
thanking the Permanent Mission of Australia for
convening this debate and for the presence earlier in
the day of Foreign Minister Bishop.

Canada and Australia enjoy a strong and
multifaceted relationship in many areas, including
counter-terrorism. Our two nations face similar
security challenges, and consequently our approaches
converge in many respects. The solidarity expressed
by Australian leaders following the recent attack in
Ottawa was reflective of our strong bilateral ties and
very much appreciated by the people of Canada.

These heinous and senseless attacks against
members of our armed forces remind us of the threat
posed by those who would commit violence in the name
of radical ideas, beliefs and motives. Such threats are
truly an international problem to which no country is
immune.

However, as tragic and shocking to Canadians as
those attacks were, Canada is still very fortunate. We
have largely been spared the scourge that has afflicted
some of our closest friends and allies. Let me reiterate
Canada's condemnation of the savage and cowardly
attack in Jerusalem yesterday, only the latest outrage
suffered by Israel, all the more abhorrent for having
cynically targeted civilians in a place of worship. It
is clear to us that the extremist actions of those who
perpetrated this attack are fuelled by incitement,
by the irresponsible rhetoric of those in positions of
responsibility.

I would also like to emphasize the waves of
violent extremism that have targeted the world's
largest democracy. Canada stands in solidarity with
India, and I recall my Government's condemnation
of the sophisticated, coordinated attacks that targeted
innocent civilians in Mumbai, six years ago next week,
an example that highlights how violent extremism can
become even more dangerous when abetted by the
capacities of a sovereign State.

I would also mention the challenge of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant that confronts us all today.
That group has ambitions to establish a terrorist State,
using the resources of a State to amplify its poisonous,
extremist message; turn naive and misguided recruits
into hardened terrorists; and export fighters to conduct
attacks around the world. In Iraq, we are confronting
extremism with military force, and Canada is proud to
stand with its allies against this global threat.

(spoke in French)

An effective response requires genuine
commitment and cooperation on all of our parts.
Canada's counter-terrorism strategy, "Building
resilience against terrorism", reflects the Government
of Canada's commitment to protecting Canadians
at home and abroad. The strategy emphasizes four
mutually reinforcing approaches to combating violent
extremism: prevent, detect, deny and respond.

Domestically, Canada's approach to countering
violent extremism is built around three mutually
supportive themes: building community capacity;
building law-enforcement capacity; and stopping
radicalization to violence through early intervention.

From a community perspective, our Government
supports family members, peers, religious and
community leaders, who are often best able to identify
and respond to the changes in attitude and behaviour
that can be precursors to violent extremist action. One
Canadian initiative which provides such support is the
Cross-Cultural Round Table on Security. The Round
Table brings together community leaders to exchange
views on emerging developments in national security
issues and their impact on Canada's diverse and
pluralistic society.

Canadian law-enforcement agencies utilize
community policing as an effective means to counter
violent extremism. That approach takes the view that
police officers should understand violent extremism as
well as they would any other type of criminal behavior.
To this end, the Government of Canada is enhancing
existing law-enforcement training on violent extremism,
most notably through the Royal Canadian Mounted
Police (RCMP) Counter-Terrorism Information Officer
initiative, which provides front-line police officers and
other first responders with critical training around the
warnings and indicators of violent extremism.

Early intervention in pre-criminal spaces is no
guarantee that a person will not radicalize to violence
or travel abroad to take part in terrorist activity. But as
a tool for redirecting potential violent extremists, it is a
useful approach to reducing the number of individuals
requiring investigation and prosecution.

(spoke in English)

Prevention techniques do not always succeed, and
once an individual crosses the threshold to actively
supporting terrorism, Canada takes action to detect and
deny such activity. The 2012 Combating Terrorism Act
created the new offences of leaving or attempting to
leave Canada for the purpose of committing terrorism-
related offences. The RCMP leads a High-risk Travel
Case Management Group that involves Government
departments and agencies working closely with law
enforcement. The Group examines cases of extremist
travellers to tailor the best response to the most pressing
cases. The responses have proven timely, effective
and accountable, and comply with the framework that
guides law enforcement and Government action. The
framework identifies a continuum of actions that may
be taken for several purposes - detecting extremist
travellers taking a leave, disrupting attempts to travel
for terrorism-related activities when they do occur, and
responding to extremist travellers' return to Canada
after participating in terrorism-related activities
abroad.

Cooperation with Canada's international allies is
also vital. Canada and the United States, for example,
have made significant strides to meet commitments
made under the Beyond the Border Action Plan. The
Action Plan committed both countries to establish and
coordinate entry-exit information systems at our land
borders and to work towards a similar system for air
travel. The information generated by this programme
will improve border management capacity, passenger
screening and the ability of law enforcement and national
security officials to conduct timely investigations into
extremist travel abroad.

Violent extremism is a long-term global challenge
that demands effective international cooperation.
In this regard, the United Nations plays a key role in
developing international standards and best practices.
Canada is committed to working with the United
Nations to implement the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and was pleased to participate in the biennial
review in June. Canada encourages Member States
to support multilateral counter-terrorism efforts and
urges United Nations entities to take a coordinated,
action-oriented and results-based approach to counter-
terrorism efforts. The value ofinternational cooperation
was well illustrated by the recent Security Council
debate on foreign fighters (see S/PV.7272), in which
Canada participated and was pleased to co-sponsor the
resultant resolution 2178 (2014).

Other multilateral forums such as the Global
Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) serve an important
role in complementing the work of the United Nations.
Canada is active in the GCTF working group on
countering violent extremism, where we lead a project
on measuring the effectiveness of countering violent
extremism programming. The Hedayah Centre, based
in the United Arab Emirates, also provides a key source
of knowledge and best practices related to this issue.

Canada is also pleased to chair the GCTF's Sahel
working group with Algeria. As Chair, Canada has
focused on organizing training and workshops that are
action-oriented and outcome-driven. The efforts of the
working group have contributed to the development of
best practices, a shared understanding of local threats
and the effective coordination of programming in the
region. Our experience in the Sahel reflects the ability
of the GCTF to mobilize and coordinate resources in
support of counter-terrorism capacity-building and
serves as a useful model for wider multilateral efforts.

Violent extremism is one of the greatest threats to
global peace and security. The international community
must work together to meet this challenge and
counter the appalling violence committed by terrorist
organizations. Canada will continue to work with our
partners to address violent extremism in all its forms.

