Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General DiCarlo for her briefing on the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1089) on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 2231
(2015), which endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA), on Iran's nuclear programme. We
also note the effective work carried out by Ambassador
van Oosterom, the Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands, in his capacity as Security Council
Facilitator for the implementation of the resolution.

We fully share the Secretary-General's assessment
in the report that the decision of the United States to
withdraw from the JCPOA and reimpose unilateral
sanctions on Iran constitutes a serious challenge that
does not contribute to the goals outlined in the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015). We join the Secretary-
General's general call to ensure the preservation of
a unique agreement of fundamental importance to
international and regional security. We agree with
the report's conclusion that issues not included in the
scope of the agreement should not serve as a reason for
dismantling it.

The Russian Federation has repeatedly warned
against attempts to torpedo the J CPOA and expressed the
hope that reason will prevail nonetheless and that issues
of global security and stability will no longer be held

hostage to domestic political processes. Unfortunately,
our calls have not been heard. We are now faced with
a paradoxical situation in which a Council member is
not only openly refusing to implement resolution 2231
(2015), which it had itself endorsed, it is also trying to
punish every other Member State for implementing the
decisions of the Council and the Joint Commission of
the JCPOA. Right now, the only way to preserve the
agreement is through the conscientious implementation
of their voluntary commitments by all its participating
States. In that context, we should point out that the
Secretary General's report presents clear evidence
of Iran's unconditional compliance with its JCPOA
obligations, which has been consistently confirmed
not only by the International Atomic Energy Agency
but also by the Secretariat, which, as the document
testifies, has no verified data to the contrary.

We are once again obliged to remind the Council
of the inadmissibility of any so-called investigations
by the Secretariat of possible violations of resolution
2231 (2015) without a clear mandate from the Security
Council. Let us leave aside the level of technical
expertise of the representatives of the Secretariat,
who on a basis of components and debris find it easy
to opine on the tactical and technical characteristics of
various types of missiles and hint at their Iranian origin.
Legitimate questions arise as to the mandate of those
specialists, the status of their visits and their authority
to draw far-reaching conclusions. The attempts to
use the authority of the United Nations to reinforce
various countries' unfounded accusations that Iran is
in violation of resolution 2231 (2105) are baffling. And
yet the Secretariat's representatives themselves admit
in the report that they were working exclusively with
information provided to them by third countries. Any
inspections or monitoring activities by the Secretariat
that have not been agreed to, whatever the reasons for
them, must end once and for all.

We continue to insist that the report should not
contain information from open sources or references
to unverified or deliberately unverifiable information
provided by individual countries, especially when it is
not brought to Council members" attention. We want
to once again draw the Secretariat's attention to the
fact that paragraph 7 of the note by the President dated
16 January 2016 (S/2016/44) provides for the preparation
of semi-annual reports on the implementation of
the resolution 2231 (2015) in its entirety, not its
individual parts.

Today we have heard a great deal about ballistic
missiles. We would like to remind the Council that
paragraph 3 of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015) only
calls on Iran not to undertake any activity related to
ballistic missiles designed to be capable of delivering
nuclear weapons. Rocket launchers generally are not
prohibited, and there is no evidence supporting the
possibility that they might have nuclear components.
The withdrawal of the United States from
the JCPOA has seriously damaged both the
nuclear-non-proliferation regime and security interests
in the Middle East as a whole. It is time to abandon
unilateral action. History shows that it is doomed to
failure. And contrariwise, when States genuinely unite
their efforts to counter regional challenges they can
achieve long-lasting results in terms of resolving crises
and stabilizing situations. We consider the JCPOA just
such an achievement. It has become a keystone of our
joint work in the region to create conditions conducive
to strengthening an overall atmosphere of trust. It has
given rise to hopes of progress towards the realization
of an important goal, the creation of a zone in the
Middle East free of weapons of mass destruction.

Russia supports the preservation of the JCPOA.
We urge for a rejection of efforts to artificially create
situations in which some Member States label the
Governments of others as rogues. Not only does that
not help to solve the region's many problems, it creates
many new ones. It is clear that if we are to reduce the
potential for crisis we must bring international and
regional efforts together, including in the framework of
effective, inclusive formats where the United Nations
and its Security Council play a central role.

With enviable predictability, many of our Council
colleagues are trying to use the format of today's
meeting to discuss Iran's so-called regional behaviour,
which is presented as being virtually the exclusive
source of all the Middle East's troubles. However, and
despite the fact that Iran is prepared for that dialogue,
they have produced no substantive proposals of any
kind in that regard. At times one gets the impression
that their only goal is to further intensify anti-Iranian
hysteria and Iran's demonization, which in fact serve
merely to aggravate the already difficult situation in
the Middle East.

The Russian Federation supports developing a
positive and unifying agenda on the Middle East for the
Security Council and the entire international community

that takes into account the legitimate interests of all the
States of the region, including Iran. The cornerstone of
our shared efforts in the region should be the creation
of conditions conducive to strengthening a general
atmosphere of trust. That is extremely important to the
relations between the Arab States, Israel and Iran. We
would like to remind members that in its resolution 598
(1988), the Security Council instructed the Secretary-
General to work with regional parties on measures for
strengthening security and stability in the region. This
is a difficult issue, but work on it must begin. And we
are ready to provide every possible assistance through
our contacts with our regional partners.

The ultimate goal should be the establishment of a
regional security architecture that is truly inclusive and
presupposes the involvement of every State in that part
of the world. Our concept for strengthening security in
the Persian Gulf under international guarantees remains
relevant and could begin to be implemented through a
conference with the participation of the States of the
subregion. In the future, such a conference could be
expanded to include other Middle Eastern countries.
Russia is ready to work on all of these aspects and
more, with interested partners, openly and impartially,
and without threats or negative pressure.

In conclusion, I want to note once again that
the Russian Federation remains committed to the
unconditional and comprehensive implementation of
the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA,
which continues to be implemented by all its other
participants despite the withdrawal of the United States.

