Mr. Riecken (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union. On behalf of the Group of Friends of the Rule
of Law, we warmly thank Guatemala for organizing
today's open debate with a special focus on the role
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), which is a
most welcome continuation of the initiative concerning
the Security Council and the rule of law that Austria
started in 2004.

At the outset, I would like to reaffirm Austria's
strong commitment to the rule of law and the fight
against impunity. As a State party to the Rome Statute,
Austria fully supports the work and independence of
the ICC. We need to provide the ICC with all necessary
support and cooperation for the effective discharge of
its mandate.

The Security Council and the ICC share a common
concern when it comes to international crimes that pose
a threat to peace and security. The Security Council has
played a leading role in promoting individual criminal
responsibility, in particular by creating the ad hoc
criminal tribunals that inspired the creation of the ICC.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the entry
into force of the Rome Statute, and we can look back at
remarkable achievements. First, the ICC is well on its
way towards universality. Almost two-thirds of United
Nations Members are now party to the Rome Statute.

Secondly, the consensus reached at the Kampala
Review Conference in June 2010 on the crime of
aggression and other amendments to the Rome Statute
was a landmark achievement in the evolution of the
Court, which demonstrated the strong commitment of
all States parties to the Rome Statute.

Thirdly, the ICC is now generally recognized as
a key instrument in combating impunity, preventing
future crimes and promoting an international order
based on the rule of law. The Court has now been fully
operational for several years and is dealing with an
increasing number of cases. It has delivered its first
sentence, in the Lubanga case. Its expanding docket,
which includes Heads of State and other high-ranking
accused, sends a strong signal that justice applies to
all, without any distinction based on official capacity
or rank.

Accountability and the fight against impunity for
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law are crucial responsibilities of both
the Security Council and the ICC. The referral of the
situation in Libya to the ICC through the unanimous
adoption by the Security Council of resolution 1970
(2011) was a milestone in this regard. We believe
that other situations would warrant the same decisive
action by the Security Council, and call for a coherent
approach to referrals.

We cannot turn a blind eye to mass killings of
innocent civilians, such as those we are currently
witnessing in Syria. We must stop the atrocities and
ensure that the perpetrators and those ordering the
crimes are brought to justice. A referral of the situation
in Syria to the ICC would send a clear signal that every
individual responsible for war crimes and crimes
against humanity will be held accountable and should
reconsider his or her actions. We are pleased that, on
Monday, the Council of the European Union reaffirmed
its support for the investigations of the independent
international commission of inquiry on Syria, with
express reference to crimes against humanity and war
crimes according to the definition of the Rome Statute
of the ICC.

However, the referral of a situation by the Security
Council to the ICC is only the starting point for
justice. The ICC cannot fulfil its mandate without the
continuing political support of the Security Council and
the material support and cooperation of Member States,
in particular with regard to the arrest and surrender of
suspected perpetrators. All States must abide by their
obligations to cooperate under the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Rome Statute. When
considering referrals, the Security Council should
ensure that ICC staff and officials are granted all the
immunities and protection that are necessary to fulfil
their mandate. In view of the increasing caseload of the
ICC, we call on the United Nations to bear an adequate
share of the costs incurred by Security Council referrals.

Finally, with regard to the question of the use of
article 16 of the Rome Statute, we are fully aware that
the Security Council has the power to ask the ICC to
defer an investigation or prosecution in full accordance
with the Rome Statute. However, we believe that this
power should be used with great caution, especially in
situations which the Council had referred to the ICC in
the first place.

Cooperation with the ICC remains the key challenge
for the future. We call on the Security Council to ensure
full cooperation with the Court in accordance with the
obligations of Member States under the Rome Statute
and relevant Security Council resolutions.

