Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): I am grateful
for this opportunity to reiterate once again the United
Nations appreciation to the European Union and the 21
member States, including Turkey, who have
participated in the European Union-led peacekeeping
force (EUFOR). I should also like to thank the High
Representative, whose personal commitment has
greatly contributed to the success of the operation. In
extending its support to the Congolese people, EUFOR
contributed to establishing an environment of stability
in which to carry out the elections held in July and
October 2006, in accordance with resolution 1671
(2006) of 25 April 2006.

For the United Nations, that has been a very
positive experience. The presence of EUFOR was quite
valuable during the critical period of the elections, at
which time the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and
the United Nations Development Programme joined
their efforts with other international actors and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Independent Electoral Commission to organize
and carry out this complex undertaking, which was the
largest electoral exercise that the United Nations has
ever supported since the inception of the Organization.

EUFOR complemented MONUC's massive effort
by adding its extra capacity and flexibility and by
helping to address security challenges and any
potential escalation that could have arisen from
developments in the country. That cooperation was
particularly effective following the violent incidents in
Kinshasa last August. EUFOR's presence was also an
important element in the deterrent role played by
United Nations military and police forces on the
ground, which in turn supported the Congolese national
police. In that connection, more than 40,000 Congolese
police were trained by MONUC to help create a secure
environment for the electoral process.

While acknowledging the outstanding effort of
the European Union, we should also like to note with
appreciation the generous assistance of Germany,
which provided the operational headquarters for
EUFOR in Potsdam. We should also like to take this
opportunity to note the sizable number of troops
07-20483

deployed to EUFOR by the Governments of Germany
and France. The excellent cooperation that developed
between EUFOR and MONUC and between the United
Nations Secretariat and the general secretariat of the
Council of the European Union serves as an example
for future cooperative efforts. I should also emphasize
that that cooperation included operational military
aspects as well as the logistical support provided by
MONUC to EUFOR in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The deployment of EUFOR in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was a further demonstration of
the European Union's ongoing strong support for the
United Nations throughout the Congolese peace
process, especially during difficult moments. In that
connection, we all recall Operation Artemis. The joint
implementation of resolution 1671 (2006) produced
many positive lessons, including the importance of
early coordination at the technical level and of mutual
understanding of each organization's concepts and
procedures. We have already started drawing such
lessons together, and we will continue to work together
to determine how we can build on that experience in
planning other operations in the future.

The United Nations Secretariat is determined to
fully exploit the strategic and operational potential of
partnerships with various multilateral organizations,
including in the very important area of security sector
reform. In that regard, we welcome the support of the
European Union mission to provide advice and
assistance for security sector reform in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (EUSEC) and the European
Union Police Mission in Kinshasa (EUPOL), which
continue to make very important contributions in the
areas of security sector and police reform.

(spoke in English)

It is difficult to overemphasize the significance of
the electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to which the United Nations and the European
Union, together with many other Member States, have
contributed. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the many individual member States of the
Council, and in particular South Africa, for their
outstanding support to that vital endeavour. Only a few
years ago, few observers believed that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo would be able to rise to the
challenge of ending the conflict and holding its first
democratic elections since 1960.
5
The credit for those elections goes to the
Congolese people, who conducted themselves
throughout with patience, courage, great dignity and
determination. Their desire for change has been the
main driving force of the electoral process. Credit is
also due to the Independent Electoral Commission,
which operated in a war-torn country with little or no
infrastructure, poor communications and limited
transportation. Despite criticism, pressure and
occasional threats from different quarters, the Electoral
Commission carried out in full its historic mission. All
international partners should take great pride in having
supported the Congolese people and its institutions in
successfully passing this milestone.

MONUC has been the largest and most expensive
United Nations peacekeeping operations in the world,
with thousands of troops and over 100 aircraft. Five
peace accords involving African countries, more than
35 Security Council resolutions, African Union and
Southern African Development Community
involvement, $500 million in international electoral
funding and strong support from the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund, have all contributed
to the success of the peace process. The European
Union in particular has played a crucial role at several
critical electoral junctures over the last several years.

The events of the last few months have produced
a new positive dynamic in the country. On the 30
December, President Kabila appointed Mr. Antoine
Gizenga, former presidential candidate in the first
round of the elections, as Prime Minister. Mr. Gizenga
is currently consulting on the formation of a
Government, which is expected to be completed this
month. At the end of December, the National Assembly
elected Mr. Vital Kamerhe as President of the National
Assembly, along with six other members of the
National Assembly bureau. All seven are members of
President Kabila's Alliance for the Presidential
Majority.

In the meantime, fighting between the Forces
Armees de la Republic Democratic du Congo
(FARDC) and the renegade forces of Laurent Nkunda
in North Kivu has subsided over the last few days, and
discussions, with the assistance of the United Nations,
are being held between representatives of both sides.
While the situation is still volatile, the Government of
Rwanda reported that it was facilitating discussions
between representatives of the FARDC and the Nkunda
group in Kigali.

On 4 January, an agreement was reached in
principle to form mixed FARDC brigades by merging the
Nkunda forces with other soldiers presently deployed in
North Kivu. MONUC continues to encourage the
Government to find a peaceful and comprehensive
solution that will address the causes of this still-
simmering conflict in the eastern part of the country,
and in that connection has facilitated the establishment
of working groups to implement the agreements
reached, with a view to resolving the underlying issues.

In Ituri, a new ceasefire between the FARDC and
the National Integrationist Front, led by Peter Karim,
was agreed upon on 2 January after fighting had
broken out near the town of Fataki at the end of
December. The situation remains very tense, with the
United Nations conducting robust operations in support
of Government troops.

We welcome the progress achieved at the summit
meeting of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, which took place on 14 and 15
December in Nairobi, and we look forward to the
implementation of the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region, which will no
doubt assist in further stabilizing the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi.

MONUC stands ready to support the newly
elected Government as it begins to address the many
challenges facing the country, including completing the
transitional agenda and implementing the provisions of
the new constitution, particularly in regard to
strengthening national unity, fostering the democratic
process and embarking on a comprehensive governance
reform agenda. The Government will continue to be
assisted in rebuilding a State free from corruption that
ensures the rule of law and good governance, protects
human rights and civil liberties, encourages
participation and pluralism, conducts major security
sector reform and is committed to reducing poverty.

The continued engagement of the international
community is also required to help the Democratic
Republic of the Congo complete a comprehensive
electoral process, with local elections due in the second
half of this year. We are looking forward to close
cooperation with the European Union and other parties
on all these fronts.

The achievements of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will be at risk if the international
community, or the Congolese people, repeat some of
our past mistakes. Early disengagement following
elections elsewhere resulted in the resumption of
conflict a few years later, requiring a new, costlier
international intervention.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is the
natural, yet still developing, pole of stability in the
troubled region of Central Africa. The resolution of the
crisis in that country will benefit Africa more than
solving any other of the continent's current conflicts.
Moreover, if Africa's worst conflict can be overcome,
then other conflicts can be overcome as well. We are
confident that our partnership with the European Union
and other stakeholders will serve this strategic goal.

We are grateful for the Security Council's
steadfast support for a settlement in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which has been demonstrated,
among other things, by the Council's numerous visits
to the country. We trust that the Security Council will
remain actively involved in reinforcing and
consolidating the input of the many bilateral and
multilateral actors.

