Mr. Kamau: I would like to begin by commending
you, Sir, for having organized this important and
timely open debate on the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union. We appreciate
the detailed concept note (S/2016/428, annex) to guide
this debate. I also thank you, Sir, for having invited
me to brief this meeting in my capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I would also like
recognize the presence of the members of the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union at today's
meeting, and I too extend my welcome to them to
New York.

Over the past decade, the strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union and
other subregional organizations in Africa has grown
significantly, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. Our cooperation in the area of
peace and security has been critical to our collective
progress and achievements. Today's debate provides
us an opportunity to review the status of the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union. On 27 April, the Security Council and the General
Assembly adopted identical resolutions - namely,
General Assembly resolution 70/262 and resolution
2282 (2016) respectively - on the review of United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. Those resolutions
are comprehensive and far-reaching documents. They
have introduced the notion of sustaining peace and
the importance of national, regional and international
efforts aimed at preventing the outbreak, escalation,
continuation and recurrence of conflict. Those
resolutions have further strengthened the foundation of
our cooperation.

Current global realities include an increasing
number of violent conflicts, exacerbated by the
deepening refugee crisis, rising terrorist threats and
violent extremism. There is clearly a need to focus
on conflict prevention and addressing the root causes
of conflict. The primacy of politics should guide our
collective work in peace operations. We must not let
situations deteriorate into violent conflicts for us in
order to react with security or military measures.
We need to change our mindset away from military
engagements and towards the prevention of conflicts.
We can achieve that through horizon-scanning, shared
joint analysis, dialogue, mediation and accompaniment
in situations of crisis. We must re-focus our work on
conflict resolution rather than on conflict management.
That is the essence of our collective efforts for
sustaining peace.

The peace and security challenges that we face
are too extremely complex and interlinked for any
single organization to address them alone. They
call for collective action. To succeed in our goal of
sustaining peace, we need to reframe and reprioritize
our responses. We must never forget that peace is at the
core of that for which the Charter stands for. It must
run through all our collective efforts, ranging from
conflict prevention to peacebuilding, peacekeeping,
reconstruction and, indeed, sustainable development.
That renewed approach to sustainable peace would
allow us to best adapt to today's global realities. Rather
than wait until a crisis breaks out and then make a
default or template recourse in the form of a response,
we need to integrate sustaining peace in our security,
development and human-rights agenda. We feel that we
cannot emphasize that point enough.

The twin resolutions I just mentioned foresee a
Peacebuilding Commission that is proactively focused
on assisting countries to prevent conflict and sustain
peace. The PBC is expected to become a more efficient
and flexible convening platform for policy dialogue
and for availing all countries that seek the support of
the United Nations for achieving sustainable peace an
opportunity to work through that platform. We are fully
committed to making that a reality. In our commitment,
we will continue to strengthen national ownership
and leadership in our engagement, because we are
convinced that the responsibility for sustaining peace
is shared between the Government and all national
stakeholders, including youth, women and civil society.

The new resolutions on the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture also stress the importance
of the partnerships and cooperation between the United
Nations and the regional and subregional organizations,
in particular the African Union. The Peacebuilding
Commission has been working closely with the African
Union and the regional economic communities in
Africa to increase synergies, enhance coherence and
complementarity of our joint peacebuilding efforts.
For instance, we have been able to work closely and,
speaking in one voice, to complement our joint efforts
to sustain peace in Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, the Central
African Republic and Burundi. Similarly, over the
past year the Commission has increased its focus on
thematic, cross-cutting and regional peacebuilding
challenges.

The Commission held regional discussions on
peacebuilding in West Africa in January and April this
year. Those discussions provided a unique opportunity
to look at the growing cross-border challenges beyond
the confines of specific countries. The discussions also
centred on strategies to address the challenges that arise
when working with the countries in the region, as well
as when working within and in concert with the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the African Development Bank and
other international and regional actors. We are looking
forward to further strengthening and deepening this
partnership in view of the new road map for the African
Peace and Security Architecture. We are aware that
this road map would provide a framework for practical
measures to reorient the African Union Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development Framework.

The Peacebuilding Commission intends to use the
momentum generated from these new resolutions, and
the commitment of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, to further enhance and institutionalize
cooperation with the African Union. We will aim to
arrive at an agreed framework for further consultations,
exchange of information and analysis, and opportunities
forjoint initiatives aimed at sustaining peace in Africa.

I am planning to lead a delegation of the
Peacebuilding Commission to West Africa in mid-June,
including Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea and Senegal, to
draw attention to the peacebuilding priorities and needs
within the context of post-Ebola recovery. Our visit to
Senegal, the current chair of ECOWAS, will provide
an opportunity to discuss the regional peacebuilding
challenges and priorities.

As we work together to strengthen our partnership,
we also intend to leave no one behind. We must focus
on the inclusive participation of young people in our
peacebuilding efforts. It is evident that investing in
young people guarantees peace and security, as well as
development. It is our responsibility to provide young
people with the opportunity to play their rightful role in
peacebuilding and development.

Similarly, we must also acknowledge the
importance of women's leadership and participation in
conflict prevention, resolution and peacebuilding. We
must particularly include gender-related issues in all
discussions pertinent to sustaining peace, and promote
the gender dimensions of peacebuilding, including
through the strengthening of women's meaningful
participation in peacebuilding. Importantly, we also
intend to work very closely with Mr. Donald Kaberuka
in the context of the African Peace Fund. We also look
forward to working with him and to achieving greater
success in raising additional funds for both the African
Peace Fund and the broader Peacebuilding Fund of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

In conclusion, we must link ourjoint peacebuilding
efforts to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly 5 70/1) and the African Union's
Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want. The opportunities
contained in these mutually reinforcing and coherent
frameworks must be supported to achieve inclusive
growth, sustained development and peace and security
for Africa.

