Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank the Uruguayan delegation for organizing
today's meeting - on a day that is a celebration as
much for the United Nations as it is for the European
Union - on cooperation between the two organizations,
this time from the point ofview of the European Union.
I would also like to welcome Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to Secretary-General Guterres for his
leadership and efforts to strengthen the effectiveness
of the United Nations and provide its good offices
with the aim of improving the management of conflict
situations and crises around the world. Right now,
there are many conflicts and crises around the world
that require close collaboration between the United
Nations and its various partners, particularly the
subregional organizations that, as we all know, play a
vital role in the maintenance of international peace and
security. In that regard, the European Union, firmly
anchored in its values, understanding and know-how,
which Ms. Mogherini so elegantly describes as "the
European way", and given the human, institutional,
technological and financial means at its disposal, has
dedicated itselfto remaining a major partner - indeed,
a strategic one - of the United Nations and many
other regional and subregional organizations, such
as the African Union. That is important both for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
the prevention of conflicts.

Allow me to recall some important documents that
continue to serve as strategic multisectoral frameworks
for relations between the United Nations and the
European Union in the areas of crisis management and
peacekeeping. Those documents include the 2003 and
2007 Joint Declarations on United Nations-European
Union Cooperation in Crisis Management, and the
plan of action to strengthen support provided by the
European Union Security and Defence Policy to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, which was adopted
in 2012 by the Political and Security Committee of the
European Union. That document, it should be recalled,
identifies the ways and means of cooperation between
the European Union and the United Nations, as well as
priority measures jointly applied in past years by the
two organizations, as pertains in particular to increased
contributions of uniformed personnel by European
Union member States, planning and coordination,
cooperation in general policy and guidelines, as well as
lessons learned from experience and training.

As underscored in the 1 April 2015 report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/229), communication and
coordination activities conducted at the strategic level
between the European Union and the United Nations in
peacekeeping and crisis management take on various
forms. Bridges between the two organizations include
the formal biannual meeting of the Security Council
with representatives from the Political and Security
Committee of the European Union. That meeting
provides an opportunity to review peacekeeping
operations and other matters related to peace and
security. Furthermore, there are high-level meetings
dealing with the review of strategic issues, in particular
periodic briefings by the High Representative of the
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the
Security Council. There are also presentations from high
United Nations officials to the Political and Security
Committee in Brussels. Moreover, let us not forget
the biannual meeting of the United Nations-European
Union Steering Committee on Crisis Management,
which is co-chaired by the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations and the Deputy Secretary-
General of the European External Action Service.

We could present an exhaustive list of European
actions for international peace and security. However,
simply by way of example, I would note the contribution
of the European Union to African peace and security
efforts, including in the Central African Republic,
Somalia, Mali and, more broadly speaking, the fight
against illegal trafficking of all types, the fight against
terrorism and the management of the migrant crises.
Simultaneously, with contributions to peace and
security, we would underscore the numerous actions
of the European Union in the area of prevention that
seek to address the root causes of conflict. The United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel is a striking
example, as is the Global Alliance for Resilience
Initiative, which is part of the same line of effort.

The European Union provides significant
contributions to the work of the United Nations. It
cooperates with all bodies, agencies and programmes
of the Organization and is involved in almost all
United Nations activities, from development policy
and rebuilding peace to humanitarian assistance and
protection of the environment, human rights and even
culture. The European Union is involved in activities
in all the regions of the world. The 28 European
Union members are the primary donors for the United
Nations system, in terms of the regular budget of the
Organization, peacekeeping operations, as well as
funds and programmes.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that as
seen from Dakar, the European Way applies universally
to the United Nations, regionally to the African Union,
subregionally to the Economic Community of West
African States, and nationally to my country. Ethiopia,
which was mentioned by Ms. Mogherini earlier, is
a member of the Security Council and engages in
effective cooperation to manage the migrant crisis and
other transboundary issues.

