The President (interpretation from Arabic): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq)
took the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 15 December 1998 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/1998/1172.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1998/ 1173, which contains the
text of a letter dated 15 December 1998 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the letter dated 14 December 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General and its enclosure.

Members of the Council have received photocopies of
the following communications: letter dated 16 December
1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council, which will be issued as document
S/1998/1175; letter dated 16 December 1998 from the
Charge d'affaires ad interim of the United States Mission
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, which will be issued as document
S/1998/1181; and letter dated 16 December 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, which
will be issued as document S/ 1998/ 1182.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Iraq. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.


