Mr. Abdounasir (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to thank the various members who welcomed
the United Nations Female Police Officer of the Year
award given to a colleague from the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). Women police
officers provide added value. That can be seen not only
in cases of sexual violence, but also when it comes to
care for victims and following up on cases.

I would also like to add that despite our best
efforts, sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo continues to be a challenge. We are focusing
on supporting local authorities, such as the Congolese
National Police and the judicial system, in order to
prosecute the responsible parties. I also note that we
have very limited capabilities. The size of the United
Nations police is less than 1 per cent of that of the
Congolese National Police. That is why we are focusing
on priority zones, so that we can have an impact.

With regard to the question on criminal justice
system, in general, we are working with the correctional
justice system under the rule of law portfolio, alongside
other partners like the European Union, in order
to support the Congolese authorities in developing
strategies and action plans, especially at the local and
provincial levels.

As for the Ebola virus raging in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in areas where there are armed
groups, the MONUSCO police has been working
since the beginning of the outbreak. We are seeing a
steady decline in the virus and the MONUSCO police
continues to add value when it comes to following
up with contacts. We are supporting the Congolese
authorities in following up on high-risk contacts, which
so far has allowed us to prevent displacement. There
are some cases, but we can follow them precisely and,
of course, bring them to treatment centres.

Turning to the question from the representative of
Belgium about the added value of the European Union,
in my previous experience in Congo, Mali and Cote
d'Ivoire there was close cooperation with the European
Union. That allowed us to develop the training sector
for the defence and security forces and in particular to
develop a framework for leadership training. Whether
it be in C6te d'lvoire, Mali or Congo, the European
Union has helped us to develop training centres and
training courses.

My last point concerns the possibility that police
units could replace the military. As I understand it,
the protection of civilians is a public security issue.
We think that this is an issue that is more within the
scope of the police in general and of MONUSCO police
officers in particular. In provinces such as the Kasais,
Tanganyika and a part of Ituri, the United Nations police
have a role in boosting the various units and carrying
out quality work, with, I am convinced, better results.

