Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation has asked for the floor because it believes
that the purpose of briefing meetings of the Security
Council is precisely that - to inform the membership
on the work of the Council and, at the same time, for
members to express their country's opinion, belief or
position on the issue under consideration in the Council.

In that connection, I welcome Mr. Leonard She
Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Regional Integration of the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, and I thank Monseigneur Utembi
and Ms. Kalala for their important briefings. We also
convey our deep gratitude to Mr. Maman Sidikou, his
entire team and the personnel of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for the work they
carry out in very complex conditions.

I reiterate the commitment of Uruguay to restoring
stability and peace to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, not only as an elected member of the Security
Council but also as a consistent MONUSCO troop-
contributing country for the past 16 years.

The broad and inclusive political agreement
reached on 31 December, thanks to the important
mediation role of the National Episcopal Conference of
the Congo (CENCO), offers a viable path to the holding
of peaceful, credible and inclusive elections - thus
empowering the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
move towards a more stable future. Nevertheless, nearly
three months after it was signed, the implementation
of the new political agreement remains stalled due to
differences among signatory parties concerning the
carrying out of the transition arrangements.

As the Secretary-General indicatein his report
(S/2017/206), the most pressing task for the United
Nations is to closely collaborate with its primary
regional and international partners to support the
implementation of the transition arrangements spelled
out in the political agreement and to contribute to
creating a favourable environment for the holding of
elections and the peaceful transfer of power as quickly
as possible - December 2017 at the latest, pursuant to
the agreement.

Uruguay is concerned about certain negative trends
in the country for several months now. One of these is
that insecurity is no longer primarily limited to the east
of the country, but rather has spread to other areas such as
the provinces of Kasai, Central Congo and Tanganyika.
Violence between communities and challenges to the
authority of the State are on the rise, to such a degree
that the United Nations has also been a victim, with the
recent disappearance of two members of the Group of
Experts of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004). Similarly, the threat
of violence in the main urban zones is also increasing
as the election approaches.

Another alarming trend is the significant increase
in violations of human rights, owing primarily to
the shrinking democratic space. Uruguay reiterates
that protecting and respecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms is the responsibility of the
national authorities, just as they must themselves
show the greatest restraint in their responses to the
legitimate protests of the population. Similarly, we call
upon members of the opposition to act responsibly in
ensuring peaceful demonstrations.

In the coming days, the Council will be negotiating
the renewal of MONUSCO's mandate. Uruguay
believes that the Secretary-General's recommendations
to renew MONUSCO's mandate are valid, responsible
and are adapted to the reality on the ground. In that
regard, we are of the view that, in addition to lending
its good offices and support to the political process,
which is crucial at this time, MONUSCO must have an
appropriate mandate and resources that would increase
its ability to protect civilians and monitor human rights
issues, especially where there is high risk of urban
violence during the upcoming electoral period.

In a highly tense political situation, in which the
security environment has deteriorated and there have
been serious violations of human rights, it is very
difficult to understand the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's Government's attempt to reduce the scope of
MONUSCO and seek an exit strategy.

In conclusion, I should like to make it very clear
that there is no more time now for political games.
It is time for the political actors in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to commit to implementing the
agreement that they themselves signed. The people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo deserve stability,
democracy and peace in their country.

