Ms. Loj (Denmark): My delegation wishes to
thank the Greek presidency for organizing this debate.
We would also like to thank you, Mr. Minister, for
presiding over our meeting today. This debate is a
useful follow-up to those held by the Security Council
in May and June of this year on the subjects of post-
conflict peacebuilding and the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

Denmark aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.

Many of the Security Council's actions are in
response to humanitarian crisis caused by conflict. In
maintaining international peace and security, the
Council's main objective is to save human lives and
spare people from further suffering. That objective was
fully met in two success stories of United Nations
intervention, namely, the cases of Timor-Leste and
Bougainville. Unfortunately, other interventions have
not yet had the same positive outcome, and human
suffering continues in places like Haiti, Sudan and
Cote d'Ivoire.

We must aim to improve our efforts to prevent
countries from relapsing into conflict. If we are not
able to act swiftly in the immediate post-conflict phase,
we may miss the window of opportunity and more
human lives will be lost.

Even if there is no standard formula by which
every conflict can be resolved, there certainly is a
checklist based on lessons learned that can help us get
off to a good start. The three pillars mentioned in the
presidency's discussion paper for this debate are all on
the checklist. The rule of law, security-sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes are vital parts of every peacebuilding
strategy, as they address the fundamental causes of
most conflicts.

To improve our work, we must develop individual
peacebuilding strategies for every conflict. In the
mandates for United Nations operations, the Security
Council must address overall needs and ensure that the
main elements of the checklist are included. As a
supervisor of its own decisions, the Council must
always stand ready to re-examine a conflict situation
on the basis of relevant advice and adjust its mandate
accordingly.

The proposal to establish a Peacebuilding
Commission addresses many of those concerns. By
bringing together local and regional partners, donors
and providers of security, we can create a unique
environment for developing strategy and for setting
priorities in a way that is both implementable and
sustainable. Allow me to give a few examples to
illustrate the complementary and useful nature of a
Peacebuilding Commission in relation to our
discussion today.

While the Security Council can only appeal to
donors to fund certain activities, the Peacebuilding
Commission can address specific gaps and, hopefully,
fill them. While the Security-Council would normally
condemn trafficking of soldiers across borders, the
Peacebuilding Commission can discuss useful
measures to stop it with regional partners. While the
Security Council can encourage quick-win projects, the
Peacebuilding Commission can make them part of the
priorities.

It is important to develop comprehensive
strategies if we wish to preserve peace and find
solutions to humanitarian crises. The root causes of
conflict do not disappear with peacekeeping alone, and
development will not happen without security. That
interconnection demands the inclusion of many actors
and instruments unique to every specific conflict. The
complexity and the many interests and concerns
involved call for the United Nations to be in charge of
coordination.

There is responsibility to be borne at every level.
The Security Council is the highest global level of
political and strategic decision-making. It bears the
responsibility to adopt mandates that allow the
necessary steps to be taken to attain sustainable peace.
As another strategic body, a Peacebuilding
Commission - being one step closer to actual
implementation in the field, due to its composition -
can more effectively coordinate specific issues and
ensure that every necessary task is accounted for in a
peacebuilding strategy.

In the end, the work done in the field by United
Nations peacekeepers, United Nations agencies, local
and regional partners, bilateral donors and other
contributors remains the centre of gravity. All we do,
and all the decisions we take, must aim at improving
the situation on the ground. The only way to measure
the success of our common efforts is by improvements
in the situation for the human lives to which we are all
accountable.

