Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to start
where my Italian colleague just ended, by thanking
Mr. Yamamoto for his work and his very comprehensive
briefings. I fully endorse his assessments in the matter
before us today. He has Germany's support for his
work. Listening to the discussions this morning, I get
the impression that there is a general convergence of
opinions. In terms of the assessment, everybody here
seems to share the View that, to summarize it, the glass
is both half full and half empty.

With regard to the half-full part of the glass, the
clear highlight of recent days and weeks has been the
initiative taken by the President of Afghanistan and the
Afghan Government to propose a ceasefire during the
Eid festivities. This was a grass-roots movement, and
the images circulated of people longing for peace were
noteworthy. Another positive development is that the
President continues to say that he is ready to engage in
peace talks with the Taliban without preconditions. Also
on the positive side, as many have highlighted, is the
encouraging improvement in cooperation with Pakistan,
and we welcome the finalization of the Afghanistan-
Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity. Now,
of course, we need that dialogue to continue and be
implemented so that it actually bears fruit.

Also, with regard to the glass half-full, the election
registration process is very encouraging in some areas.
Yes, it is a positive development that, as my Italian
colleague just said, one third of registered voters are
women, but our goal must be 50 per cent.

An example of the glass half-empty is the ruthless
behaviour by the Taliban to stop this ceasefire. Like
our American colleagues, we condemn this behaviour.
We think it is very cynical and brutal behaviour by
the Taliban. It must reconsider, so I hope that the
Government will remain prepared to discuss this.

The two briefings we heard this morning were
also more on the half-empty side. Mr. Fedotov gave an
alarming account of the opium-production situation.
This is terrible, given everything that drug production
has as a consequence. Mr. Voronkov also gave a
very depressing account of the figures involved in
terrorist attacks.

Also, on the elections, we have to ensure that all
posts in the Independent Election Commission are
filled, that everything is done to remedy the regional
imbalances in voter registration and that the elections
go ahead as planned.

I want to highlight, with respect to the glass half-
empty, what Mr. Yamamoto said with regard to women
and violence against women. This was highlighted
by several representatives, including our French and
British colleagues. More has to be done in that respect.
I urge the Government to put this issue high on the
agenda. The representative of Afghanistan said in his
intervention that they are working on it, but I think that
more has to be done to ensure the inclusion of women in
the political process and address the issue of crime. This
must not happen, so maybe the presidency in charge of
the next debate could think about additional briefers.
We have addressed the issues ofterrorism and drugs, so
maybe we could focus on the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, or
children and armed conflict, and the Security Council
could concentrate on these issues.

What we need, of course, is economic development
and investment in the country. We need to create jobs
so that there is an alternative to drugs. For this to
work, there is one recipe: good governance. It is very
important that the Afghan leadership and President and
all involved work together as a team. We must continue
to build institutions and an independent judiciary. We
also must work very hard to end corruption, and we
urge the Afghan Government once again to implement
the recommendations contained in the recent report.

This, I think, is what needs to be done. The Afghan
Government bears a great deal of responsibility.
We are, of course, aware that it cannot shoulder
this alone, but I think that it has to assume the
corresponding responsibility.

Germany will continue to support the UnitedNations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the United
Nations agencies working in Afghanistan. I do not have
the figures on how much we spend, but we have from the
very beginning had at least 1,000 soldiers there. We are
in Mazar-e-Sharif with many other countries. We have
for many years provided economic support totalling
hundreds of millions of euros - billions, probably,
by now - so we will continue to provide support in
close cooperation with the Afghan Government and
our international partners. When Germany comes into
the Security Council next year, it will continue to pay
special attention to Afghanistan.

