The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs and African Integration of Chad.

We congratulate Mr. Nicholas Haysom on his
appointment as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
and thank him for his briefing. We also thank Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, for his briefing.

Chad commends the President-elect of Afghanistan,
His Excellency Mr. Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai, and Chief
Executive Officer Mr. Abdullah Abdullah, for their
leadership, which has allowed the country to emerge
from the political impasse in the post-electoral period.
We encourage them to maintain this momentum of
solidarity in order to address the major challenges faced
by the country. We also welcome the unflagging efforts
of the international community, notably UNAMA, and
of Afghan civil society and traditional and religious
leaders during this crucial phase of Afghanistan in its
history.

The current post-electoral environment should
not serve to mask the Challenges that the country
faces. The situation requires the ongoing support of
the international community, especially in terms of
security, the humanitarian situation and the combat
against drug trafficking, terrorism and extremism.

Along those same lines, Chad takes note of the
commitments entered into by President Ghani and
of the call made on all political, traditional, religious
and military groups, including the Taliban and Hezb-e
Islami Gulbuddin, to join the process of the political
resolution of the crisis, so as to bring stability and
prosperity to Afghanistan.

Chad welcomes the signing of the cooperation and
military assistance agreements between Afghanistan
and the United States on the one hand and NATO on
the other, aimed at filling the gaps that will emerge
with the withdrawal of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), whose mandate will conclude
on 31 December.

We wish to pay a resounding tribute to ISAF
for the role that it has played and for the tremendous
sacrifices that it has made, and we hail the memory of
fallen ISAF personnel. Chad welcomes the political and
diplomatic efforts made regionally and internationally
to build peace and security in Afghanistan, and we
encourage those efforts to continue. Chad believes that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations is criminal
and unjustifiable, whatever the motives might be. We
condemn all violence and terrorist acts perpetrated
by the Taliban or linked to Al-Qaida or other armed
groups. Such inhumane and cruel acts represent serious
crimes against humanity, and their perpetrators must
be pursued and prosecuted.

We remain concerned at the tenor of the most
recent report ofthe United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, which shows an increase in drug trafficking,
including opium and other narcotics, whose negative
consequences for national security are incalculable. We
encourage neighbouring countries and the international
community to step up their efforts in order to ensure
greater coordination in the fight against the cross-
border traffic in drugs and illicit substances.

The implementation of joint and mixed patrols
with neighbouring countries will allow for improved
surveillance of common borders. We are concerned
at the deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
particularly that of internally displaced persons, and call
on the international community to make greater efforts
to assist them. We would also recall the call made by the
Secretary-General to increase humanitarian assistance.
We condemn the attacks perpetrated by armed groups
against humanitarian workers and the obstacles of all
kinds that are hindering the delivery and distribution of
humanitarian assistance to those in need.

To conclude, we pay homage to outgoing President
Karzai for the efforts he deployed in endowing
Afghanistan with a Constitution and in fostering the
democratic transition of power, for the first time in the
history of that country. We wish the current Government
every success. We commend Jan Kubis, the outgoing
Special Representative, for his tireless efforts and the
courage that he has shown throughout his time at the
helm of UNAMA.
Lastly, we commend and encourage all United
Nations and humanitarian agency personnel, who,
despite the difficult conditions in which they are
discharging their duties in Afghanistan, continue to do
their very best to help the people of Afghanistan.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.

