Mr. Wane: It is my pleasure to address the Security
Council and to provide a briefing on the activities of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) joint force,
including on its operationalization, as well as on the
challenges encountered and possible measures for
further consideration, as requested by the Council in
resolution 2359 (2017), two months after it welcomed
the creation of the joint force.

The cross-border dimension of the terrorist threat
in the Sahel region, as well as the serious challenges
posed by transnational organized crime and its links
with terrorism, continue to pose a serious threat to
stability, prosperity and growth in the Sahel region. In
Mali, attacks by violent extremist groups on national
security forces, international forces and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) remain a sad reality and
hamper the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, one of the key elements for
the stabilization efforts in the region. Their activities
know no borders, and time and again we have seen
vicious attacks also in neighbouring countries and in
the broader region. This past weekend was marked by
the heinous attacks in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, and
on MINUSMA camps in Douenza and Timbuktu.

Worst of all, however, are the consequences
borne by the civilian population, which suffers from
intimidation and violence and bears the brunt of
inadequate or non-existing social services, which this
insecurity negatively affects. In Mali, the number
of State officials present in the northern part of the
country has decreased by 10 per cent compared with last
year; persistent threats by extremist groups targeting
schoolteachers, students and parents resulted in the
closure of 178 secular schools. This erosion of State
authority provides a fertile breeding ground for violent
extremist and terrorist groups. The countless numbers
of young people in the Sahel facing job insecurity and
even chronic poverty could all too easily fall prey to
these groups. The situation is dire, and time to identify
and implement solutions is, unfortunately, running out.

Allow me here to acknowledge and value the
contribution and sacrifices made by so many African
countries to peace operations on the continent. The
countries of the G-5 Sahel are undertaking tremendous
efforts, in multiple theatres across vast and inhospitable
terrains and with limited resources, to improve security
in the Sahel and to counter violent extremism and drug
and arms smuggling, including in the fight against
Boko Haram, and elsewhere in the region.

Against this backdrop, the strong determination and
commitment of the G-5 Sahel member States to share
the responsibility to collectively tackle these challenges
head on and to protect civilians in their respective
territories, as underlined in resolution 2359 (2017), is
commendable. The creation of a joint force to address
terrorism and transnational organized crime threats,
including through the conduct of cross-border joint
military operations, demonstrates regional ownership
of regional challenges and is an acknowledgment
that these will require collective action and unity of
purpose. As such, it bears the potential of significantly
contributing to the stabilization of the Sahel region,
and in turn facilitating MINUSMA's implementation of
its mandate.

Since the decision taken by the G-5 Sahel Heads of
State in February to create ajoint force of 5,000 military,
as well as police and civilian personnel, important steps
towards its implementation have been undertaken. I
should like in particular to highlight the following.

First, efforts aimed at the development of the
normative framework that would allow a swift
operationalization of the joint force have been made.
Key strategic documents - such as the concept of
operations, the command architecture, a preliminary
budget and a memorandum of understanding on
extraterritoriality - have been adopted by the G-5
Sahel Comite de defense et de securite and endorsed
by the African Union Peace and Security Council, and
the scale and scope of the force and its operations have
been further defined.

Secondly, a two-phased approach has been agreed.
The joint force is set to initially conduct cross-border
operations in three strategic sectors, and subsequently
to consolidate and enhance bilateral and multilateral
cooperation among the G-5 Sahel member States.

Thirdly, in terms of staffing, General Didier Dacko
of Mali was appointed Force Commander of the G-5
Sahel force in June, and has begun assembling his team
in the force's provisional headquarters in Bamako.

Fourthly, the force's permanent headquarters in
Sevare is currently being equipped and is projected to
attain initial operational capability by the end of August.

Fifthly, immediate priority in terms of operations
will be given to the Central Sector, along Mali's borders
with the Niger and Burkina Faso, where the force is
planning to conduct coordinated operations in October.
These operations will build on existing trilateral efforts
of Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger in the Liptako-
Gourma triangle. The operationalization and force
generation for Sectors East and West headquarters,
including the deployment of one company per sector
to attain initial operational capability, is scheduled for
spring 2018.

Sixthly, the generation of105 provostpolice officers,
who are expected to fulfil judicial policing functions
and to contribute to addressing transnational organized
crime, as well as of a small civilian component, which
is expected to be composed of three advisers to the
Force Commander on human rights, humanitarian and
development issues, is ongoing.

Lastly, the budgetary requirements to fund both the
start-up of the joint force, including initial investments
in infrastructure, staffing and operations in the first
year were set at €423 million. Out of this amount,
approximately €234 million are projected for initial
investments, €110 million for operational costs and
€83 million for personnel-related costs. As Council
members will recall, resolution 2359 (2017) bestows the
primary responsibility for resource mobilization on the
G-5 Sahel member States. In this light, I should like
to applaud the commitment of the G-5 Sahel member
States to pooling their resources and contributing
€10 million each to the budget.

Given the domestic economic challenges facing
the G-5 Sahel countries, these pledges are particularly
laudable. Their joint contribution of €50 million,
in conjunction with the European Union's pledged
contribution of €50 million, as announced by
Commissioner Mogherini during her visit to Bamako in
June, and France's logistical and financial contribution
to the force worth €8 million, brings the total to
€108 million, or 25 per cent of total requirements as
currently defined the amount of money needed for the
force to be fully operational. The G-5 Sahel countries,
with the support of international partners, have
undertaken a technical review of resource requirements,
which may lead to a better delineation and fine-tuning
of the initially projected financial needs. The planned
meeting, to be hosted by the German and French
Defence Ministers in Berlin in September, will provide
an opportunity to further explore options for the
support of the start-up of the joint force, to be followed
by a planning conference, as requested in resolution
2359 (2017), later this year.

While generating pledges and contributions to
meet the requirements of the joint force will be critical,
the setting up of transparent, coordinated and effective
funding will be equally as important. We understand
that, in terms of what was pledged by the European
Union, efforts in this respect are already under way.
I also urge G-5 Sahel member States to swiftly make
good on these pledges so that they can be utilized for
the further operationalization of the joint force.

Given the complexity of the issues to be addressed
and the multitude of stakeholders in the region,
resolutions 2359 (2017) and 2364 (2017) urge the joint
force, MINUSMA and the international forces to
ensure adequate coordination and information-sharing
on their operations, within their respective mandates.
Allow me here to highlight a few additional points.

First, MINUSMA is currently prioritizing the
establishment of a common post in Mopti, in line with
its political and security mandated tasks in Central
Mali, which will also allow close coordination with the
first focus area of the G-5 Sahel, starting in October.

Secondly, in addition, existing coordination
mechanisms between MINUSMA, the French forces,
the Malian defence and security forces, the European
Union (EU) Training Mission in Mali and EUCAP Sahel
Niger will be adapted to accommodate the joint force in
order to facilitate information-sharing. The Mission is
also preparing the deployment of liaison officers to and
from the G-5 Sahel.

Thirdly, further and as per resolution 2359 (2017),
MINUSMA is providing logistical and strategic
support, within existing resources, to the Malian
defence and security forces with a view to accelerating
their redeployment to the northern and central parts
of Mali. In that connection, the Mission is finalizing
a protocol with the Malian defence and security forces
to define the modalities and scope of this support and
the coordination of operations in the north and centre
of Mali.

Fourthly, these measures, in conjunction with
MINUSMA's core mandated tasks in support of
the extension of State authority across Mali, will
be a further contribution to enable the Malian
authorities to proactively address security challenges,
including through G-5 Sahel force, as well as to
enhance governance mechanisms and accelerate the
implementation of the peace agreement.

(spoke in French)

Although the developments I just referred to attest
to the political will of the States members of the G-5 for
the Sahel to operationalize the joint force, significant
challenges remain and a number of issues need to
be addressed.

First of all, it is important to respond to the
enormous needs, not only in terms of funding and
funding mechanisms but also with regard to force
generation, training and equipment, tactical support,
intelligence and communications technologies, medical
evacuation capabilities and providing protection for the
force as well as the camps.

Secondly, the potential impact of force-generation
efforts on subsequent operations and on MINUSMA's
posture must also be considered carefully.

Thirdly, certain aspects of the legal framework,
such as modalities pertaining to the right of pursuit
beyond the limits of each each zone, must be better
defined and require additional agreements among the
States members of the G-5 Sahel.

Fourthly, with regard to the rules of engagement,
it should be noted that the success of the force will
depend upon the support of the people. It is therefore
essential to ensure strict compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law, including
implementing measures to mitigate the impact of
military operations on civilians. Among other things,
the latter implies the establishment of appropriate
mechanisms for the handing over to the competent
authorities of persons arrested by the joint force,
including minors, and the sharing of information on
arrests and detentions.

The G-5 Sahel joint force presents a unique
opportunity to respond to regional challenges through
a regional approach. In order to fully take advantage
of that opportunity, it is important that other aspects
of the causes of instability in Mali and in the region
be addressed simultaneously. Addressing the root
causes of instability in the Sahel requires going beyond
military action and tackling the governance gap,
chronic poverty and unemployment, climate change
and financing for development; it is also necessary to
address cross-border crime.

I should also like to emphasize the primacy of
politics and the need for a political strategy to guide the
activities of the joint force so as to ensure that they are
aligned with the Malian peace process and other regional
initiatives. Resolution 2359 (2017) calls for the prompt
and effective implementation of regional strategies by
the States members of the G-5 for the Sahel and their
international partners. The joint force can make a
significant contribution to the stabilization of the Sahel
region, in synergy with other existing initiatives.

In order to better coordinate and refocus the
attention of the United Nations system on the Sahel, the
Secretary-General recently established an Executive
Committee working group on the Sahel, chaired by the
Deputy Secretary-General, which has already begun
to meet.

Lastly, in order to better support and promote
regional ownership, it is important that the deployment
of the joint force be part of the African Union's Peace
and Security Architecture. The Nouakchott process
could be an effective tool to that end. We hope that,
as the force's concept of operations matures, it will
receive the support and cooperation of other countries
in the region.

The establishment of the G-5 Sahel foint force
has the potential to make a significant contribution to
the efforts already under way to stabilize the region.
Once again, I congratulate the member States of the
G-5 for the Sahel for the considerable efforts they are
making. The success of the force will depend upon
both the deepening of this regional partnership and the
relevant political framework, and the determination
of the G-5 for the Sahel member States to achieve its
operationalization, as well as the unflagging support of
of their international partners. The United Nations will
remain ready to contribute to that partnership and to
efforts aimed at supporting this initiative. We welcome
the proposal to submit a written report on those efforts
in October, as called for in resolution 2359 (2017).

