Mr. Omoregie: Mr. President, the report before
the Council, contained in document S/2008/181, is the
thirtieth report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
that country (UNOGBIS).

The report focuses in particular on developments
linked to the mobilization of resources and the
increased engagement of international partners with
Guinea-Bissau. Of particular note are the signing of the
agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
in January for Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance and
the launch, also in January, of the Peacebuilding
Commission's engagement in Guinea-Bissau.

I would like to say just a few words now to
update the Council on developments that have taken
place since the report was published. In this regard, I
would like to start on a happy note.

Last night, President Joao Bernardo Vieira, who
had heretofore been evasive on the subject of the date
of the country's next legislative elections, announced
that the elections will be held on 16 November 2008.
This announcement, on the eve of this meeting of the
08-28372
Security Council, will no doubt significantly reduce the
tensions that have been building in the country in the
past few days.

Meanwhile, preparations for the forthcoming
legislative elections are moving forward very slowly. It
was only recently that the Government opted for the
biometric voter identity card registration process. Its
decision was backed on 16 March by the parties
signatory to the Political and Government Stability
Pact on which the Government is based. A voter
registration exercise involving the issuing of biometric
cards would take five to six months. The voter
registration exercise, which should have been carried
out in January and February, is still behind schedule,
mainly because of the impasse over arrears from
previous elections estimated at $1.7 million which
should have been paid to the national and regional
electoral commissions.

On 9 March, the Central Committee of the
African Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cape Verde (PAIGC) declared null and void the
decision taken by its leader, Carlos Gomes Jr., on
29 February, to withdraw political confidence in Prime
Minister N'Dafa Cabi, who is the Third Vice-President
of the PAIGC. The Central Committee's decision and
support by the two other members of the Stability Pact
alleviated disquiet among national and international
actors that uncertainty over Mr. Cabi's position might
have an impact on the positive momentum of the
cooperation activities with the international community
currently under way.

The PAIGC will be electing a new leader at its
Congress which will take place from 3 to 6 April. The
outcome of this contest will determine whether this
current momentum will be sustained or seriously
undermined.

The Peacebuilding Commission and the
Government, with support from UNOGBIS and the
United Nations country team, are working closely to
prepare short-term projects for early funding from the
Peacebuilding Fund, within the framework of a
peacebuilding priority plan for Guinea-Bissau. In this
initial phase, the projects implemented help build the
confidence of national partners, yield immediate and
visible dividends in the process of peace consolidation,
and serve as a catalyst or impetus for the medium- to
long-term assistance that will be provided by the
Peacebuilding Commission under the wider umbrella
08-28372
of the strategic framework for peacebuilding in
Guinea-Bissau.

The National Assembly passed the amnesty bill
after a second reading on 4 March. It will now be
submitted to President Vieira for ratification. This law
is seen by its proponents as facilitating reconciliation
and paving the way for security sector reform, and
President Vieira and the military worked very hard for
its passage.

The census of active personnel in the armed
forces, funded by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), ended on 19 March. The data,
which are being processed and are expected to be ready
by the end of this month, will inform decisions on the
scope of future demobilization and retirement
programmes. The census is a precondition for the full
support of donors for the security sector reform. A
census of veterans and security bodies will also need to
be conducted.

On 17 March, the Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) organized, with
financing by the Government of the United Kingdom, a
consultation on security sector reform for the Security
Sector Reform Steering Committee, which includes the
United Nations and key multilateral and bilateral
donors as members. The purpose of the consultation
was to raise security sector knowledge capacity and
assess the need for updating of the Government's
security sector reform strategy. Its conclusions focused
on the need to update the strategy in order to enhance
efforts to combat narcotics and organized crime,
strengthen national capacity, increase the role of
non-State actors and devise an effective
communication and awareness strategy.

The OECD followed that consultation with two
days of consultations with the Technical Coordinating
Committee on 18 and 20 March. These consultations
focused on raising capacity and applying best practices
to security sector reform in the Guinea-Bissau context.
The consultation exercises identified the following
challenges to security sector reform implementation.

First, there is a weak parliamentary oversight and
control system. Second, there is a need for better aid
coordination. Third, national capacity-building is
required in key sectors. Fourth, there is a lack of
support for civil society organizations. Fifth, a
coherent communication and sensitization policy on
security sector reform is lacking. And, finally, there is
a need to link security sector reform more coherently
with the national anti-narcotics and poverty reduction
strategy frameworks.

To conclude, I would like to highlight some key
points.

First, the first quarter of 2008 has seen strong
activity that illustrates the tangible progress by the
Government in engaging the international community.
In particular, the arrival of missions from the
Peacebuilding Commission and of teams of technical
assistants from the European Union, particularly in
connection with the security sector reform, is creating
expectations among the population of tangible peace
dividends.

Change management is a long and delicate
process in which expectations must be managed. A
failure to manage these expectations would result in
disillusionment that might ultimately jeopardize the
long-term commitment necessary for implementing
these reforms.

There is also a danger that the upsurge in donor
activity may mask the reality that Government poverty
reduction and security sector reform strategies are still
massively underfunded. The international community
therefore needs to remain engaged. While we are all
aware that security sector reform is a key structural
requirement, Guinea-Bissau continues to face massive
social problems that need urgent solutions. It is
important that the international community also
earmark assistance so that the Government may
implement its poverty reduction strategy.

We must acknowledge the need for better donor
coordination in all sectors receiving overseas
development assistance. The need to strengthen the
existing coordination structure is particularly evident
in the security sector in view of the arrival of various
technical assistance teams to assist with the reform of
that sector.

As a follow-up, it may be necessary for the
donors to consider creating a multi-donor security
sector reform trust fund in order to ensure a strategic
coherence, identify gaps and develop a common donor
vision. I have already informed partners that I intend to
submit proposals to enhance our coordination efforts in
the country.

I have also sought the cooperation of other
departments and donors to map out the various security

sector activities in Guinea-Bissau, with a View to
articulating possible value-added roles for the United
Nations and non-United Nations entities involved in
supporting the police and other law enforcement
agencies of the country.

Depending on the outcome of a mapping resource
meeting at headquarters here in April, I envision the
possibility of a multicomponent assessment mission to
Guinea-Bissau in the near future to evaluate the
situation on the ground and identify the nature of any
assistance that could be rendered. The Council would
be informed of the outcome of the assessment mission.

The legislative elections are a key benchmark on
the level of democratic maturity in the country. It is
disappointing that preparations for the elections have
been impeded because of resource problems,
particularly with regard to arrears from previous
elections. President Vieira wants to be sure that all
conditions are met in order that elections are
financially, technically and politically feasible.

Now that President Vieira has announced the date
of the elections, it is important that the country's
partners provide resources to enable elections to be
held in November and to prevent the national
stakeholders from using the lack of funds as a pretext
not to move forward.

Finally, the Government of Guinea-Bissau is very
concerned about the emerging threat of terrorism in the
country. The recent case in January, in which two
Mauritanian nationals were arrested in Bissau in
connection with the murder of four French tourists in
Mauritania and the subsequent threats of reprisals
against Guinea-Bissau have led to concern by
authorities that there is a terrorist threat in the country.

The Government has requested international
assistance to strengthen its capacity to control its
borders in order to combat this emerging threat. The
arrest of the Mauritanians was an example of
coordinated criminal intelligence exchange between
the authorities of Senegal and Guinea-Bissau and also
demonstrates the risk posed by porous borders.
Subregional cooperation should be encouraged and
supported in addressing the threats of terrorism
especially in a region with porous borders.

