Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, Mr. President, allow me to say
how honoured we are to see you presiding over the
work of the Security Council today. We would also like
to welcome the presence among us today of the
Secretary-General. I also wish to commend your
country's delegation, Sir, for having convened this
meeting and chosen this subject for our consideration.
Following the terrorist attacks on Mumbai, the entire
world has once again seen the destruction that
terrorism can inflict and the magnitude of the threat it
poses for peace. This meeting is also taking place
following the terrorist acts inflicted on Palestinians in
Hebron by Israeli extremists.
The concept paper (see S/2008/738) that has
kindly been prepared and circulated by your country's
delegation, Mr. President, for which we are very
grateful, has served to establish the framework and
objectives for our debate, namely, an exchange of
views on the relationship between global security and
international terrorism in order to revitalize and
strengthen efforts to combat terrorism and bolster the
leading role of the United Nations in global counter-
terrorism. It is indeed a well-known fact that we all
have a common objective: establishing a world of
peace and security for all peoples and eradicating
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, whether
committed by States, individuals or organizations, as
well as addressing its causes and symptoms.
Nevertheless, I regret to say that there continue to be
disagreements about how to achieve those goals.

Although my country appreciates the progress
made and the work done by the Council, seven years
following the emergence of unprecedented solidarity
and momentum in combating terrorism, the Council's
efforts are still just a series of partial reactions to
circumstances focused narrowly on security only. In
that period, the emphasis has been on preventing and
combating terrorism. As emphasized by the concept
paper, we cannot achieve the goal of maintaining
international peace and security merely by declaring
war on terrorism. Terrorism is a multidimensional
phenomenon that cannot be effectively addressed
through punitive measures alone. In fact, preventive
measures and a flexible and comprehensive approach
are needed.

There have been several efforts in the Council to
achieve consensus on a set of draft resolutions. The
Council's committees and working groups have played
a prominent role in various bodies of the Council.
While they have had considerable achievements, they
have nevertheless worked within the confines of fixed
mandates drafted in line with partial measures and the
narrow focus of combating and preventing terrorism.
Increased participation in those bodies has sometimes
served to sap synergy from their efforts. In particular, it
has served as a drag on the momentum of the efforts of
the international community, as represented by the
General Assembly. In some instances, that has had an
impact on effectiveness and efficiency in combating
the phenomenon of terrorism, as well as on active
cooperation between Member States and the United
Nations.

Libya believes that there is a need to assess and
reconsider the steps taken to prevent and combat
terrorism in recent years. Without going into detail
about all the relevant measures, we believe that
preventing the financing of terrorism must be given
special attention and should be the subject of more
comprehensive and effective measures. We also think
that it is incumbent upon the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, to adopt more robust
measures to oversee flows of financing moving through
transparent financial institutions. Banking practices in
some countries and in some so-called free zones
require particular attention from the international
community in order to bring an end to suspicious
financial transactions that can serve to finance
terrorism. In addition, the granting of asylum to third-
country citizens must be subject to controls that ensure
that asylum is based solely on humanitarian reasons
and is not used for any other ulterior motive.

Over the past years, we have emphasized the
combating and prevention of terrorism at the expense
of basic aspects of the problem. We have not discussed
the reasons and causes for the spread of terrorism,
building the capacities of Member States or respect for
human rights of all and the rule of law: the basic and
important principles that have been adopted by
Members of the United Nations in the context of a
global strategy to combat terrorism. We are still
waiting for effective practical measures that will deal
with the circumstances and causes of the spread of
terrorism. Libya believes that our agreement on
removing the justifications of terrorism must not be at
the expense of dealing objectively with its causes. The
causes for the discontent that feeds violence and
counter-violence include: occupation, denying the
legitimacy of fighting against occupation, making
charges against peoples and their cultures, applying
double standards in the application of international
legitimacy and the injustices that have been suffered by
the Palestinians and other peoples.

Still more effort is needed to develop technical
assistance in a manner that will strengthen and build
the capacity of Member States to respond to their
practical needs in combating terrorism. We appreciate
the development of the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council in this respect, and it is our hope that
technical assistance provided within the context of the
United Nations, as an alternative to bilateral assistance,
will be developed. We also commend the efforts of
those organs responsible for the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
the cooperation among United Nations institutions and
specialized agencies.

There is no doubt that respect for the human
rights of all and for the rule of law are the cornerstones
of any effective strategy for combating terrorism.
National and international measures within such
strategies must conform with obligations under
international law, in particular international human
rights law, the laws of refugees and international
humanitarian law.

In brief, it is incumbent on all of us to strengthen
international solidarity to enhance the leading role of
the United Nations in combating terrorism. This is the
objective of our debate today: to implement the global
strategy to combat terrorism in all its aspects and
dimensions and to expedite the conclusion of a
comprehensive treaty to combat terrorism and to reach
a clear definition of this phenomenon.

In conclusion, I wish to commend the delegation
of Croatia for preparing the draft presidential statement
before us. We support it and we look forward to
adopting it at the end of our meeting.

