Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
extend my welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nebojsa
Radmanovic', Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We are also pleased to see again
among us His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative and Special Representative of the
European Union, and thank him for his briefing. The
report (see S/2010/575, annex) that he presented
accurately reflects recent developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and we share the concerns that he
expressed in his report and his briefing. I would like to
take this opportunity to reaffirm Croatia's full and
continued support for him and his Office.

Bearing in mind the existing shortcomings in
addressing the remaining objectives and conditions, as
well as the continuing challenges to the very
foundations of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as established
by the Dayton Peace Agreement - the fifteenth
anniversary of which we will mark shortly - we agree
with the assessment that it would be premature to begin
the closure of the Office of the High Representative
this year.

I would like to make three brief points.

First, we welcome the fact that the October
elections were free, fair and generally organized in
accordance with democratic principles and
international standards. Croatia believes that elected
individuals and political parties should enter into
constructive dialogue on the formation of new
Governments at all levels so as to continue, as soon as
possible, with the process of reforms needed for Euro-
Atlantic integration.

Negotiations on constitutional reform should be
continued in the post-electoral period. Croatia
reiterates its call to political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to find strength and reach compromise on
key issues. Assisting Bosnia and Herzegovina in
reaching sustainable stability and functionality is one
of our regional priorities. However, there will be no
progress without consensus, which has to originate
from within and enjoy the support of regional actors
and the international community.

For Croatia, the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and equality of Bosnia and Herzegovina's three
constitutive peoples are the basic preconditions for the
country's stability and sustainability. Croatia therefore
advocates for constitutional amendments that provide
full equality for all constitutive peoples and citizens
throughout the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Secondly, Croatia's strategic interest is the
stability, security and progress of South-East Europe.
We are pleased that the report recognized the improved
political environment in relations between countries in
the region. I would like to reiterate that Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina enjoy a close and friendly
relationship in many aspects. The high-level visits of
both President Josipovie and Prime Minister Kosor
represent strong encouragement to Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including as regards their viable return to their country,
primarily to Republika Srpska.

In the same vein, Croatia strongly supports the
clear and unambiguous European and Euro-Atlantic
perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We firmly
support all the countries of the region in their reforms.
We have invested a lot of effort in offering them our
assistance and experience on the European Union and
NATO integration path. We believe that membership in
the European Union represents the most suitable
framework for the overall development of all countries
of South-East Europe.

Therefore, we are particularly pleased with the
recent decision of the Council of the European Union
on the abolition of the visa requirement for citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina holding biometric passports.
This is a welcome step that not only brings real
benefits to the people, but may also reverse the trend of
Bosnia and Herzegovina lagging behind other countries
in the region in its rapprochement to the European
Union.

On the other hand, we regret that the invitation
extended by NATO to Bosnia and Herzegovina to join
its membership action plan, a step that Croatia strongly
and actively supported, has not been followed by the
start of its annual national programme. We call on the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take all the
necessary measures in order to fulfil requirements
regarding State property.

Thirdly, as we have stated on many occasions,
there cannot be a Bosnia and Herzegovina without
Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Their political and
cultural survival is vital for the continued existence of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as these two elements are
closely intertwined. Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are the smallest and most vulnerable group. Their voice
should be considered on the basis of equality, both
ethnic and civic, as guaranteed in the Constitution and
as stemming from the history of the country. Croats
should have the equal right to participate in the
decision-making process and should not be out-voted,
especially at the level of the Federation.

Finally, the fight against impunity for war crimes
is crucial for the normalization of the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The mandate of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia should not be declared complete without
bringing to justice the two remaining fugitives, Ratko
Mladie and Goran Hadzie, who were indicted for the
most atrocious crimes committed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Croatia. It is also important that
national courts fulfil their lasting responsibility and
address their war crime cases.

