Mrs. D'Achon (France) (spoke in French): I also
thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his very thorough briefing.
France renews its firm condemnation of the acts of
violence carried out in Kosovo this past month. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
certain delegations have categorized those acts as
terrorist and their perpetrators as terrorists. Those
crimes must not erode our determination to make
progress in implementing Security Council resolution
1244 (1999), with the assistance of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and all concerned parties.

We must also continue the fight against organized
crime. It is becoming a major scourge, and it
constitutes a threat not only to the security of all the
inhabitants of Kosovo, but also to regional stability and
Europe as a whole.

The firm commitment of the self-governing
provisional authorities of Kosovo is crucial to thwart
the power of that type of crime. We will judge their
ability to exercise their entrusted responsibilities in
keeping with specific results.

The renewed violence also means that we need to
remain vigilant in terms of the amount of international
force for security deployed in Kosovo. KFOR must
continue to have sufficient means to meet its mission. I
would recall here that France continues to be one of the
leading troop contributors in Kosovo and that its
soldiers are deployed in very exposed areas.

In that tense context, we reaffirm our full trust in
and support for the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to continue implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). We are convinced that the
"standards before status" formula continues to be fully
valid. As Mr. Annabi has stated, Mr. Holkeri will
shortly make proposals to make those standards more
operational. We have full confidence in him to define,
together with the self-governing provisional authorities
of Kosovo, the best way to advance, without delay, in
areas such as the rule of law, public order, respect for
minorities and the return of refugees and displaced
persons.

Finally, we have full confidence in Mr. Holkeri to
define the modalities by which there will at long last be
established between Pristina and Belgrade a direct,
sustained dialogue on practical issues of common
interests. We believe that that direct dialogue should
help to specifically improve daily lives in Kosovo for
all its inhabitants.

