I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to remotely address the Security Council about the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. My written report (see S/2020/763) provides details about our activities and results during the reporting period in relation to our strategic priorities. Today I would like to highlight a few important issues. At the outset, I would like to bring to the Council's attention the continued commitment of the staff of the Office of the Prosecutor, who remain fully focused on completing our important work despite the disruptions and difficulties resulting from the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The past nine months have been a test for all of us. Yet my Office has maintained full business continuity and is achieving important results inside and outside the courtroom. I would also like to express my appreciation to President Agius and Registrar Tambadou. As principals, we have worked closely together this year to lead the Mechanism through the challenges it has confronted. I can say without hesitation that cross-organ cooperation is at its highest level in years. In relation to our trials and appeals, I am pleased to report that in-court proceedings recommenced in late August, only five months after the pandemic forced the Mechanism to shift to remote working. My Office presented its oral appellate arguments in M/adic, and we are now awaiting the judgment in that case. In Turinabo et al., my Office expeditiously presented its witness evidence in only six weeks, consistent with the directions of the single judge. We are now preparing to respond to the defence cases and then make our final submissions. The presentation of evidence in the Stanisic and Simatovice retrial has been completed. The Prosecution team is working quickly to prepare its final trial brief and closing oral arguments. In our newest case, Kabuga, our work has proceeded well. By August, only two and a half months following the arrest, we established a team in Kigali to prepare the case for trial. We are in the process of contacting witnesses, and the team is reviewing the evidence collected. Travel restrictions and other pandemic-related restrictions are posing challenges that we are working to overcome. The prosecution is also meeting its pretrial obligations. The initial appearance of Kabuga was held on 11 November in The Hague. Disclosure of material to the defence is already under way. We will file a request for leave to amend the indictment by 15 January and will adhere to further deadlines set by the pre-trial judge. My Office would like to extend its gratitude to the Government of Rwanda for its strong cooperation in relation to the Kabuga case. Our requests for assistance are being promptly and fully answered, and we are being granted swift access to witnesses and documentary records. The efforts of Rwandan authorities are having a direct and positive impact on the expeditious preparation of that case for trial. With regard to my Office, we remain firmly focused on completing the remaining ad hoc judicial activity as quickly as possible. We look forward to receiving judgments in three cases by the end of May 2021, which will mark important steps towards the achievement of our goals. With respect to the remaining fugitives indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), my Office has viable leads and is implementing our strategies, with a particular focus on Protais Mpiranya, who will be tried by the Mechanism upon his arrest. In the last three years, my Office confirmed the death of Augustin Bizimana and located two other fugitives. The Council knows the story of one of them - Felicien Kabuga. As I reported to Council members earlier this year (see S/2020/527, annex 2), my Office identified Kabuga's likely location following an intensive analysis of telecommunications and other data. Thanks to efficient cooperation from French authorities, Kabuga was arrested just a few months later on 16 May 2020. However, the story of the other - Fulgence Kayishema - is that he remains at large following South Africa's failure to provide effective cooperation over the past two and a half years. My Office alleges that Kayishema, the local police inspector, played an important role in the 16 April 1994 massacre at Nyange Church. In the days leading up to the massacre, 2,000 Tutsi civilians - women, men, children and the elderly - sought refuge in the church. Initially, militias surrounded the church and launched an attack, including by throwing hand grenades into the packed building. While many were wounded and killed, the refugees resisted, forcing the attackers to retreat. Determined to murder those innocent civilians, local leaders, including Kayishema, brought a bulldozer to the church grounds. In an act of unimaginable brutality and sacrilege, the bulldozer was used to demolish the church with the refugees still inside. More than 1,500 were crushed to death. Survivors who escaped were hunted down and killed. Kayishema fled from justice and remained a fugitive for years, but almost three years ago my Office finally located him. Relying on records and sources, my Office concluded in early 2018 that Kayishema was living in Cape Town. That was confirmed by South African authorities via INTERPOL in August 2018. We immediately submitted an urgent request for assistance to South Africa seeking his prompt arrest. We were therefore surprised to be informed that because Kayishema had been granted refugee status in South Africa, he could not be handed over to the Mechanism. The excuse was withdrawn months later and replaced with a new argument that South Africa lacked a legal basis to cooperate with the Mechanism. After 16 months of intense negotiations, in December 2019, South Africa finally submitted the United Nations arrest warrant for execution, which a local magistrate approved. However, by then Kayishema could no longer be found. It is important to note that my Office has reliable information that Kayishema was present in South Africa as late as October and November 2019, only a few weeks before South Africa reported in the Security Council that the arrest operation was unsuccessful. Little has improved since then. A year ago, after the failed arrest, my Office submitted an extensive request for assistance detailing information that we required to continue the pursuit of Kayishema. Our request has yet to be satisfactorily answered. Two months ago in October, it was agreed that my Office would send a technical team to Pretoria to finally receive the requested material. The Foreign Affairs and Justice Ministries convened a number of joint meetings with responsible officials, but the Department of Home Affairs, which has responsibility for key information, did not attend as scheduled. My Office was then again requested to send last week another mission to specifically meet with the Department of Home Affairs and receive the outstanding documents. To our great surprise, on the last day of the mission, Home Affairs representatives informed us that Kayishema's refugee file and fingerprints do not exist. That is difficult to understand. I report those facts to explain why, despite all my Office's efforts, Kayishema remains at large. The situation raises many questions. How can it be that South Africa refused to arrest Kayishema two and a half years ago based on a refugee file that, it is now claimed, does not exist? Why did the authorities not take obvious measures after being informed that an internationally wanted fugitive indicted for genocide was present in their country? Despite a United Nations warrant calling for Kayishema's immediate arrest, South African authorities did not provisionally detain him or put him under any surveillance to prevent his escape. Yet what remains most important is that we move forward and finally secure Kayishema's arrest. Let me therefore make this request today to the representative of South Africa to empower operational services - particularly police and prosecutors - to work directly with us on a day-to-day basis and truly give them his Government's full political and diplomatic support, as well as the resources they require to help us. I am prepared to visit Pretoria in the new year to discuss our further cooperation and agree on a clear joint strategy and operational arrangements. That would also send the right message to other capitals. I previously mentioned my Office's efforts to engage with Zimbabwean authorities, and I intend to travel to Harare soon for further discussions. To move cooperation in the right direction, we would expect to see a more proactive approach by the Zimbabwean task force. In that regard, effective investigations would need to begin with the acknowledgment that a fugitive is known to have sheltered in Zimbabwe and has deep, long-standing connections with Zimbabwean persons. Similarly, my team and I will need to return to Kampala to engage in open and frank discussions about the urgent steps needed to remedy long-standing issues. Authorities have acknowledged that a fugitive obtained an official Ugandan passport, but our requests for investigation records and access to persons of interest have not been answered after more than a year. My Office is determined to account for the remaining fugitives as quickly as possible so that our tracking activities can finally be brought to an end. I know the Council fully shares and supports that goal. But the absence of effective cooperation continues to set back our work and prevent the completion of this critical residual function. As my Office works to resolve the challenges we face, the firm support of the Council will be vital. Member States should understand that, when my Office requests their cooperation, we are acting with the authority given to us by the Security Council. All of us owe nothing less to the victims and survivors of the 1994 genocide. My Office's third strategic priority is to assist national jurisdictions prosecuting international crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. We also provide support to authorities searching for persons still missing as a result of the conflicts. I would now like to briefly update the Council on three important developments. First, the arrest of Felicien Kabuga has brought renewed attention to continuing national efforts to prosecute alleged genocidaires. Arrests conducted by Belgian and Dutch authorities in September and October, respectively, demonstrate both that international cooperation is essential and that justice can be achieved in courtrooms around the world. My Office continues to urge full cooperation with the work of the Prosecutor General of Rwanda as he seeks to account for hundreds more fugitives who remain at large. Secondly, my Office continues to strengthen our direct support to national prosecutors in the countries of the former Yugoslavia. As a result of our efforts, a number of important complex case files have been transferred to Croatia and Serbia. During the reporting period, we also handed over to Montenegrin authorities a requested dossier concerning more than 15 suspects who can now be investigated for serious crimes, including sexual violence. Those developments present an important opportunity for the States concerned to clearly demonstrate their commitment to full accountability, particularly with respect to senior- and mid-level suspects who have enjoyed safe haven and impunity up to now. My Office will continue to engage directly with our counterparts to support further investigations and prosecutions. Diplomatic support from the European Union and other partners will remain critical. Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the importance of the search for missing persons in the former Yugoslavia. My Office continues to work closely with the International Committee of the Red Cross and national missing persons authorities. We can report that our efforts have produced significant results. Through that cooperation between international and national organizations, just a few weeks ago a new mass grave for Kosovo Albanian victims was found at Kizevak, Serbia, where exhumations are now under way. Similarly, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, assistance from my Office contributed to locating four new grave sites during the reporting period. More than two decades after the end of the conflicts, 10,000 families are still waiting to learn the fate of their loved ones. Accounting for all missing persons is a humanitarian imperative. In conclusion, my Office is pleased that courtroom proceedings have now resumed and congratulates all Mechanism staff for making this possible despite the COVID-19 pandemic. We are undertaking all efforts to expeditiously complete our work and look forward to the delivery of three judgments in the first half of next year. The search for the remaining six fugitives indicted by the ICTR continues to be a critical priority. My Office is grateful for the strong support it receives from some Member States, but we are deeply concerned that the lack of cooperation from others significantly hinders our efforts. In order for that work to be successfully completed, it is critical for the Security Council to send an unmistakable message that Member States should treat the matter as an urgent priority and offer my Office their full cooperation. We are grateful for the continued support of the Council in all of our efforts.
