Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): I welcome and thank
you, Sir, for taking the time to preside over this
important meeting. I would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Martin Kobler
and Special Envoy Mary Robinson for their briefings.
I wish to thank His Excellency Mr. Joao Goncalves
Lourenco for his statement. I also acknowledge the
presence of other ministers who have set aside time to
participate in this discussion.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has made
remarkable progress in overcoming decades of violence
and instability. Recent developments further offer the
hope that enduring solutions will yield dividends in
the search for permanent peace in the country. The
sustained engagement of the international community
will be required to complete that process.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
demonstrated its firm commitment to the success of the
electoral process, which is critical to peace and stability
in the country. The internal processes, such as the
proposed amendments to the Constitution and reform
of the judiciary, will serve as confidence-building
measures to engender broad-based participation in the
process. Such reforms must therefore attract the support
of all the relevant stakeholders. Other proposed reforms
relating to adjudication on genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes against civilians should
be predicated not only on constitutional provisions
but should also be in consonance with the relevant
international instruments.

Security sector reform is increasingly being
recognized as an important vehicle for supporting the
security and safety of the State and its people. That is
why we applaud the robust efforts of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in reforming
its police sector. We consider initiatives in that area
as essential to consolidating State authority and we
encourage the Government to mobilize adequate
resources in orderto enable similar reforms of the defence
sector. We believe that once that is accomplished, the
process of establishing a rapid reaction force to assume
the functions of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) will be facilitated.

Nigeria shares the aspirations of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to assume full
responsibility for the stabilization and reconstruction
of liberated areas. The effective implementation of all
aspects of that initiative, including the establishment of
Government structures at all levels, is critical for the
consolidation of State authority.

The activities of armed groups continue to
constitute both security and humanitarian challenges
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We therefore welcome the attention of elements of
the Forces democratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda-
Forces Combattantes Abacunguzi to disarm and
embrace dialogue and negotiations. We encourage the
Government of Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in partnership with MONUSCO, to facilitate the
disarmament process. In the interim, we support the
joint discussion between the Congolese defence Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo and
the Uganda People's Defence Force towards neutralizing
threats emanating from the Allied Democratic Forces
armed group in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We anticipate similar actions between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and other Governments of neighbouring countries in
order to completely eliminate threats posed by armed
groups in the region.

On the humanitarian dimension, we note the decline
in the number of internally displaced persons from
2.9 million to 2.6 million. More, however, remains to be
done to further reduce that figure and to ameliorate the
conditions of so many people who remain vulnerable
to various threats and human rights abuses. We
nevertheless take positive note of the initiatives of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Republic of the Congo in creating a mixed
commission to manage the humanitarian situation
caused by the movement of citizens of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo from the Republic of the Congo.
We urge the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to continue to pursue mutual beneficial
arrangements with other regional actors in mitigating
any humanitarian concerns emanating from conflicts
in the region.

We remain supportive of the continued diplomatic
efforts in Kinshasa between the team of special envoys,
including those from the African Union, the European
Union, the United States, and the relevant stakeholders,
for the implementation of the key objectives of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
Agreement. We also welcome the holding of the
seventh meeting of the Technical Support Committee
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism in Goma in May,
designed to assess progress on the implementation of
the regional action plan. Both initiatives are intended
to give impetus to the promotion of peace, security and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region and they enjoy our full support.

Nigeria commends MONUSCO for its continued
logistical, political and technical support to the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is pertinent to point out that MONUSCO's
reconfiguration process should not, by virtue of
pursuing efficiency in terms of resource deployment,
impede the implementation ofresolution 2147 (2014). In
that regard, it is essential that the execution of Council
mandates be facilitated by adequate resource allocation.

Finally, Nigeria pays tribute to Special Envoy Mary
Robinson for her very active engagement in the peace
process in the Great Lakes region. Her efforts have led
to the present level of progress in the region, and we
wish her all the best in her future endeavours. We also
pledge our continued support to Special Envoy Said
Djinnit as he assumes the mantle of leadership of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.

