Lieutenant General Ngondi: I thank the speakers
and the members of the Council for their kind words
and commendations. We appreciate the encouragement
we have heard today.

There have been a lot of questions. I think it would
be unfair to the Council members who have taken the
time to ask them ifI did not answer them all, and I
will therefore try to respond to each and every question
addressed to me.

First, with regard to the question posed by the
representative of Poland as to whether the current
mandate will allow us to work pragmatically, the short
answer is yes. The four aspects that I mentioned as
the main issues of the mandate are very clear and are
functioning well, with the exception of the political
pillar, which, because of the current political situation,
has stalled. The rest are going well. The problem of
denials of access in terms of visiting the entire area,
particularly the limited area that is under the control
of the armed movement, is the only area that is an
obstacle to the full implementation of the mandate.
I would therefore answer that the current mandate
as outlined in resolution 2429 (2018) can indeed be
implemented pragmatically,

The situation in Khartoum does have some impact
on operations in Darfur, but not as much as in other areas.
That is because whatever is happening in Khartoum,
in Darfur there are those who support the Government
and those who support the opposition. So it does have
an effect, now more so given the militarization of the
Government and the fact that the State is being run by
people in uniform, which creates a disconnect with the
management of the population itself and which is what
we see as having a big impact in the area.

With regard to the suspension of the handover of
the camps, it is our own camps that we are withdrawing
from. I believe that this is something that will be
worked out. From what I have gathered from what the
Transitional Military Council has said, those that are
with the Rapid Support Forces will be given to the
communities for civilian use and not kept for the Rapid
Support Forces. I therefore think the suspension is just
a matter of time while these issues are sorted out. I
think that is because of the response not only from the
mission itself, but from the international community,
including here at Headquarters, to the decree that
was issued.

Moving to the question posed by the representative
of the United Kingdom regarding the impact of
reforms and what we are seeing on the ground, I say
that decentralizing resources and decision-making is
always good. It makes it easy for us to operate with our
resources and to make decisions.

As for the lessons we can learn from the looting
of El Geneina, that was an unfortunate incident. The
investigations are going on right now, but the El Geneina
incident was unfortunate because the substantive
section stopped operations in El Geneina as far back
as 1 December 2018, and the facility has therefore
remained there without people working with the
communities. The substantive sections of components
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) work with the communities.
Based on the experience of seeing team sites handed
over to benefit the men in uniform, I tend to think that
it is they who are also benefiting from that.

Lastly, as I said, the militarization of the Government
has given the leadership of the State to uniformed
officers who perhaps do not have the necessary channels
of communication to the population to explain to them
the usefulness of those team sites if they are left the
way they are and handed over. This was an unfortunate
incident, and the lesson that we have learned is that we
must ensure that we have adequate capacity to protect
ourselves to the best of our ability, depending on what
we have at our disposal, and then to engage. We should
not detach ourselves from the community again. The
civil-affairs and rule-of-law personnel and all the other
components that reach out to the communities and
educate them on the beneficial purpose of our presence
there must engage with them and the Government with
regard to their primary responsibility to ensure peace
and order in the area - which they are doing - so as
to ensure that such incidents never recur.

Turning to the issue of violations of human rights
raised by the representative of Peru, it is a major
challenge. Our priority is to increase rule-of-law and
human rights capacities, particularly with regard
to monitoring human rights issues in the territories
and, more important, educating the people and the
Government on capabilities for ensuring law and order
and respect for human rights. It is especially important
to realize that the Sudan is a vast area, and that it is
therefore vital to expand State authority to reach all the
people, as well as the institutions that are responsible
for the rule of law and maintaining order and justice.

Lastly, with regard to development, while it is
not an immediate part of peacekeeping, the poverty
in Darfur has a direct influence on the incidence
of violations, as they are what results when people
struggle for their livelihoods in the absence of proper
governance throughout the country and have to compete
for resources, with all of that compounded by arms
proliferation and weapons falling into the wrong hands.
That is what makes the situation especially difficult.

Turning to the issue of the peaceful transition
of power raised by the representative of Russia, the
arrangements for that transition are quite elaborate.
That is why the State liaison functions are there. We
believe that it will be a peaceful transition, and it is
being carried out as well as possible on the ground.
As far as our safety is concerned, there are indeed
valuable lessons to be learned from Lieutenant General
dos Santos Cruz's report on Improving security of
United Nations peacekeepers. I should start by saying
that the situation in the Sudan is somewhat better than
in other areas, because the Government has always
dominated the area, and unlike in other missions, we
do not see deliberate attacks on the mission itself. The
Government is in full control of the area, and it is very
difficult for concentrated armed elements to attack
our camps without the Government identifying their
signature. The problem we had was with the people
themselves wanting to loot. We have said how we are
tackling that and have put an adequate number of troops
at every team site to ensure that we can do whatever
is necessary.

With regard to the question by the representative of
the United States, the Transitional Military Council has
indicated that it will rescind its decree, although that
has not been officially communicated. The question
was about how we proceed from there. From the outset
it has been agreed with the authorities that the team
sites will be for civilian use. Working with communities
and other non-security Government institutions, with
the exception of the police, we have some idea of
who the appropriate people will be to take over those
team sites for civilian use. That will be put back on
the table once we can ensure that the team sites will
benefit the communities in which they are located and
can be used by the communities, including universities,
polytechnic institutions, hospitals and anything else
that the communities have in mind. While we are
supposed to hand back the spaces to the Government,
which is where UNAMID got them from in the first
place, the arrangement is that they will be returned to
the community and not to the people in uniforms. That
is why the decree has to be contested so that we can go
back to where we were.
The representative of France asked what the
Security Council can do to help us enhance our work
there in terms of cooperation. In that regard, it is
important to ensure that both parties, UNAMID and
the Government and its authorities, respect the mandate
and the status of force agreement. It is as simple as
that. As I said, there are two essential elements for that
cooperation - trust and political will. We need that to
ensure that our work can be done, and that is where we
need the help.

With regard to the behaviour of the peacekeepers in
the area, this mission has been perfect. For instance, we
have not had a single allegation of sexual exploitation
or abuse on the part of our uniformed personnel for the
past four years, which is quite excellent.

With regard to the question from the representative
of Cote d'Ivoire, as I said in my briefing, in terms
of cooperation with the authorities regarding armed
groups in the areas under their control, that is the only
area in which people are not benefiting from UNAMID
services, because of the denial of access. The area
where the armed groups are is limited and contained.
There was an exception to the denial of access on one
occasion, in September of last year, when there was a
landslide in that area and the Government allowed us
access to it to help the victims of the landslide. The
argument would be that as we are enemies neither
of the Sudanese Liberation Army (SLA) nor of the
Government, UNAMID peacekeepers should be
allowed to go anywhere without problems, given that
we negotiate and talk neutrally.

The representative of China asked what we should
change in the mandate to ensure our success. As I said,
the only issue relates to the political pillar, which is
not very clear owing to the ongoing political situation
and whether or not we might have to exit before it is
resolved. We need to find an arrangement that will
enable us to address that pillar through negotiations. As
far as I can see, within the current political situation,
in my honest opinion it would be better to consider the
Darfur issue as part of the Sudan situation as a whole
rather than separately, but that is up to the Sudanese
people to decide. As far as our mission is concerned
right now, that is the only area where we see no clarity of
direction. We leave it to the Security Council to decide
how to proceed on that pillar as we move forward.
The representative of Germany mentioned a number
of important things, but to start with, the possibility
of handing over the team sites to the Rapid Support
Forces is something that will be worked on but will not
happen. There are two sides to the coin with regard to
the Rapid Support Forces. There are areas where the
people themselves say that it is better to have them
around because it is keeps the peace and protects them
from armed groups in a defined area. They therefore
feel that there are areas where the Rapid Support Forces
are useful to the people and are embraced because
they help them, particularly the farming communities,
because they do not have their own weapons, while
there are nomads who roam about and do have weapons.
The farmers feel all right about the presence of the
Rapid Support Forces in certain areas because it means
there will not be any armed people there. On the other
hand, based on the Rapid Support Forces' history, some
people are not very comfortable with them.

Are new clashes possible? I look at this issue from
two perspectives. My concern is a military threat from
clashes between the armed group that has a political
agenda, the SLA, and the Government. Those are
possible, and they break out once in a while. The other
aspect is banditry activities - the cattle rustling,
looting and criminality that happen everywhere. With
the drawdown, those clashes might or might not happen,
and the same goes for banditry. Without the rule of law
and governance, those crimes are likely to continue.
There could also be clashes between the SLA and the
Government, but they would be contained within a
certain area of Jebel Marra.

With regard to sexual violations and human rights
violations generally, I believe that it is important to
have human rights monitoring capability in the area.

The representative of the Dominican Republic
mentioned collaboration with young people and the
general population, which I agree is important. As I
said before, when we started the drawdown, most of the
components whose job it is to interact with the people,
particularly civil society, among others, were removed.
It is important to interact with the population, including
young people, and promote capacity-building measures
for their livelihoods. The governance section does a
lot of good work in that regard. As for the military,
what we need from the international community is for
the troops to be trained on a variety of cross-cutting
aspects, which is important in the areas of gender and
human rights, for instance, so that when the troops are
in further areas where they cannot move with civilian
components, they can still advocate and propagate for
issues of civil society, gender and human rights and any
others that can help communities. That is something
that can be discussed with Member States to ensure that
their troops are well trained on those issues even before
they are deployed to mission areas.

The representative of South Africa asked whether
we leave a vacuum when we hand over sites. I want to
repeat that I have already discussed the issue of sites.

With respect to the safety of the peacekeepers, the
Cruz report has been important for us. As Mr. Lacroix
said, it is important for the Department of Peace
Operations to be provided with enough resources to
ensure that it can perform. I just want to say that if a
time came when it seemed as ifUNAMID could replace
the Government, it would be time for us to exit and
leave the country to take ownership of itself.

The representative of Indonesia asked what
challenges we see and what we need for a responsible
drawdown. I think that the mandate has always been
clear for us uniformed personnel. We listen to what
we are told and implement it. The drawdown has been
responsibly conducted since we began it. We have been
clear on that. We began in peaceful areas and are now
left with the problematic area, although there are no
problems on its outskirts, and that is a problem that
requires a political solution rather than a military one.
As I said in my briefing, the tripartite coordination
mechanism invited everyone to the table, including
the armed movements, but one of the movements has
remained persistently uncommitted. Getting people to
the table is an area that requires political effort, because
everything must be sorted out through dialogue and
the way forward must be agreed on. That is what we
are seeing. But as far as the drawdown is concerned, I
believe it has consistently been responsible, especially
because we have seen no recurrences of hostilities
within the areas where the mission has drawn down. I
believe that even in the final stages it will continue to be
done responsibly and will be supported by the greatest
possible diplomatic efforts to ensure that the people
reach agreement on the way forward for their country.

The representative of Equatorial Guinea asked
about the peacekeeping force within the communities,
and I will say again that our uniformed troops do not
have skills in other areas such as civil affairs. They
are more concerned with physical security. But as a
mission, we are integrated with civilian components
and experts in other areas, and we work together so that
we engage the communities, as well as the Government,
in various areas. That collaboration should continue so
as to ensure that the communities are engaged and well
educated on what they need to do in various areas for
their own survival and welfare.

The representative of Belgium asked about pulling
out without political success, for lack ofa better word. In
my assessment, the political pillar is somewhat stalled
and should be jump-started. The current situation is
a little challenging in that regard, and work needs to
done there. Otherwise, all the UNAMID components
are well integrated. We have an integrated approach to
addressing issues, and we trust that we are all doing
our part in a coordinated manner, from the leadership
to the tactical level. However, I have to say that since
we started the drawdown, some of the civilian elements
and their useful services have been terminated, and
we are really missing them, particularly the civil-
affairs staff, who have eyes and ears on the ground in
the communities.

I will turn lastly to the question of what we do
when there are differences between parties, which I
believe is in reference to the parties to the conflict. I
want to underscore the most important aspect, which
is dialogue and diplomatic effort, because it is through
diplomatic efforts - people sitting down together and
discussing the way forward - that final settlements are
reached. Political dialogue, agreement and togetherness
are crucial. It is the people themselves who are causing
the problems, and they are the same ones who can
solve problems by sitting down together, talking and
agreeing on a way forward, which is how everything
will be okay. Therefore, when parties have differences,
they should seek each other out, discuss from their
different points of View and come together until they
reach an agreement.

