Mr. Von Boeselager: The Sovereign Order of
Malta appreciates this opportunity to address the
Security Council on the vital subject of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. This is a subject of
special concern to my Order, and I extend our thanks to
the President for convening this important debate.

During the twentieth century, civilians became
disproportionately both the targets and the victims of
warfare. One hundred years ago, 90 per cent of war
victims were military; today, 90 per cent of casualties
are civilians. Until now, all the efforts of the
international community under the international
conventions for the protection of civilians have failed
to mitigate this unacceptable tragedy. Current efforts to
protect civilians against the various atrocities of
contemporary armed conflict must be intensified. As an
international sovereign order with a 900-year mission
to help, in particular, the victims of natural and man-
made disasters and conflicts, the Order of Malta is
deeply concerned about this ever-increasing challenge.

The use of human shields to provide shelter for
combatants exposes civilians to lethal danger. This has
come to be the case in asymmetric struggles between
Governments and insurgent or terrorist groups. The
misuse of protected civilian or religious facilities
endangers even the principle of protection of those in
situations of armed conflict. We have seen this in Iraq,
Afghanistan and Gaza. The systematic use of rape and
mutilation of civilians has become a tactic of choice of
militia groups and armed forces in several regions,
especially in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where sexual violence and rape are part of the
military strategy of disruption.

Terror is an epidemic. Militiamen and rebels
perpetrate many of these outrages, often directed at
young women or even little girls and sometimes little
boys. The Order is working with victims in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to prevent or treat
sexually transmitted diseases and to provide
psychological counselling to them. We have treated and
counselled more than 30,000 women in the past four
years, and we have also successfully worked with
soldiers and rebels in order to try to prevent such
crimes in the future.

Civilians and humanitarian aid workers, including
Order of Malta personnel, have become victims of
military raids, most recently in Darfur. Cluster bombs
in southern Lebanon are a serious threat to the civilians
we treat in our clinics. Our maternity hospital in
Bethlehem, Palestine, the birthplace of 44,000 babies
since 1990, has been shelled twice in recent years.
More than 60 per cent of the attacks on humanitarian
workers have occurred in Afghanistan, Somalia and the
Sudan. In Afghanistan, the Order of Malta has lost
several local staff members in ambushes and shootings.

The Order has observed at least four types of
violence perpetrated against civilians in the course of
armed conflict, and the Council should address each
one. They are, first, direct attacks on civilians,
including by use of sexual violence, suicide bombings
or assaults on facilities for refugees and displaced
persons for the purpose of destabilizing society or
generating terror for military or political objectives;
secondly, the taking of civilian hostages to serve as
human shields or the misuse of protected facilities,
such as hospitals or aid stations, for the purpose of
protecting combatants or combatant facilities or
operations; thirdly, the inflicting of incidental or
collateral damage upon civilians, including aid workers
and medical personnel, as part of military operations
that create a high degree of probability that innocent
civilians will be killed or injured in pursuing what
would otherwise be legitimate military objectives; and
fourthly, the targeting of humanitarian facilities or aid
workers, such a medical personnel and volunteers, for
the purpose of denying civilians refuge, food, shelter or
medical care.

There can be no question that these kinds of
actions violate basic principles of international
humanitarian law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, whether or not a particular conflict
technically constitutes an international conflict and
whether or not the combatant groups or militias are
formally parties to the Convention. International
humanitarian law has evolved to the point that all
combatants must recognize and obey those
fundamental precepts of human decency and
civilization. In short, these principles and values must
be regarded as part of customary international law and,
as such, they are universally binding.

Equally important, those persons who violate
these precepts must be held accountable for their
actions. That accountability must include those who
personally violate the basic rules of international
humanitarian law, as well as those who are responsible
for those violations in accordance with settled
principles of the international law of command
responsibility.

The Council should clearly and unambiguously
endorse those principles, insist that all combatants

observe them, condemn violations of those principles,
urge all Member States to take appropriate action to
investigate and punish violations, and consider
referring to the International Criminal Court any gross
violations that Member States are unable to pursue
through the ordinary course of their domestic law and
procedure.

I commend the Council for unanimously adopting
this morning resolution 1894 (2009), which deals with
some of those issues.

The international community must mitigate the
danger to civilians stemming from armed conflict by
taking additional steps. One is to limit or outlaw the
production, distribution and use of weapons that are
inherently indiscriminate and that history has shown to
pose a massive danger to civilians, especially children.
I refer specifically to land mines and cluster munitions.

In addition, while the Order of Malta expresses
its support for international efforts to prevent the
spread of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction, the vast majority of civilians killed and
injured in the course of armed conflict are the victims
of low-level conflicts. The proliferation of small arms,
including automatic weapons, is a major source of
those deaths and injuries in such conflicts. The Order
urges the Council and the international community to
take responsible and effective steps to stem the trade in
small arms.

The Order of Malta pledges to work with other
members of the international community to re-establish
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, with the
goal of ensuring, to the extent possible, that civilians
do not become the innocent victims of these struggles.

