Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
and the other briefers for their valuable contributions
to the discussion on this issue of vital importance to
the Organization.

Peacekeeping is an essential tool in the United
Nations arsenal of measures to maintain international
peace and security, resolve conflicts and assist in
nation-building in the early post-crisis stage. Today,
however, United Nations peacekeeping operations
operate amid new challenges and asymmetrical threats,
including terrorist attacks on the civilian population
and peacekeepers, organized crime, illegal arms and
drug trafficking, and cyberattacks. Unfortunately, this
is not an exhaustive list, as the situation in countries
of deployment can change rapidly and each theatre of
action has its own characteristics. We should always
be prepared for the possibility that a conflict will
present new challenges. Regarding the recent sad news
from Mali, we would like to offer our sympathies to
the Governments of Mali and Togo and the families of
Malians and a peacekeeper from Togo who fell victim
to the latest attack.

The concept note (S/2016/927, annex) prepared
by the delegation of Senegal rightly notes that the
asymmetric threats to United Nations peacekeeping
operations have not appeared out of nowhere, but are
the result of the changing nature of conflicts. More
and more often, missions are working in environments
where at least one of the parties to the conflict is not a
State, whether we are talking about armed opposition,
illegal armed groups or even terrorists. We also see
cases where, in an area where a traditional confrontation
exists between two sides, a third one emerges that is not
under anyone's control, as has happened, for example, in
the Golan Heights, which are now controlled by terrorist
and illegal armed groups. Such non-State actors are not
bound by any obligations, including under international
law, and they do not participate - and sometimes
cannot be induced to participate - in the peace process.
Of course, there can be no question that they will take
any responsibility for protecting civilians, and yet the
people living in the territory controlled by such groups
are at the epicentre of the conflict and mingled with the
insurgents, who can use people and infrastructure as
human shields.

As such situations grow and spread, a debate is
going on in the United Nations and the professional
community about what the conceptual foundation for
Blue Helmet operations should be, how they should
approach situations in which it is impossible to
distinguish fighters from civilians, the extent to which
they can use force and so forth. After all, United Nations
peacekeeping operations represent the Organization's
ideals, and any mistake can have tragic consequences
and undermine its credibility. One ofthe concepts being
discussed is the so-called people-centred approach. We
believe that in such risky conditions, it is vital to ensure
that United Nations peacekeepers act with extreme
caution. It is more important than ever that they stick
to the basic principles of peacekeeping - the consent
of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force
except in self-defence or to implement the Security
Council's mandate. Otherwise, in cases where robust
and, especially, preventive responses to asymmetric
threats are sought, peacekeepers may end up becoming
directly involved in a conflict and accused ofbecoming
a party to it themselves. Needless to say, that is not the
way problems get solved. It can only worsen the risks to
the civilian population and the Blue Helmets themselves
and, incidentally, it can also raise questions about their
responsibilities under international humanitarian law.

For example, many Member States and independent
experts who worked on preparing last year's report of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (S/2015/490) have come
to the conclusion that offensive and counter-terrorist
operations run the risk of retaliation and heavier losses
and are therefore unacceptable from the point of View
of United Nations peacekeeping. We agree with that.
Peacekeepers should not do the work of non-core
functions meant for specially trained national or regional
forces. Such activities are entirely consistent with the
Charter of the United Nations when they are conducted
at the invitation of the parties or in accordance with
a Security Council decision. Blue Helmets should be
deployed when they can provide effective assistance
while remaining neutral. The conditions for that should
be carefully defined. It is not acceptable to attempt
to use them to plug holes in situations where no one
else wants to be involved any more. And the problem
cannot be solved with quantitative indicators. At best,
such miscalculations can end up creating increasing
demands for Blue Helmets, and at worst can result in
increasing casualties in their ranks.

We firmly believe that in order to address
asymmetric threats adequately, it is essential to work
on improving peacekeeping processes and cooperation
with host countries. That means, first, strengthening
the security resources available to peacekeepers, and
then their ability to fulfil their mandates effectively.
That cannot be done without proper planning when
a mission's mandate is being developed, including
by setting realistic goals and timelines. That should
be backed up by sufficient funding, equipment and
professional training for peacekeepers and leadership
personnel. A lot of that could be done by the troop-
contributing countries.

It is crucial to check their experience in handling
high-tech security tools. As we know, things do not
always go very smoothly in such areas. In that context,
it is essential to discuss contingents' so-called active
security, that is, the collection and analysis of potential
threats. While that work is unquestionably important
to operational efforts on the ground, it should be done
only with the consent of the host country and in full
respect for its sovereignty. We should be discussing
that sensitive topic not only here in the Security
Council but also with the participation of countries
where peacekeeping operations are deployed, troop
contributors and, of course, the Secretariat, and the
most suitable forum for it is the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations of the General Assembly.

One Vital component without which the problem
of asymmetric threats cannot be solved is ensuring
effective cooperation with host countries - the national
stakeholders - and building constructive and mutually
respectful relations with them. Governments bear
the primary responsibility for ensuring the people's
safety, including from terrorist attacks, establishing
the political process, providing development and
addressing the root causes of the conflict. The job of
international assistance is to support local and regional
efforts, not replace them. We should be considering
the comprehensive support that countries need in order
to expand their capacity to address the root causes
of crises. That should include establishing a political
process, institution-building, creating development
programmes and training civilian personnel and
security forces.

In conclusion, it is sad to see the Ukrainian
delegation using any means to continue its efforts to
pursue its propagandistic goals in the Security Council.
Such attacks have nothing to do with the subject
of today's debate and cast doubt on the Ukrainian
delegation's ability to responsibly fulfil its duties as a
non-permanent member of the Council.

