Mr. Kouliev (Azerbaijan)(interpretation from Russian): Allow me to express my gratitude to you, Mr.
President, for convening this meeting of the Security
Council, which is devoted to such an important and
urgent problem.

Armed conflicts occurring today in various countries
and regions of the world continue to bring untold
suffering to millions of people. They bring destruction,
conflagration, hunger and disease. They turn millions of
people into refugees and displaced persons, and the first
to suffer are children. Defenceless as they are, they
become the targets of the cruellest abuses: hostage-taking,
rape, humiliation and forced labour. This is a danger for
civilization because today's children are the generation of
tomorrow. How will they grow up? What are we
inculcating in them? In the General Assembly and in
other forums, our delegation has repeatedly underscored
the importance of further study of the effects of armed
conflicts upon children.

We fully support the study conducted under the
leadership of Ms. Graca Machel. We value highly the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu. We believe that his work deserves the fullest
support.

Unfortunately, our country had to experience first
hand all the dire ills and disruptions of armed conflict.
Mr. Otunnu said that most armed conflicts throughout the
world today take the form of civil wars. However, there
also continue to be acts of direct armed aggression. As a

 

result of the armed aggression by Armenia and the
continuing occupation of 20 per cent of the territory of
Azerbaijan, there are today a million refugees and displaced
persons in our country. Over 400,000 of them are children,
who experience the harshest consequences of expulsion,
loss of family, hunger and severe winters. They continue to
live in tented encampments and railway cars, awaiting only
the resolution of their fate and, above all, wondering when
they will be able to return safely home.

We support Mr. Otunnu's view that it is essential to
ensure the return of refugees and displaced persons to their
permanent homes. Placing children under alien conditions
and removing them from their families will affect their
consciousness throughout their lives. A peaceful settlement
of armed conflicts and returning home will foster the
psychological and social rehabilitation of children and
ensure that they gradually forget feelings of hostility. This
is why our country has always sought a peaceful settlement
of the Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict and the return of all
refugees and displaced persons to their permanent homes.
We consider that under conditions of an unresolved
conflict, humanitarian assistance for refugees and displaced
persons is an essential element for the survival of the
affected population. We are not talking here solely of a
certain amount of assistance, products or pharmaceuticals
without which human life is impossible. By obtaining
assistance, refugees and displaced persons see the
involvement of the international community in their plight
and thus continue to have hope for a just settlement of the
armed conflict.

In this connection, allow me to express our gratitude
to the donors and the organizations within the United
Nations system - particularly the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the World Health Organization
and the World Food Programme, as well as other
international organizations and States that provide
humanitarian assistance to Azerbaijan.

An inter-Republic meeting devoted to the problems of
refugees and displaced persons was held few days ago in
Baku under the chairmanship of the President of
Azerbaijan, Mr. Heydar Aliyev. The meeting considered
questions relating to refugees and displaced persons and
comprehensively addressed the matter of national structures
to mitigate the plight of this sector of the population. It also
underscored that the lack of a solution to the Armenian-
Azerbaijani conflict and the continuing occupation of 20 per
cent of Azerbaijan' 5 territory by Armenian armed forces are
the basic reasons for these people's suffering. The same
meeting also considered ways and means of effectively
using all available resources, as well as the humanitarian
assistance rendered by international organizations, to
support refugees and displaced persons.

We understand how difficult it is for conflicting
parties to reconcile and try to meet each other halfway.
At the same time, we consider that those States that
continue to Violate international humanitarian and human
rights laws must suffer sanctions at the hands of the
international community. The international community
should strongly say "no" to those countries that are
holding up the process of reconciliation because of their
political ambitions.

The Security Council could play a major role in this,
inter alia, by determining measures that could make up a
mechanism for resolving existing conflicts and averting
potential ones. Any party to an armed conflict must
assume responsibility for the consequences of the conflict.

