Mr. Lamamra (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
For five days now, the territory of Lebanon has been
overwhelmed by an onslaught of Israeli aggressive violence,
which has caused the death of many innocent civilians as
well as considerable material damage.

The Government of Algeria has strongly condemned
these recent acts of Israeli aggression, perpetrated in
violation of the basic rules of international law and of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon. It also
believes that by resorting to force in this way, Israel has
done grave damage to the necessary conditions for the
establishment of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East, which is a legitimate aspiration of all
peoples in the region.

Almost 20 years have elapsed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 425 (1978), requiring Israel's
unconditional withdrawal from southern Lebanon. In that
resolution, the Council took a step in keeping with the
Charter of the United Nations and with the requirements
of international relations, which must be protected from
unilateral faits accomplis based on relations of force.
Since then, the Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon,
which has continued, has been a hotbed of fermenting
violence, spawning an infernal logic that has thwarted
regional stability and the commendable efforts of the
Lebanese Government to establish State authority
throughout the whole of its territory. Thus, the
implementation of resolution 425 (1978), for which the
Council set no preconditions, is more than ever as an
absolute necessity. The futility of territorial bargaining
chips has been proved time and again, and the human
price of military actions can go no higher without
imperiling the prospects for peace throughout the whole
region.

Since the Security Council stopped regularly taking
up developments in the situation in southern Lebanon and
since the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon does not involve an evaluation
of efforts made in the implementation of resolution 425
(1978), an unfortunate phenomenon has arisen - that of
becoming inured to recurrent outbreaks of violence and
the accompanying upheavals for the civilian population.
But recent events in Lebanon are of such magnitude and
scope that a reaction by the international community is
urgently needed to avoid a double catastrophe -
humanitarian and political. The Council, and particularly
its permanent members, must be moved by the gravity of
the situation to act resolutely and effectively so that the
future of peace and security to which the peoples of the
region aspire is not further jeopardized.

