Mr. Vieira de Mello: It is a great pleasure and an
honour to appear before the Council today and to have
the opportunity to brief it once again on the latest
situation in East Timor and our plans for the future at
this critical stage in the transition process. It is a
particular pleasure to make this presentation under the
presidency of China, which has been such a stalwart
friend to the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and to East
Timor since the very beginning of this daunting
enterprise. Indeed, the entire Council, having set us this
mammoth undertaking, has never shirked from its full
responsibility to ensure that this mission is a success.
Though, in East Timor, we may be nearly as far away
from this Chamber as it is possible to be, through the
intense interest and support of the Council's members
we are continually reassured that we are never far away
from their minds.

Before I begin my presentation proper, allow me
to introduce - though it always seems somewhat
foolish to introduce one so well known to all Council
members - our Cabinet Member for Foreign Affairs,
Jose' Ramos-Horta. Also, and she is perhaps less well
known to the Council now, may I take the opportunity
of introducing Mrs. Emilia Pires, Director of the East
Timor National Planning and Development Agency.
Mrs. Pires is here in New York as a guest of the United
Nations Development Programme and the timing of her
visit is particularly fortuitous, as she headed our initial
planning exercise for the possible design of a successor
mission in East Timor, a subject I shall focus on at
some length today.

It has been six months since I last visited New
York and spoke to the Council. As members have read
in the report of the Secretary-General, much has
happened in East Timor since then. Many of the
projects that I outlined six months ago have come to
fruition thanks to resolution 1338 (2001), which this
Council adopted after the last open debate in January,
while many more are on the way. As I have told the
Council before, however, the mandate with which we
were entrusted in East Timor was much more than a list
of tasks, much more than a catalogue of problems to be
solved. It was nothing less than to work with the
traumatized and brutalized people of East Timor and,
together, to create an independent sovereign State.

I have often commented on the uniqueness of the
operation in East Timor. I do so not because I wish to
make excuses for any of our failings, but because we
are all engaged in something truly historic, and we
need to constantly remind ourselves of that fact and of
where we started. Never before has the international
community banded together and embarked on such a
noble venture from such a bleak beginning. We started,
quite literally, from nothing and - because we had
never done this before - through feeling our way
carefully, we have come a long way towards preparing
East Timor for that ultimate goal: independence.

That end is now in sight. But my message to the
Council today is that while we have indeed come a
long way on an extraordinary adventure, we
nonetheless have much further to go if East Timor is to
be able truly and fully to benefit from its independence.
Now is not the time for complacency, but a time to
buckle down and complete the mandate the Council
gave us to the very best of our ability.

Elections will take place in exactly a month's
time. A Constituent Assembly will be convened on the
basis of the outcome of that ballot. A second
transitional Government will be put into place, and
East Timor will soon thereafter become the first new
nation of the millennium.

This Council can afford to be proud of the
consistent help and guidance it has given us during this
critical and often difficult period, and I want to thank it
for that.
But much still needs to be done, and in his report
to the Council, the Secretary-General has indicated that
some of the tasks will be completed only after the
formal date of East Timor's independence. My
overriding priority now is to ensure that the United
Nations is positioned to complete the job it has been
set by the Council, as quickly as is sensible and as
economically as is prudent. To do this, we need to
address four major objectives: first, consolidate the
secure and stable environment that presently exists;
secondly, steer East Timor through the creation of
democratic institutions and successful, peaceful
elections; thirdly, put in place the building blocks for
the management of public finances and policy-making;
and fourthly, establish the framework for a sustainable
and effective Government administration. These four
broad objectives support the goal of handing over a
secure, stable and working Government to the people
of East Timor.

I believe that we are on track with the process of
political transition. We are producing a voters' roll,
which is being developed from the successfully
completed civil registration process. Elections will go
ahead on 30 August. A multi-party political process is
now under way, and campaigning has begun. I am very
happy to tell the Council that our efforts to encourage
women's participation in the political process have
truly borne fruit. No fewer than 268 women candidates
will be standing in the election, out of a total of 992
candidates, and I expect a substantial number to be
elected; indeed, I very much hope that that will be the
case.

We have also found a way, with the generous and
timely support of Member States, to offer campaign
help to the political parties, which will be of particular
assistance to the smaller and less well funded among
them. It will not be in cash, and it will not be
enough- it never is - but it will assist the
democratic process to take root in a country that has
never before been afforded this basic right.

There is still some disquiet among much of the
population because of concerns that the political
process may lead to civil unrest and violence. But both
East Timor's leadership and we have made it absolutely
clear that politically motivated violence in the territory
will not be tolerated. At the beginning of this month, to
reinforce that point, 14 of the 16 parties competing in
the election signed a pact of national unity, witnessed
by both Jose Ramos-Horta and myself, among others,
which demonstrates unequivocally their commitment to
peaceful, non-violent and mature - I repeat, mature -
democratic competition.

As has been mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General, those members of the transitional
Cabinet who wished to take part in the election
campaign have resigned and have been replaced by
their civil service deputies. This modified Cabinet will
continue to exercise executive authority and develop
draft legislation, most of which, apart from urgent
business, will await referral to the new Assembly.

Following the elections, I intend to appoint an
expanded Cabinet that will reflect the outcome of the
ballot. The new all-Timorese transitional Government
will head a reorganized Transitional Administration
that will more closely reflect the anticipated portfolio
responsibilities of the future independent Government.
This will entail perhaps the most exciting qualitative
leap forward in the process of handing over the reins of
Government to the East Timorese from the
international community: a process that the Council
called on UNTAET to carry out to the utmost in its
resolution 1338 (2001) last January.

While I shall continue to retain the authority the
Council has vested in me as the Secretary-General's
Special Representative and Transitional Administrator,
following the elections it is clearly appropriate to move
to a further stage of what we call Timorization. This, I
agree, is an ugly word that, I regret, has entered into
common usage. Behind it, however, lies the basic
guideline that has underpinned this mission from the
early months of last year: you cannot prepare a people
for self-government without first exposing them to
experience of government. Any other approach would
simply not work.

I know that, following the successful donor
conference in Canberra last month, many in the
Council are keenly and, dare I say it, critically looking
at our plans in the area of public finances. The budget
provided at Canberra, of $65 million, was, I believe,
neither lavish nor imprudent. It was the product of a
very bruising and difficult, as well as very democratic,
process. It was, like all budgets, a compromise - a
compromise between the need for fiscal sustainability,
economic good sense and aid dependency, on the one
hand, and the clear and desperate needs of the people
of East Timor, on the other. However, I share with
many members concern about the medium-term
viability of a budget that is already dependent on
$20 million a year in aid money just to keep running
the basic operations of Government.

The last on my list of essential objectives was the
transfer of the existing public service architecture to an
East Timorese public administration. My plans for this
will lead me to discuss also the question of the follow-
on mission and the sensitive but increasingly urgent
task of what we call "managing expectations".

In public administration it is my intention to
follow much the same pattern as in the political
transition. In other words, I want to spend the time that
we have between now and independence bringing the
international component of the public administration
down to a size and a shape that will allow a seamless
transfer of power to a national structure that is credible,
effective and adequately staffed. This public
administration will be one that East Timor can afford,
using technology that is sustainable, and one that will
serve the people while eschewing the risks of
corruption, nepotism and cronyism. There is still a way
to go, and over the next few months and years
capacity-building must remain our main endeavour and
highest priority.

Capacity-building has proved both frustrating and
difficult in the past, and we at the United Nations have
too often looked for managers rather than mentors, who
have thus not seen the need to deliver in this vital area
of skills transfer. UNDP has done excellent work in
this field, and I would like to commend it on its recent
very comprehensive report on this subject and on the
long-term plan that it contained. All of East Timor's
development partners will do well to support this plan
over the next few years.

The Secretary-General has recommended in his
report to the Council a continuation of the United
Nations presence in East Timor, should he receive an
appropriate request from the Government of East
Timor. The nature of the successor mission has been
spelled out to members, but I would like to take a few
moments of the Council's time to share my views on
what is needed and why.

I might preface this by saying that we have been
planning the new mission both through the mechanism
of an integrated mission task force in the Secretariat
here in New York and through the presence in East
Timor of a senior officer dedicated to its planning
several months ahead of its deployment. That is a rare
and welcome exception which I know my colleagues in
New York will ensure becomes the norm in future.

I am aware that critics of the United Nations
often say that the hardest thing to persuade us to do is
to leave. In the past, that has often been the case, but in
East Timor I do not think we are seeking to outstay our
welcome, although I look forward to hearing Jose
Ramos-Horta on this subject in a moment. This is not
in any sense special pleading; it is my view that this is
an absolute necessity. The arguments for a continued
military and police presence have been well presented
in the report, and I will not return to them in detail.
What I wish to emphasize, however, is that our
planning in this critical area will be predicated solely
on the security conditions prevailing in East Timor. No
other factor should be allowed to influence our
judgement or that of the Security Council.

The report entertains a scaled drawdown of the
international military presence, starting some time in
the near future and beginning in the eastern part of the
country. Should the current stable conditions continue
in East Timor through the election period and the
formation of the Constituent Assembly and of the new
transitional Government, I see no reason at this stage
why that process could not commence, cautiously, prior
to independence.

Security, however, requires more than an
effective police and military, important though they
are. It requires also the rule of law and effective access
to justice. In East Timor, as members know well - and
indeed, as the Council mission to us last November
made explicit - we have struggled to put in place an
effective mechanism to deal with the serious crimes of
the recent past. Some success is now becoming visible.
A major trial is currently under way in Dili, focusing
on a series of brutal crimes against humanity that took
place in 1999 in the eastern district of Lautem.
Nonetheless, our courts continue to lack basic
resources, both material and human.

Where we also continue to struggle is in bringing
fully to life the memorandum of understanding that I
signed last year with the Attorney-General of Indonesia
concerning cooperation in legal, judicial and human
rights related matters.

While bilateral relations continue to move
forward in a generally positive direction, we urge the
Government of Indonesia to reissue the decree creating
the ad hoc human rights tribunal that would make it
possible to bring to justice for serious crimes in East
Timor those first 23 suspects that the then Indonesian
Attorney-General Marzuki Daruzman publicly named
in early September 2000 following thorough, joint
investigations by the Indonesian and the East Timorese
prosecutors-general. For that process to be credible, it
is imperative that the tribunal have jurisdiction over
crimes that occurred not just after the popular
consultation in 1999 but also before that date. We can
and will continue to bring to justice those responsible
for these acts who are within East Timor's jurisdiction.
But true justice will require that the architects of those
crimes also face their day in court.

The bulk of my comments today will focus on the
question of the civilian presence, and in particular that
part of it that will be working within the post-
independence government structure. We have been
directed to do a job, and that job is not yet complete.
The Security Council mandate in resolution 1272
(1999) was quite clear. UNTAET was to maintain
security and law and order, to establish an effective
administration, and to support capacity-building for
self-government.

To equate the political transition, which is now so
close to completion, with the establishment of an
effective administration for East Timor is quite simply
wrong. The event of political independence is on a path
that is parallel, albeit closely related, to the progressive
achievement of what we might call administrative
independence. It would be wrong to disengage from
that activity prematurely, to declare too early the full
implementation of resolution 1272 (1999). On
independence, we will have unfinished business from
resolution 1272 (1999) still to do - and do it we must,
in order to ensure that the work so far completed, for
which the Council should take much of the credit,
remains firmly in place. I am sure that Jose Ramos-
Horta will reinforce that point in a moment.
The reality today is that we do not yet have a
fully effective East Timorese administration, and that
we will not have one early next year, when
independence is likely to come. The machine we run
now, the hybrid we have created, which contains large
numbers of international staff, is being reduced in size
and rationalized. But there will still be many gaps, and
those gaps will need to be filled. We cannot simply
walk away and thus put at risk the enormous
investment that has been made thus far. While it is true
that East Timor must rely on its bilateral and
multilateral partners and that the mission should not do
anything that those partners are prepared to do, I
nevertheless believe that there are vital parts of
government, particularly in the areas mentioned by the
Secretary-General in his report - those of central
management, fiscal management, justice and human
rights, and security and national sovereignty - where
it would be entirely justified to place advisory staff and
a small number of line managers in the East Timor
Government. With the consent and active support of
the East Timorese, those experts would continue the
process of skills transfer and would ensure the proper
functioning of departments for a specified period of
time.

I am convinced that those positions should be
within the new mission and should be funded from
assessed contributions. With great respect, I am fully
aware of the difficulties that some members of the
Council may have with that proposition, but I have
worked for most of my United Nations career with the
often debilitating and always uncertain constraints of
voluntary funding, and I am certain that these vital
posts should have the firm and predictable base of
assessed contributions if they are to attract the calibre
of personnel required and if those personnel are to be
enabled to work successfully in areas which are, after
all, of vital concern to East Timor's donors.

The Secretary-General has already indicated our
determination to finish the task in East Timor as
economically and as efficiently as possible. We have
signalled this with the figures we have already
presented for downsizing - or as I am now told is the
correct phrase, "rightsizing" - the existing mission.
We are still putting the details to our plans for the next
mission, but what we will ask for in October, when we
come back to the Council with more precise
information, will, I can assure members, be a strategic,
sensible and above all modest assessment of what will
be required.

Perhaps this is the right moment to address the
question of burden-sharing before I move on to
sustainability and the management of expectations. An
address to the Security Council always provides an
opportunity like no other to bring to the attention of the
international community and member States any
particular hobbyhorses that the speaker might be riding
at the time. Perhaps the Council will indulge me
therefore if I ask members to encourage, on my behalf
and on behalf of East Timor, the entire United Nations
system - the Secretariat of course, but also agencies,
funds and programmes - to work as never before to
deliver together as much coordinated assistance, with
ourselves on the ground, as they can. We had hoped for
that before, at the beginning of the current mission, and
quite frankly the results were, as members will recall,
disappointing. Let us, on this occasion, really pull
together in the spirit of a truly integrated mission to
show what the United Nations working as a team can
do.

One of the most significant events of the past few
weeks in terms of the long-term viability of East Timor
was the signing on 5 July of the Timor Sea framework
agreement. Australian and East Timorese cabinet
ministers initialled an Arrangement that was the
product of 16 months of often difficult negotiations. It
will come into effect as a treaty only when it has been
approved, signed and ratified by the elected
Government in Dili. It would be very unwise at this
stage to offer even a guess as to the revenues that this
will provide for East Timor in the medium term.
Suffice it to say that those revenues, if properly
managed, will have a very significant impact indeed on
the ability of the independent Government to deliver
services to its people and to plan development
investment for a secure future. There are surely enough
examples of bad management of mineral resources for
the East Timorese to take heed and profit from others'
mistakes. I am confident that they will. However, this
indication of wealth to come and the need to manage it
should not deflect the Government from the need to
plan within its means in the meanwhile.

This leads me to the vexed and sensitive subject
of managing expectations. I have no doubt that we have
done well in East Timor so far - together, in very
close partnership with the Timorese leadership.
Historians will be able to tell us with hindsight how
much better they would have done in our place. But
even the harshest of critics - and, as Council members
know, we have had many, especially those sitting on
the fence - must be surprised at what we, the United
Nations and the East Timorese, by working ever more
closely with the people of East Timor, have achieved in
turning the ashes and debris that we found when we
arrived, in early November 1999, into a functioning
State, heading fast towards democratic institutions,
elections and a democratic future.

There is a price, however, which concerns me
more and more, and that is the baggage that a United
Nations mission and the donors and others bring with
them on a venture such as this. In order to function and
to create the conditions necessary for us to operate
effectively, we bring with us a complicated culture of
technology and relative comfort. We bring cars and
computers, air conditioners and satellite antennas, and
all the paraphernalia of the technologically developed
North - because we do not function otherwise and
arguably could not do the job without them. But then
we leave, having created expectations, especially in the
capital and main centres, that cannot be realized when
Independence Day dawns and our hosts find that they
have to live within their modest means. Sustainability
is the catch-all word that we put into our reports, but
behind this antiseptic word may lie disappointment and
disillusion, which need to be managed if they are not to
be destructive. We have been working hard on this
whole question of the transfer of UNTAET assets to
independent East Timor.

Over the next few months, with the right-sizing
of the Government machine, some hard and even harsh
choices will have to be made, and we have to do
everything that we can to make sure that they are not
only made, but that their effects are planned for and
understood by all. How many computers remain in
Government, how many means of sophisticated
telecommunications, how many vehicles? There are
many important questions. But how many, how much,
how few are not simply mathematical questions; the
answers will affect people's lives and livelihoods.

I have made a habit on these occasions of
drawing to the attention of the Council some of the
lessons we have learned in East Timor that might be
useful to others in the peacekeeping business. In
addition to what I have just said, I would like to draw
the Council's attention to three final concerns: police,
justice and personnel.

I have little new to say on the question of United
Nations civilian police, but I must repeat myself
because we still seem to be facing the same old
problems of quality versus quantity - a problem, I
would suggest, that might not be so much one of the
police personnel that are sent on peace missions, but
rather one of our doctrinal approach to the whole
concept of international executive policing functions.
Admittedly this would be a new departure for the
United Nations. We need an exhaustive analysis of how
we approach this task. This involves the Secretariat, the
contributing States - in how they prepare their
officers pre-deployment - and those of us in the field,
in how we decide to best use them.

For the record - with the support of Jean-Marie
Gue'henno and the assistance of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in New York - we have
tried a pilot project in one district, involving the
deployment of the civilian police as a national unit.
The results are not yet conclusive, but I believe that in
some cases this might prove more effective than the old
method of scattering and mixing national contingents
in small numbers all over the mission area.

I would like to place on record here my strong
personal support for those who have been asking for
the development of a uniform code of justice to be
employed by transitional administrations such as
UNTAET and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). If the
United Nations is to govern, then justice is the key, and
we should come to the mission with the code already in
our pockets. But even a pre-prepared code requires
implementation, and implementation requires
resources. These have been sorely lacking in East
Timor from the very start. As Council members will
recall, the mission began at a place that was some
distance from even square one. There were no judges,
no lawyers, no records, no equipment, no buildings.
For the future, should we ever be called on to
administer justice, we must be in a position to do just
that, and we must be provided with the means to ensure
that we have no excuse for not doing so. Anything less
and we risk the collapse - or non-development - of a
fundamental pillar of democratic society.

Lastly, after much weeping and gnashing of teeth,
we have proved, somewhat belatedly and with strong
Secretariat support, that in personnel matters we can
make the United Nations system work. We have
developed an autonomy and flexibility that has seen us
through very difficult days, but let us not leave it at
that. Let us now institutionalize some of these
innovations and continue to be creative in our thinking
as concerns field deployment. We need the right people
at the right time, and we need to have the machinery to
keep the good ones and let those who do not perform
go. Above all, we need the time and the resources to
plan ahead. That is why we are planning now, and that
is why we are asking, once again, for the Council's
help.

When I briefed the Council in June of last year, I
invited all the members to visit East Timor and see for
themselves, first-hand, the work that was being done,
the difficulties encountered on the ground, the
successes and those areas where I recognized that there
was much room for improvement. In November the
Council paid us such a visit and, I believe, found the
exercise to be helpful, enabling members to see
perhaps more clearly the complexity of the operation in
all its multifarious aspects.

The elections on 30 August will be a landmark in
many different ways. They will lead to the creation of
an Assembly that will formulate the constitution of
East Timor, while assuming certain legislative powers
and, in all likelihood, eventually transforming itself
into the first legislature of an independent East Timor.
These elections will also enable me to form the
second - this time, all-Timorese - transitional
Government of East Timor. Its composition will reflect
the aspirations of the people as expressed at the polls;
its structure will very much prefigure that of the first
independent Government; and I intend to delegate to it
most of the day-to-day management of Government
business.

These new bodies, coupled with the judiciary,
which we have striven to Timorize from the very early
days, will, from the second half of September, be
exercising the maximum degree of self-government
possible under resolutions 1272 (1999) and 1338
(2001). At this stage it appears that once the
constitution is adopted presidential elections would be
the likely final step on East Timor's route to
independence.

A great deal will be accomplished in that final
phase ofthe United Nations-led transition. Both we and
the East Timorese will continue to learn in what will
be, without doubt, the most complex, yet the most
rewarding, chapter of this unprecedented mission. The
challenge for the East Timorese is obvious. The one
faced by the United Nations, which, on the Council's
behalf, administers East Timor, will be equally
daunting, for we shall have to exercise our
responsibilities in full harmony with new organs that
will enjoy, for the first time in East Timor's history,
democratic legitimacy.

Should Council members accept my renewed
invitation to visit us again, they would, I am sure,
appreciate that this is not an interface that should be
allowed to continue for longer than is absolutely
necessary to meet the essential benchmarks for East
Timor to achieve its independence. Conversely, I am
equally certain they would agree that for our pride in
this endeavour to be fully justified, we must remain
fully engaged in those early, difficult days after the
United Nations flag comes down. I pledge to fulfil the
Secretary-General's commitment to recommend to the
Council in greater detail, by this coming October, the
reduced, compact and most effective configuration of
that post-independence component.

I thank you once again, Mr. President, for
allowing me to make this presentation today. Perhaps
now, to complete my briefing and that of the East
Timorese Transitional Administration, you will be kind
enough to allow my friend and colleague Jose Ramos-
Horta to take the floor.

