Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French):
Belgium will speak later on behalf of the European
Union. France fully associates itself with what will be
said by the representative of Belgium.

The situation in the Middle East, including
Jerusalem, is worrisome. The escalation of violence is
tragic. Since our last debate, that violence has
increased further. More children died yesterday.
History seems to be going backward. Two peoples are
suffering and descending into a deadly, suicidal,
madness. This infernal logic must end. The spirit of
peace must gain the upper hand.

It is right that the Security Council should once
again to be seized with these grave developments,
whose tragic and deadly escalation we can only
deplore. It is now high time to break with the sterile
logic of force and violence and to see to it that we
renew without delay a dialogue on the search for a
political solution to the painful conflict that for over
half a century has torn apart a region of the world that
has particular emotional, historical and spiritual
significance for many of us.

Our goal should be firmly to recall the rule of
law, to guide the efforts of the parties and of all those
helping them put an end to violence, ease tensions and
regain the path of negotiations to lasting and just peace
and security. We must do everything possible to
harness the moral and political weight of the United
Nations in support of a real dynamic of peace. That
weight is not insignificant and can be very effective if
we are united. At a time when peace and security are
threatened, it is the responsibility of the Security
Council to chart the course out of the sterile and deadly
game of mutual accusations, provocations and
aggression.

The Council cannot end the violence or seal a
peace for the parties, but it can help and urge them to
do so by facilitating existing initiatives and the efforts
of the various partners of the Palestinians and the
Israelis in the search for a solution - especially those
of the United States, whose backing is essential,
Russia, the European Union and its member States,
Arab countries of good will such as Egypt and Jordan,
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations and
his Special Representative.

We believe that the United Nations can make a
useful contribution, given the fact that the peace
negotiations have broken down and the cycle of
violence is increasingly out of control. We also believe
that the Security Council cannot make itself heard on
such a difficult issue, or influence the course of events,
unless it is united.

In order to do that, we must base ourselves on a
common basis that is agreed to by all. We already have
such a basis, namely, the recommendations of the
Mitchell report. Our Council welcomed that report on
22 May, under the presidency of Ambassador
Cunningham. It also called on the parties immediately
to begin to take the necessary steps to implement the
report's recommendations. Those recommendations
contain all the essential elements for a return to calm
and a resumption of the peace process: an end to the
violence, the rebuilding of confidence and the
resumption of negotiations.

The Palestinians must make a 100 per cent effort
to prevent terrorist actions and shootings by civilians.
Whatever its provenance, terrorism is hateful,
unjustifiable and intolerable. France and the European
Union have on several occasions affirmed in the
strongest terms their condemnation of wanton terrorist
violence and have expressed their profound sympathy
for the victims and their families. By agreeing to the
recommendations of the Mitchell report the Palestinian
Authority committed itself to prevent terrorist acts and
shootings from territory under its control.

The recommendations of the Mitchell report
constitute a balance and a set of measures required of
the two parties. By agreeing to those recommendations
Israel, for its part, has also committed itself to an
immediate and unconditional cessation of violence.
The Israeli Government is mistaken if it believes that
destroying houses and Palestinian agricultural crops,
expropriating property, extrajudicial executions,
military aggression in areas under Palestinian control
and the closing and illegal occupation of Palestinian
institutions and properties in the territories and in
Jerusalem - such as the closing of the Orient House
and the theft of its archives - will make possible a
return to calm.

Committed in violation of the commitments
undertaken by Israel in Madrid 10 years ago, these
unilateral measures of repression taken collectively
against the Palestinian people are grave violations of
international law, in particular of Security Council
resolution 476 (1980) and the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. Israel, as a Member of the United
Nations, is duty-bound to respect those instruments;
including in Jerusalem where, with an expectation to a
final peace settlement, nothing should be done to
change the status quo.

Those illegal actions must end and be rescinded.
Orient House and its archives must be returned to the
Palestinians without delay. Those unilateral actions
only serve further to weaken the Palestinian Authority
and its President, Yasser Arafat, who nevertheless
remain today the necessary and obligatory interlocutors
of Israel. Israel must withdraw to positions held before
28 September 2000 and stop all settlement activity in
Palestinian territories, including the natural growth of
existing settlements, end the closure of territories and
transfer income due to the Palestinian Authority.

It would be artificial to separate security from
peace. They go together. Separating them would be
falling into the logic of extremism and terrorism of all
stripes. Only responsible and courageous action of men
and women in Palestine and Israel will see to it that
those young Palestinians who have known only the
closed horizon of camps will no longer live in the
anguish of lack of a future and in a void of personal,
professional, family and political prospects. Only
courageous action on par with those great men who
paid with their lives - I am thinking of Yitzhak Rabin
and Anwar Sadat - can one day penetrate the shadows
of vengeance, hatred, oppression and terrorism.

I would like to have a dream, one of a Middle
East that is reconciled, of Palestinians living on their
own territory, including Jerusalem, in the dignity of a
viable, independent and democratic State to which they
have a right, and of Israelis living in peace in a State
with recognized and secure borders, concerned with
integrating itself in a region at peace and encouraged to
do so by its neighbours.

This path to peace requires a return to calm, a
resumption of political dialogue among the parties and
a resumption of negotiations for a just and lasting
peace based on the principle of law, Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace. In this spirit, as we have
already stated on several occasions here and elsewhere,
we believe that an impartial monitoring mechanism on
the ground that is part of an extension of the work of
the Mitchell Committee, as soon as it is agreed to by
the parties, could help Palestinians and Israelis in their
efforts to reduce tensions and could contribute to
guaranteeing the results obtained.

Faced with a tragic situation, the international
community and the Security Council cannot give in to
despair, nor can they resign themselves to impotence.
We must and we can work to bring together positive
forces in favour of a restoration of a dynamic for
reducing tensions and for peace in full cooperation
with both parties.

