Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): As the representative of Germany
said, the situation is being brought under control.
Why make a change now, rather than waiting for it be
further consolidated?

The Dominican Republic voted in favour of
resolution 2471 (2019). We are of the view that
although it is true that there is an atmosphere of
relative calm, with a significant decrease in incidents
of violence, and although there has been progress in
terms of confidence-building and the resumption of
political dialogue, it is no less true that the process
of implementing the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan still faces significant challenges that will
determine the success of the Agreement in the medium
and long terms.

The setting on 3 May, in Addis Ababa, of a six-
month period to establish a Government of National
Unity opens a new window of opportunity for the parties
to make crucial decisions and to complete two of the
fundamental tasks that have not yet been implemented:
military reform and the resolution of matters related to
internal borders. It is time to reach a definitive political
solution. We are hopeful that this period of calm will
bring the process of political negotiation back on track,
that the parties will assume their responsibilities and
break with the trend towards inaction that we have seen
over the past eight months.

The humanitarian needs and food insecurity in South
Sudan are serious; sexual and gender-based violence is
a constant threat, as are human rights violations and
the illicit exploitation of natural resources. Also of
concern is the presence of armed groups, limitations
on information on weapons, possible violations of the
assets freeze and proven breaches of the travel ban.

To improve the situation caused by the crisis,
both parties must focus on preserving the ceasefire
and working together towards the realization of a
comprehensive and sustainable peace. We in the
Council must harness the momentum gained to move
that process forward in the shortest possible time.

It is imperative that tangible progress be made to
improve the lives of the civilians of South Sudan, many
of whom continue to be internally displaced, with little
hope of returning to their places of origin. The time is
now. The situation is critical and unacceptable.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
Indonesia on its presidency, as well as you, Mr. President,
and your team for your great work.

