Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first of all, to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and, through you Singapore, for your
well-deserved election to the Security Council. We are
convinced that your country will faithfully represent in
this body the interests of the smallest members of the
international community.

I would also like to congratulate the
representatives of Ireland, Colombia, Norway and
Mauritius on their joining the Council. It is now for
them to be standard bearers for the interests and will of
the other members of the Organization so as to make
this body a more effective, democratic and legitimate
organ.

I would also like to thank the Executive Director
of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), Dr. Peter Piot, for the briefing he made at
the beginning of the meeting.

The AIDS epidemic has become a catastrophe of
vast proportions. As we have heard, today over
36 million people live with the HIV Virus, while over
3 million persons died of AIDS in the year 2000. The
crisis is most acute in sub-Saharan Africa. Over
25.3 million people in Africa carry the HIV virus, in a
continent which is home to 70 per cent of the world's
adult HIV infections and 80 per cent of child
infections. Africa is also home to the majority of both
children made orphans and older persons made
destitute by the disease.

Although the human and social effects of AIDS in
Africa are incalculable, the economic effects are, on
the other hand, horribly clear. The epidemic will
dramatically reduce the annual economic growth of
sub-Saharan countries, and it is estimated that by 2010
those losses will exceed $22 billion.

We also cannot forget the more than 2 million
persons who suffer from this infection in Latin
America and the Caribbean. My continent has also
been a victim of the devastating effects of the
epidemic, on both the personal and the social levels.

Controlling this disease requires firm and clear
measures. High-risk behaviours should be avoided at
all costs. Although in some extreme cases measures
such as distributing hypodermic needles and condoms
can be taken to reduce the level of risk, those measures
are not enough; they inevitably entail a margin of error
and their success is dependant on careful and
continuous use. Reducing risk is not enough; it must be
eliminated.

A long-term AIDS prevention strategy must
promote the widespread adoption of safe practices. We
must promote social standards and values that
encourage responsible behaviour and the rejection of
the use of intravenous drugs as well as of casual and
risky sexual relations.

A comprehensive strategy to deal with the
scourge of AIDS requires, in addition to the adoption
of health programmes to provide medical and
psychological assistance to the sick and those who are
infected, as well as programmes to meet the basic
needs of vulnerable orphans and elderly people. The
human aspect of the crisis is enormous, and requires
extensive political and financial investment in
programmes designed to assist the neediest
populations. At the same time, we must guarantee that
the best medicines are readily accessible to the ill in
developing countries.

Considering the problem of AIDS in relation to
United Nations peacekeeping personnel, the Security
Council is faced with a worrisome problem. Could it be
that some United Nations personnel are carriers of the
HIV virus and thus, through their behaviour, endanger
the health of civilians in the field? That would be
unacceptable. Could it be that United Nations
personnel are at risk of contracting the HIV virus by
engaging in risky practices with the civilian
population? That situation would be equally
unacceptable. My delegation trusts that such situations
will not arise.

The behaviour of United Nations personnel
should always be beyond reproach. We cannot allow
United Nations personnel to have casual relations with
the local population, putting civilians and themselves
at risk of infection. We trust that the troop-contributing
countries, as well as the Secretariat, will take the
appropriate disciplinary and health measures to prevent
such situations from occurring.

Because of the judicious division of powers and
functions that the founders of the United Nations
incorporated into the Charter, the Security Council's
competency in the area of AIDS and the HIV Virus is
severely limited. It is for the General Assembly to
study and coordinate, in a comprehensive manner,
efforts to combat this epidemic. It is for the Economic
and Social Council to assess and deal with the social
and developmental effects of the disease. That is why
my delegation is looking with keen interest to the
special session of the General Assembly on AIDS,
which will be held in June this year. We trust that that
meeting will provide a new impetus to the fight against
this disease.

Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador Richard Holbrooke and wish
him every success. I can assure him that his innovative
approach, character and special style will not be
forgotten in this Chamber.

