Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to commend the
active Swedish presidency of the Security Council for
this month and to express my country's appreciation for
your efforts to ensure a positive outcome in the work of
the Council.

The world recently celebrated the life of a man who
was able to speak to the human conscience. He spent
many years of his life fighting from behind bars against
apartheid, and he spent his years of freedom advocating
for a culture ofpeace, freedom and tolerance. On 18 July
we celebrated the centennial of the birth of Nelson
Mandela, who dreamed of freedom and equality. The
Palestinian question was a large part of his struggle for
freedom, and indeed he is the one who said:

"We know too well that our freedom is incomplete
without the freedom of the Palestinians".

This is the dream of millions of Palestinians,
including the thousands who are prisoners or detainees.

In return, Israel daily makes clear, through the
attacks and deliberate killings it carries out, that it
considers itselfa State above the law. For Israel, siege,
starvation, the construction of barriers and apartheid
walls were not enough; it has recently adopted an
abhorrent racial law, namely, the Nation State of the
Jewish People, which paves the way for practices of
genocide in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory.
The Palestinian people are therefore in dire need of
international protection, as set out by the General
Assembly in its resolution ES/10-20, of 13 June 2018.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia strongly condemns
the continued Israeli violations and stresses its rejection
of all illegal Israeli policies, practices and plans,
along with Israel's attempts to entrench apartheid and
dissipate the national identity of the Palestinian people.
My country stresses the importance of a comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Middle East, as it is a strategic
option to bring the Arab-Israeli conflict to an end on
the basis of the agreed international parameters and the
2002 Arab Peace Initiative, based on the establishment
of a State of Palestine within the borders of 4 June
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and on ending
the Israeli occupation of all Arab occupied territories,
including the Syrian Arab Golan and the Lebanese
occupied land.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) suffers
from an acute shortage in its financial and humanitarian
resources that could result in millions of Palestinian
refugees being denied their basic right to education
and a decent life. The Palestinian question has always
been and always will be championed by the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia as its first cause.

For this reason, my country has provided UNRWA
with an urgently needed $50 million, as announced by
the Custodian ofthe Two Holy Mosques at the Jerusalem
summit held in Dhahran City. We have disbursed more
than $100 million over the past year alone. The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia firmly believes in action, not in words.
Accordingly, over the past two decades my country's
total financial support to UNRWA has amounted
to nearly $1 billion - with a "B" - and more than
$6 billion - with a "B" as well - to the Palestinian
people in the form of humanitarian, development and
relief aid.

Syria was a land of civilization and a beacon of
science before it came under the control of a dictatorial
regime to which civilization means nothing. Its barrel
bombs have destroyed the remnants of that civilization,
which are thousands of years old. Its rockets have levelled
the minarets of mosques and the domes of churches.
Its soldiers and sectarian gangs have silenced the voice
of the rebellious people. The regime has claimed the
lives of men, women and the elderly, declaring victory
over its own people. It is shameful that this regime
has failed to clear its territory of occupation but brags
about destroying Dara'a and Ghouta while displacing
their people.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stresses once
again that the misery of the Syrian people should end.
A peaceful solution must be pursued based on the
principles of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). Protection should be
provided to civilians in Syria. Humanitarian aid must
be delivered to those in need throughout Syria. We call
for the immediate release of abductees and detainees,
the disclosure of the fate of missing people, and
assistance to the return of internally displaced persons
and refugees.

My country supports the efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Martin Griffiths.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and its brotherly countries
in the coalition have exercised the utmost restraint to
restore legitimacy in Yemen, especially with regard
to Al-Hudaydah. However, Houthi militias supported
by Iran ignore every political initiative and fail to
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 2216 (2015). The continued Houthi
control of parts of Yemen has spawned the medical,
food and humanitarian disasters. Saving Yemen and
its people requires removing Al-Hudaydah, its port
and other Yemeni cities from Houthi control, thereby
enabling an increased level of humanitarian assistance,
and liberating them from Houthi pillaging.

The militias that staged a coup in Yemen have
launched 163 Iranian missiles at cities in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. Independent reports by the United
Nations have made it clear that they came from Iran.
They were manufactured in Iran and transferred to
the Houthis from Iran. In that regard, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/602) on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), issued on 12 June, states in
paragraph 10, related to the missiles launched at my
country, that the debris of five of those missiles share
key design features with a known type of missile
manufactured by the Islamic Republic of Iran.

The Iranian regime continues to use all its
financial, scientific, and military resources to spread
havoc and destabilization in the Middle East, a region
that has suffered and continues to suffer from the
destabilization situation engendered by the Khomeini
revolution in Iran in 1979. The main principle of the
revolution is to export its extremist ideology not
only to neighbouring countries, but beyond. We
occasionally receive reports of the involvement of Iran
and its agents in destabilization activities, as well as
of repeated attacks on diplomatic headquarters in Iran,
with complete disregard for the relevant international
agreements and instruments.

It is high time for the Security Council to reject Iran's
irresponsible behaviour and continued intervention in
the internal affairs of other countries in the region, as
well as the spread of sedition and sectarianism. The
Council must tell to Iran that enough is enough so as to
prevent terrorism and violence from increasing in the
region and to enable the Iranian and Arab peoples in the
Arab Gulf region and the Middle East to enjoy security,
peace and stability.

