Mrs. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The Palestinian people continue to suffer deeply.
For almost 50 years, the illegal occupation of Israel
and Israeli policies and practices have flagrantly
flouted international law, including international
humanitarian law. From October 2015 to date, Israeli
military incursions have caused the deaths of over
200 Palestinians, some of them children. From the
beginning of 2016 to date, 878 Palestinian structures
in the West Bank have been destroyed or confiscated
by Israeli authorities, which represents a 60 per cent
increase as compared to 2015 and the most structures
destroyed in a single year since 2008. New settlement
construction in the second quarter of 2016 was higher
than at any point during the past three years.

How long will the Security Council stay silent,
hostage to the United States veto or threat of veto? How
long will the Council allow Israel to act with impunity as
it commits crimes against the Palestinian people? Cuba
once again calls on the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
and to adopt the necessary measures to demand that
Israel immediately end the occupation ofPalestinian and
other Arab territories; the blockade of the Gaza Strip,
the building and expansion of Israeli settlements and
the separation wall in occupied Palestinian territories;
the destruction and expropriation of Palestinian land
and property; forced displacements; and the transfer of
settlers to illegally occupied Palestinian land; among
other violations of international law, international
humanitarian law and United Nations resolutions.

Until the Security Council shoulders its
responsibilities, Israel will continue to consolidate the
occupation, making the two-State solution impossible
and undermining the attainment of a fair and peaceful
solution to the conflict. Cuba applauds regional and
international efforts under way to resume Israeli-
Palestinian peace talks. We reiterate that the Security
Council must fulfil its obligation to promoting a
negotiated solution that ends the Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territory. The only possible solution to
the Palestinian question is the peaceful coexistence of
two independent States, with the establishment of an
independent, sovereign and viable Palestinian State
with its capital in East Jerusalem and with pre-1967
borders.

Cuba reaffirms its full support for the admission of
Palestine as a full Member of the Organization and calls
on the Security Council to take a decision to that end. If
it does not, the General Assembly should act with full
determination to resolve the matter. Cuba welcomes the
willingness of the State of Palestine to lead the work of
the Group of 77 in the near future. Its leadership will
honour the Group.

We condemn the politicization of the crisis in Syria
and the manipulation of the humanitarian situation and
the suffering of the Syrian people by some members
of the Council, which, to serve their own geopolitical
interests, are pursuing the declared objective of
imposing regime change in Syria. These same members
too often forget the great humanitarian needs in the
besieged Gaza Strip, where more than 1.3 million of the
1.9 million Palestinian residents need help.

Those who have fuelled the conflict in Syria,
providing weapons and funds and sponsoring
terrorist groups from outside, are responsible for the
thousands of civilian victims of the conflict and for
the humanitarian situation in the country. Cuba regrets
the loss of innocent lives as a result of this situation
and condemns all acts of violence against the civilian
population in Syria.

The threat posed by extremist groups in the
country, some of which are using terrorist methods, is
the main challenge facing that Arab nation. The fight
against this scourge in Syria should be part of the
collective efforts to find a solution to the crisis. Cuba
rejects the promotion of an interventionist agenda in
the guise of the fight against terrorism. We demand
that violations of Syria's sovereignty cease, and that
the foreign military presence, which does not have the
consent of4 and whose operations are not coordinated
with - the Syrian Government, the sole legitimately
elected authority in the country, be brought to an end.

A political solution through dialogue and
negotiations and without preconditions is the only
viable solution to the conflict in that country. Peace in
Syria can be achieved only by respecting the right of
the Syrian people to decide their own destiny without
outside interference and without impositions. We
support the Syrian people in their aspirations to live in
peace and choose their destiny.

All conflict situations in the Middle East should
receive the same attention by the Security Council.
The achievement of the peace, security, well-being and
development that all peoples, including those of the
Middle East, deserve will depend upon the Council's
decisive action. Cuba reiterates its support for a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the conflicts in
the Middle East, which will safeguard the sovereignty,
security and territorial integrity of all States in
the region.

The meeting rose at 4.25 pm.
