Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like to briefly
share with the Council the reasons that compelled us to
vote against resolution 1953 (2010) today.

Since the adoption of resolution 186 (1964),
which set up the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP), all Council resolutions extending
the mandate of the Force are unfortunately still being
drafted as if there were only one side on the island.

There has not been a joint and constitutional
Government representing the whole of Cyprus since
1963. Treating the Greek Cypriot Government as the
Government of the whole island has been the main
obstacle in the way to finding a just, lasting and
comprehensive solution for over 46 years. For all those
years, Turkey has stressed that the consent and
cooperation of the two sides are backdrop principles
for the success of the peacekeeping operation.
Unfortunately, this erroneous practice has been
corrected neither in the previous resolutions nor in
today's.

Although the resolution contains some elements
that encourage increased momentum in the
negotiations, it is short of reflecting the observations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on his
mission of good offices (S/2010/603), in which he
underlines, inter alia, that the talks cannot be an open-
ended process and that a critical window of
opportunity is rapidly closing. We believe that the
resolution should have carried a stronger message to
that end.

That also applies to the support given to the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General, Mr. Alexander
Downer. We believe that, by only welcoming his efforts,
the Security Council has not rendered its full support to
Mr. Downer at this very critical juncture in the
negotiating process.

We welcome the Secretary-General's
determination to keep UNFICYP under close review
and to work on contingency planning. However, his
intention to conduct a broader assessment, which he
strongly emphasizes in both his reports, unfortunately
is not in any way reflected in the resolution. That is yet
10-69138
another important shortcoming as far as the resolution
is concerned.

I would like to reaffirm that the Turkish side has
implemented and will continue to implement the
provisions of the relevant resolutions. We believe that
achieving a mutually acceptable and comprehensive
settlement of the Cyprus problem within the
established United Nations parameters, which will
safeguard the fundamental and legitimate rights and
interests of two peoples on the island, is possible and
within reach.
10-69138

The parameters of a solution in Cyprus are
known. There is a substantial body of work. Turkey
sincerely hopes that the two sides will show the
necessary political will to bring the negotiations to a
successful conclusion. In that respect, Turkey will
continue to fully support the Secretary-General in his
efforts and to cooperate with UNFICYP.

