Mr. Karamanlis: It is a great pleasure for me to
attend today's Security Council summit meeting. I
would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
the Philippines' assumption of the presidency for the
current month.

This is a historic moment for the United Nations,
as heads of State and Government are reviewing the
implementation of the Millennium Declaration and are
considering the future of this Organization.

The end of the cold war ushered in a new era in
international relations, which dissipated the threat of
military confrontation among the two power blocks.
However, the world community still faces violent
internal conflicts, civil wars, genocide and other large-
scale atrocities that cause immense suffering to
millions of people.

Terrorism is undeniably one of the most serious
threats to peace and security, menacing the very
foundation of our democratic societies. The signing,
during the present summit, of the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism and the adoption during the sixtieth session
of the General Assembly of a comprehensive
convention against terrorism are very important steps
in the struggle against this scourge.

In this context, it should be stressed that actions
to combat terrorism and the protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms are not mutually exclusive.
We fully subscribe to the recent statement of the
Secretary-General that "in the long term, we shall find
that human rights, along with democracy and social
justice, are one of the best prophylactics against
terrorism" (S/PV.4453, p. 3). Consequently, we welcome
the adoption of a new Security Council resolution on
the prohibition of the incitement to commit terrorist
acts. We believe that this resolution should not affect
established principles relating to freedom of expression
and to non-refoulement.

In addressing the deep-rooted structural problems
that fuel conflicts, peacebuilding must bridge security
and development. Good governance, the rule of law,
strong democratic institutions, respect for human
rights, development assistance, reform and
democratization of the security sector are critical
components in reducing today's conflicts.

The United Nations should be strengthened in
managing, resolving and preventing conflicts and their
recurrence. Early, comprehensive and coherent
prevention of conflicts lies at the heart of the United
Nations mandate for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Integrated and long-term strategies
to address the root causes of conflicts are necessary.

In this respect, we fully support the establishment
of a Peacebuilding Commission. We also support the
adoption of a Security Council resolution on conflict
prevention in Africa, the most conflict-ridden
continent.

Conflicts within and between States are not the
only threat to international peace and security. New
threats and challenges are emerging. Extreme poverty
in many parts of the world, deadly infectious diseases
and environmental degradation have devastating
consequences. Proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is potentially the greatest threat to our
societies. Organized crime is another threat that can
have destabilizing effects and can fuel civil wars.

All these threats and challenges require a more
comprehensive concept of collective security and the
strengthening of the United Nations. International
regional organizations should also be effective and
international treaties should be respected. We believe
that this summit offers a unique opportunity to bring
about the changes required for a more peaceful and
stable world in the twenty-first century.

