Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): More than six weeks have passed since the
onset of acts of violence perpetrated by extremist
groups whose fundamental goal is clearly the fall of the
Syrian Government. Throughout this time, law
enforcement authorities have exercised the utmost
restraint, in order to avoid the killing of innocent
civilians. However, those groups, which included
armed criminal elements, have continued to kill
innocent citizens and many members of the security
forces, as well as to attack Government facilities and
army and law enforcement installations.

As the Security Council is aware, the
Government has taken many measures in response to
legitimate popular demands, including the lifting of the
state of emergency, the abolition of the High Security
Court and the issuance, for the first time in Syria's
history, of a legislative decree on peaceful
demonstrations. Measures have also been taken to
combat corruption and to respond to popular demands
on issues related to the daily lives of Syrian citizens.
Moreover, I would like to draw the Council's attention
to the fact that there will be further measures by the
Government to bolster reform in the country, following
calls from several members of the Council.

Rather than backing down in the light of the
reform measures taken by the Syrian leadership,
regrettably, the parties behind the demonstrations have
responded with further attacks against army positions
and by destroying security installations, killing many
security personnel, mutilating corpses, raising slogans
of incitement and burning private and public
establishments. I have here with me the names of 51
members of the armed forces who were killed by these
armed gangs. The list includes the names of both
soldiers and officers. I would be happy to provide
copies to anyone who would like one.

In response to popular demands, the President of
the Syrian Arab Republic has met with delegations
from every province in the country in order to respond
directly to citizen complaints and demands. The
President has issued instructions to respond to all
legitimate demands, including investigating all acts of
killing and declaring that all civilian and military
casualties are to be considered as martyrs.

Faced with these initiatives of openness by the
State and its institutions, those who are attempting to
undermine Syria have tried to exploit the positive
environment in order to erode the country's security
and stability by blocking roads, threatening citizens,
forcing schools and Government institutions to close
and continuing to carry out acts that run counter to the
interests of citizens, their security and their ability to
live normal lives throughout the country.

That campaign within Syria has gone hand-in-
hand with an unprecedented media campaign in the
region against Syria and its national and Arab policies.
There has been incitement to terrorism and sabotage.
Doubts have been sown as to the Government's intent.
In many cases, facts have been turned on their heads.
Demonstrators have been incited to burn State property
and raise doubt about its position on events. There has
been encouragement to acts of violence and
justification for it, in an attempt to make the
Government's reform efforts null and void. There have
also been fatwas from beyond our borders, calling for
opposition to authority and State institutions.

That campaign has been accompanied by
information confirming that official parties outside the
country have been financing and responsible for
inciting acts of sabotage against Syria, its people and
its leadership. For example, let me refer to an article in
the Washington Post dated Monday, 18 April, which
states that, since 2006, the State Department has
provided up to $6 million to several Syrian opposition
figures to run a satellite television station called
Barada, which is headquartered in London. In addition,
since 2005, the United States Administration has
provided financial support to Syrian opposition figures.
All of this is part of a long-term campaign that,
according to the Washington Post, "is aimed at the
regime of President Bashar Al-Assad. To complete the
picture of this conspiracy against my country, allow me
to refer the Council to the statement made to a number
of media outlets by a Syrian opposition figure living in
France, namely, that he had received offers from three
foreign parties to bring weapons into Syria.

These actions have had a negative impact on our
national economy. Markets are stalled. Tourism has
come to a halt. Investment is down. All of this is part
of an effort to heighten instability in as many Syrian
cities and villages as possible.

The authorities, within the responsibility that they
have to protect Syria and its borders with neighbouring
countries, have stopped many arms shipments that had
been sent to groups attempting to undermine stability
and security in the country. It has been proved that
those weapons were sent from overseas by extremist
religious groups to their agents inside the country with
the goal of killing innocent people, burning public and
private institutions and, in general, causing chaos in
the country. It was natural, under such circumstances,
for the State to undertake to fulfil - just as would any
other State facing such threats and dangers - its
fundamental responsibility to respond to the calls of its
citizens, who had been enjoying peace and security.

The Syrian leadership is convinced that such
extremist circles do not want reform; they want to
overthrow the Government through killing and chaos.
It was thus natural for the Syrian leadership to respond
to the appeals of its citizens that it save them from the
actions of such terrorist extremist groups and to restore
order to the country. That is exactly what happened in
the city of Dar'a, which Mr. Pascoe mentioned earlier.
Security forces found large numbers of sophisticated
weapons, including machine guns and advanced
communications equipment. The operation also led to
the detention of a large number of members of those
extremist groups that have been sowing terror and
death; other groups managed to escape outside the
province. The detainees have admitted to their crimes
and to the fact that they had received large sums of
money for their acts, which the State can neither accept
nor justify.

Syria sees no justification for a debate on this
issue in the Security Council. We view with grave
suspicion the attempts made by some to give the
impression that the Syrian State does not protect its
people. While armed groups have committed acts of
killing and destruction, as I have stated, let me stress
that no one has the right to protect, or even hint at
protecting, such groups. The Syrian State is defending
its people. It is saving them from the seditious plots
being hatched by Syria's enemies in an attempt to
undermine its security and independence. It is rejecting
the massive political pressure brought to bear by some
from outside the country to change national policies
that serve the interests of the people and the nation.

In order to safeguard the rights of all Syrian
citizens, a judicial commission has been set up to
investigate all cases involving losses of life among
civilians and military personnel, which are regrettable,
as a result of the latest clashes.

The falling of even one victim from my
Government, which we regret, is too high a price to
pay. As a Government, we cannot accept that some
claim to value the lives of our sons more than we do.
Policies of interference in the affairs of other States on
the basis of various pretexts and justifications have
always proved to be erroneous. We believe that some
of the statements we have heard today against Syria
can only be considered an encouragement to extremism
and terrorism. The price will be paid by innocents in
Syria and the rest of the world. Stability and peace in
the region will also pay a price.

We cannot be convinced that the convening of
such meetings serves the interests of the Syrian people,
even as it is interpreted by extremist groups as
international support for them and their wrongful
practices.

We reaffirm that the age of colonialism has
passed. All the peoples of the world are now aware of
the new methods used by some States to interfere in the
affairs of other States, be it in the framework of the so-
called responsibility to protect or that of humanitarian
intervention, which have been rejected by all
developing countries, even as attempts are being made
to ram them through international forums, including
the United Nations. We have always feared that the use
of such lofty concepts would undermine the unity,
sovereignty and independence of the peoples of the
developing countries.

Syria stresses that what is happening on the
ground can in no way be considered peaceful
demonstrations. Otherwise, how could so many
martyrs have fallen among our security forces, our
army and our innocent civilians? Syria also stresses
that it will move forward on the road of reform, as
announced by the President of the Syrian Arab
Republic. We will continue to satisfy the legitimate
demands of our citizens; we will continue to protect
their lives and property. We will not allow terrorism or
extremism to kill our people.

The attempt by some members of the Security
Council, with unprecedented enthusiasm, to bring what
is a Syrian internal affair under the agenda item
entitled "The situation in the Middle East" - an item
devoted fundamentally to seeking a peaceful settlement
to the Arab-Israeli conflict and the establishment of a
11-31393
Palestinian State according to well-known international
terms of reference - makes us and many others
wonder about the decades-long lack of such enthusiasm
in attempting to end the Israeli occupation of Arab
lands occupied since 1967. However, for us the answer
is clear. It is a policy of double standards. It is the
dominance of the rule of force over the rule of law. If
there is any doubt as to the truth of what we are saying,
we would ask why some have used the so-called right
of veto 48 times to protect Israeli aggression and
occupation, most recently a scant two months ago - a
veto that led to the aborting of an international
resolution condemning Israeli settlement of occupied
Palestinian land.

We expect from the leaders of the members of the
Security Council that they encourage further national
reform instead of attempting to ignore the path of
reform and to sow doubt as to the continuing attempts
at reform by my Government - a reform that is
ongoing and will continue.

In this context, we find it truly strange to hear the
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America make unfounded claims, which can in no way
be considered serious or legitimate, concerning Syria's
alleged exploitation of its special relations with Iran to
"repress" Syrian citizens. This surreal, Hollywood-
style attempt to link the two countries reflects a lack of
respect for the Security Council and its responsibility
to protect international peace and security, and clearly
reveals the United States Administration's true ill will
towards my country. Such designs have no bearing
whatsoever on the interests of Syria, its people or its
Government.

