Mr. Rushaylo (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I
should like to express my appreciation to the Security
Council for the invitation to participate in this meeting
on regional organizations.

The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
is actively participating in this process. We deem this
initiative extremely important and timely, given that
the important objective of such forums is to strengthen
and fine-tune the capacities of the United Nations and
regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The 2005 world
summit opened the way for further work in that area.
World leaders supported the idea of strengthening ties
between the United Nations and regional organizations
and decided to involve the relevant regional
organizations in the work of the Security Council.

At its meeting last year with the heads of regional
organizations, the Security Council adopted resolution
1631 (2005), by which the Council emphasized the
potential role of regional organizations in addressing
issues related to the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, notes the efforts made in the fight against
terrorism, and urges all relevant regional organizations
to enhance the effectiveness of their counter-terrorism
efforts.

Small arms and light weapons in the hands of
terrorists and various criminal groups is an extremely
dangerous factor that promotes destabilization, leading
to conflict situations involving open armed resistance.

Important means of combating the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons include the universal
United Nations Convention against Transnational and
Organized Crime; the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition; and the
United Nations Programme of Action on the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons.

In the framework of the implementation of those
instruments, the Council of Heads of State of the
Commonwealth of Independent States on 19 September
2003 took a decision on the means of supervision of
international transfers of "Igla" and "Strela" type
portable Zenithal-rocket complexes by CIS Member
States, which stipulates that there must be an exchange
of information in all cases involving the transfer and
acquisition of Zenithal-rocket complexes on the basis
of the bilateral and multilateral agreements that have
been concluded.

The CIS countries are currently working on a
draft statement on the combat against the illicit trade in
weapons, which will give concrete expression to the
measures contained in the Programme of Action, to be
implemented at the regional level.

Terrorism is among the most dangerous
challenges facing the world. In 1999 we signed a
cooperation agreement on counter-terrorism among the
CIS countries that forms the legal basis for the relevant
CIS bodies to implement various measures that will
help them identify, suppress and investigate acts of
terrorism.

In 2000, the first programme of the member
States of the CIS was adopted to fight terrorism, which
will require major efforts on the part of CIS countries
aimed at eliminating this scourge. At the same time,
CIS States have stepped up their efforts to accede to
the 12 counter-terrorism conventions of the United
Nations to combat international terrorism and to
implement the relevant provisions contained in our
legislation.

The summit of CIS heads of State held in
September 2004 considered the issue of further
developments in cooperation among CIS countries
aimed at countering terrorism and any other current
threats and challenges to peace and stability in the light
of the agreements reached within the framework of the
CIS, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the United Nations. Following their
discussions, the heads of State of the CIS countries
adopted a declaration whereby they proposed the
convening of a special meeting of the Security
Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee with
international organizations and CIS countries, which
was held on 26 and 27 January 2005 in Almaty,
Kazakhstan.

The cooperative programme among the CIS
countries aimed at fighting international terrorism and
any other forms and manifestations of extremism was
reaffirmed for the 2005-2007 period as well. That
programme calls for, inter alia, developing cooperation
with international organizations in this area.

The implementation of those universal and
regional treaties and programmes and the stepping up
of efforts to fight terrorism will contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The CIS has consistently been and remains open
to cooperating with the United Nations and regional
organizations in countering existing threats and
challenges.

