Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Ijoin other speakers in
commending you for convening this important debate,
Madam President. The Sri Lankan delegation associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We are very concerned about the humanitarian
impact of the recent escalation of violence resulting in
large-scale destruction, devastation and displacement
in Gaza. Sri Lanka joined the international community
in mourning the tragic loss of life, including those
of many children, during the violence. The extensive
damage to public infrastructure, including schools,
hospitals and United Nations buildings, further
undermined the already precarious access to basic
services that prevailed prior to the current conflict,
services that include electricity, water and sanitation,
health and education.

Despite the open-ended ceasefire reached on
26 August, the situation in Gaza remains tense.
The challenges ahead of addressing the immediate
humanitarian needs and launching reconstruction
activities are enormous. The international community
must ensure that the injured, the displaced and the
homeless are taken care of while addressing the broader
question of peace in the region. In that regard, we
welcome the successful convening of the conference
on reconstructing Gaza held in Cairo on 12 October. It
is essential that the unilateral sanctions and blockade
of Gaza be lifted if we are to find a more permanent
solution to its bleak economic conditions. The
restrictions on imports and exports due to the blockade
are stifling economic growth as well as aggravating
the humanitarian crisis. We welcome the partial lifting
of the restrictions within the framework of resolution
1860 (2009), which should contribute significantly to
Gaza's economic advancement and the well-being of its
people, and to creating an environment of hope.

We join the international community in appealing
to all parties to refrain from indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks on civilians, since they are
detrimental to the peace and security of both Israel
and Palestine and to the stability of the entire region.
Indiscriminate attacks on civilians will only worsen
feelings of desperation and insecurity and widen the
gap between the parties. The security needs of the
people of Israel must be respected. A climate conducive
to peace will be encouraged by a mutual approach
sensitive to the concerns of both sides. We hope that
all parties will engage constructively and sincerely to
end the conflict, enabling the achievement of a lasting
peace. The ongoing settlement activity, which is illegal
under international law, particularly article 49 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, must end if a sustainable solution to
this problem is to be negotiated.

Finding a just and durable solution to the situation in
the Middle East has been a priority for the international
community since 1948. It is disappointing that after
more than five decades, we are still nowhere near a
satisfactory solution. The Middle East conflict absorbs
a considerable amount of international attention and
resources. As we heard in the summit-level meeting of
the Security Council on 24 September (S/PV.7272), the
conflicts in the Middle East, especially the lingering

question of Palestine, are one of the main motives

driving the recruitment of terrorists in the region and

worldwide. Terrorism originating from the region has

the potential to pose a serious threat to the security and

stability of many countries.

Given the events of this year that led to the
unprecedented humanitarian crisis in Gaza, we hope
that every effort will be made to achieve a successful
negotiated end to the conflict so that the people of
both Israel and Palestine will be able to enjoy peace
and prosperity in their own lands. In this year of
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, we must not give up on our hopes for a lasting
peace accord that leads to the establishment of a
fully sovereign and secure State of Palestine. We are
encouraged by the political rapprochement between
Gaza and the West Bank with the formation of the unity
Government.

Sri Lanka supports Palestine's application for
admission to full membership in the United Nations.
Let me conclude by reiterating Sri Lanka's support for
the implementation of General Assembly resolutions
regarding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to statehood and the attainment of a two-State
solution on the basis of the 1967 borders.

