The President: I wish to welcome the presence at
this meeting of the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency Mr. Sven
Alkalaj.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Australia, Botswana, Canada, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, Ghana,
Guatemala, India, Kenya, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, Sierra Leone, the Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste and Uruguay,
in which they request that their delegations be invited
to participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representatives of those countries to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I extend
a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Zalmai
Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan;
His Excellency Mr. Alfred Palo Conteh, Minister of
Defence of Sierra Leone; and Her Excellency Ms. Lucia
Lobato, Minister of Justice of Timor-Leste.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
2

Excellency Mr. Peter Wittig, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Germany.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Wittig to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mrs. Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, Managing Director of the
World Bank.

It is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 14 April 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of Uganda to the United
Nations, in which he requests that the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
His Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio, be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Antonio to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
10-31721
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2010/ 167, which contains a
letter dated 1 April 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper for this debate.

I should now like to make an opening statement
in my national capacity.

It is a great honour for me to convene an open
debate of the Security Council on a very important
topic - post-conflict peacebuilding. At the outset, I
would like to express my sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
and to the ministers and special guests who have
travelled a great distance to share their experience and
insights at this meeting.

How do conflicts recur even after a ceasefire is
successfully concluded? Why does peace not take root
in post-conflict countries? These are critical issues to
which the international community has yet to find a
definitive answer. I believe that the key to solving them
is for people in a post-conflict situation to have hope
for the future. To this end, how can political stability
and security be achieved in parallel with social
stability? How can a comprehensive peacebuilding
strategy be created, with the assistance of the
international community? I look forward to a lively
discussion on these points.

When we think about peacebuilding, we should
first of all emphasize the importance of political
leaders implementing a peace agreement with steadfast
determination. It is also important that the fruits of
democratic elections, which include political stability,
be shared among all the people, including those who
did not prevail, and not simply be reserved for the
winners. This requires as its foundation the
achievement of peaceful coexistence and reconciliation
among parties to the conflict. In the States that
comprised the former Yugoslavia, especially Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which was most heavily affected by
the conflict, continuous efforts have been made to that
end. Afghanistan, where self-reliant efforts are being
made for reconciliation and reintegration, also requires
the support and cooperation of the international
community.

With regard to security, peacekeeping operations
have a significant role to play and lay the groundwork
for promoting security sector reform. The building of
10-31721
national police force capacity is an especially urgent
task, for instance, in Haiti and Timor-Leste.

We recently lost many of our dear colleagues in
the earthquake in Haiti, including Mr. Hedi Annabi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
another friend, Mr. Takahisa Kawakami, in Dili last
month, who, as the Deputy Special Representative of
the Secretary-General at the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), had not yet fulfilled
his aspiration to build the national police of that young
nation. I call upon the international community to
continue the efforts of these dedicated United Nations
staff members by striving harder to enhance national
police capacity in many post-conflict countries.

In order to break the vicious circle of social
instability and prevent the recurrence of conflicts, it is
important that conflict-affected people be provided
with basic services and thereby enjoy a peace dividend.
It is essential, from the viewpoint of human security, to
protect and empower individuals, including women and
the vulnerable. Refugees, internally displaced persons
and ex-combatants must be reintegrated into society.
We need to generate conditions that are conducive to
making peace irreversible through promoting
coexistence and reconciliation.

Youth unemployment is a common issue of
serious concern in many countries in the post-conflict
stage. I therefore propose that, when assistance is
extended to such countries, high priority be attached to
the creation of youth employment. Young people
represent the future of a country. They should not take
up weapons but rather engage in productive work,
which will enable them to participate in the
reconstruction of their nation and its communities.
Thus, they can provide a foundation for socio-
economic development, which will lead to the true
consolidation of peace.

Creating a long-lasting peace requires sustained
cooperation between a post-conflict country and the
international community. In this connection, I would
like to highlight three points.

First, we should think about how efforts for
peacebuilding can be carried out in an integrated
manner. In Sierra Leone, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Government of Sierra Leone made
concerted efforts to formulate a Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework, which included such socio-
economic development measures as energy assistance,
3
together with measures to create political stability and
security. The international community is currently
assisting the country under this framework. A
framework of this kind should serve as a model for
other peacebuilding strategies.

Secondly, the assistance and involvement of the
international community may have conflicting impacts
on the ownership efforts of a post-conflict country. For
instance, will provision of food assistance be consistent
with efforts to promote domestic agricultural
production? Will the pursuit of justice by the
international community advance the effort for national
reconciliation? Does the hiring of local experts by
international programmes affect the national
Government's efforts at capacity-building? If we
overlook these issues, the fundamental goal of building
the country's self-reliance will not be achieved. The
international community must respect the ownership
and capacity-building efforts of the post-conflict
country.

Thirdly, peacebuilding requires long-term
engagement and sustainable resources. We first need to
make the best possible use of funds available for the
immediate aftermath of a conflict - for example, the
Peacebuilding Fund. But such funds must be followed
by medium- and long-term resources from bilateral and
multilateral programmes. It is also essential to secure
and strengthen necessary expertise to serve the diverse
requirements of peacebuilding activities, including in
the areas of governance and the rule of law. In this
regard, we look forward to the work of the Senior
Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities, launched by the Secretary-General
last month.

The Security Council must continue its strong
engagement in favour of peacebuilding, and we hope to
see the Peacebuilding Commission obtain enhanced
results through the ongoing review process. Building
on today's debate, Japan will continue to participate
actively in the efforts towards achieving sustainable
peace in post-conflict countries.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council. I now invite His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United Nations, to
take the floor.


