Mr. Lowcock: The past three weeks have seen
a deadly escalation of the conflict in north-western
Syria. The Secretary-General has been warning about
this for months. In a September 2018 press release
(SG/SM/19208), he stressed that it was, absolutely
essential to avoid a full-scale battle in Idlib. And he
warned that that would "unleash a humanitarian
nightmare unlike any we have seen [in Syria]". When I
briefed Council members here on 18 September, I said a
full-scale military onslaught could result in "the worst
humanitarian tragedy of the twenty-first century"
(S/PV8355, p. 5). Despite our warnings, our worst fears
are now coming true.

As Ms. DiCarlo just summarized, the United
Nations estimates that 3 million people live in the
area of the de-escalation zone in the north-west of the
country. Even before the recent escalation, they were
among the most vulnerable people in Syria, particularly
the 1 million children and the 1.3 million people who
fled to Idlib from other parts of the country. The area
is now largely controlled by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham - a
proscribed terrorist group. The innocent civilians, of
course, hugely out-number the men with guns.

We have briefed the Council every month as the
conflict has escalated. On 27 March, my Director of
Operations alerted the Council to the alarming spike in
civilian casualties and displacement owing to fighting,
noting that 90 people had been killed and nearly
90,000 displaced (see S/PV.8493). On 24 April (see S/PV.8515), my Deputy briefed Council members here
on a further increase in air strikes and shelling, with
attacks both in the de-escalation zone and from the
zone into Government controlled areas. She described
how approximately 200 people had been killed since
February, and the number of newly displaced had
grown to 120,000 people.

Just days later, the pace of attacks increased even
further, with some of the most intense hostilities in
almost a year. My Director of Operations briefed the
Council once again last Friday on the effect of the
air strikes, the barrel bombs, the ground attacks and
the shelling. And yesterday the Deputy Regional
Humanitarian Coordinator updated the International
Syrian Support Group humanitarian task force in
Geneva on yet a further spate of barrel bombs from
helicopters, air strikes, heavy shelling, ground attacks
and counter-attacks. In the past three weeks, we have
received reports that up to 160 people have been killed.
At least 180,000 people have been displaced, and
millions of people are crammed into an ever-smaller
area - 180,000 in three weeks.

While many people have moved to camps, more
than 80,000 people have found themselves with nowhere
to go. They are therefore simply parked in open fields
or sheltering under trees. We now have reports of
three internally displaced persons settlements being
attacked. Three days ago, an attack near a market
place in Jisr Al-Shughur reportedly killed at least eight
civilians and injured three others. Some 17 schools
have been damaged or destroyed, and many more are
closed, with more than 400,000 students unable to sit
for their exams.

Areas in Government-controlled western Aleppo
and northern Hama have also been affected by
hostilities, resulting in civilian casualties and injuries.
On 14 May, rockets hit the densely populated Al-Neirab
camp for Palestine refugees in Aleppo, killing at least
nine civilians and wounding 11. Humanitarian agencies
are trying to help people caught up in the fighting,
but the response is already stretched. Pre-positioned
stocks of food have been given to 100,000 people since
the start of this month. Tents and other shelter items
for 25,000 people are being distributed, but, as we
have told the Council before, a full military incursion
would overwhelm all ability to respond. We are rapidly
approaching that scenario.

I am most of all concerned about the number of
attacks damaging or destroying medical facilities. I
need not remind the Council that medical facilities are
specially protected under international humanitarian
law. Since 28 April, the World Health Organization
(WHO) and health actors have identified at least
18 facilities that have been damaged or destroyed by
air strikes, shelling or other fighting. All of them are
inside the so-called de-escalation zone. Following the
attacks, almost all are currently unusable, including a
hospital in Latmana, in Hama governorate, attacked
on 28 April; a hospital in Madiq Castle, in Hama
governorate, attacked on 28 April; a primary health-
care centre in Hbeit, in Idlib governorate, attacked
on 30 April; a primary health-care centre in Qastun,
in Hama governorate, attacked on 1 May; a WHO-
supported surgical unit in the Kafr Nabudah area, in
Hama governorate, attacked on 1 May; and a primary
health-care centre in Al Madiq, in Hama governorate,
attacked on 2 May.

I know that the Council appreciates brevity, but
I could continue listing such attacks for some time.
The trend has continued day after day. In total, WHO
and health actors have reported 20 attacks on those 18
facilities, amounting to almost one a day over the past
three weeks. Some facilities have been hit twice. Other
hospitals are closing for fear of being attacked. A total
of 49 health facilities have partially or totally suspended
activities. Among them, they provided an average
every month of at least 171,000 medical outpatient
consultations and 2,760 major surgical operations. They
helped more than 1,400 women deliver their babies
every month. Now they are not doing those things.

The 20 attacks are confirmed attacks, using WHO'S
global methodology for cataloguing attacks on health
facilities. That system relies on WHO'S global reporting
system and a specialized network of partners on the
ground to triangulate and confirm what has happened.
In the case of a reported attack, those partners on the
ground provide a detailed incident report. That is then
verified by WHO, and it is checked against additional
sources. Only those that are fully vetted and confirmed
by a variety of sources are included in the list of
confirmed attacks. That system, by the way, is the one
used for reporting on such attacks from Afghanistan to
Yemen. It is widely respected.

In the light of the events of the past three weeks,
my office and I have been asked a lot of questions
by Member States, non-governmental organizations
operating in the area, doctors in the hospitals and
families affected by the fighting. Let me tell the
Council some of the questions, and what I can say in
answer to them.

They ask: Who is bombing all these hospitals? I
answer that I cannot say, but that at least some of those
attacks are clearly organized by people with access to
sophisticated weapons, including a modern air force
and so-called smart and precision weapons.

Are our hospitals being deliberately targeted? I say
that I do not know. The people who do are the ones
dropping the bombs. What I can tell them is that there
are a lot of attacks on those health facilities.

Is it true that you provide details of where hospitals
are in order to protect them? I answer that, yes,
the obligation to protect civilian objects, including
hospitals, emanates from international humanitarian
law. We give details of some hospital locations to the
parties to the conflict so that they can comply with
those obligations.

Is the information being provided about the
locations of hospitals in fact being used not to protect
hospitals but to target them? I answer that I do not know.
Once again, the people who can answer that question

are the ones dropping the bombs. Many deconflicted
sites that are not hospitals have not been attacked.

Has this kind of thing happened before during the
Syria conflict? Yes. Last year, the then Special Envoy,
Staffan de Mistura, and I raised concerns about similar
attacks in eastern Ghouta with Council members that
we thought might have relevant information and could
prevent a recurrence. Did you get satisfactory answers
at that time? We have yet to receive full answers to the
questions we raised last year.
If I were a non-governmental organization running
a hospital, why would I want to give you details of my
location if that information were simply being used to
target the hospital? That is a good question. We are
thinking about what conclusions to draw from recent
events in respect of the de-confliction system insofar
as it covers health facilities.

What is your advice to parents of children who live
in the de-escalation zone; should they take their children
to the hospital in case of an illness or injury? That is a
very difficult question. I am deeply concerned about
the impact on the health of children and their safety,
when so many medical facilities are being attacked.
What would you do if you were the parent of a child
needing hospital care in the so-called de-escalation
zone in Idlib right now? I am sorry to say that I just
do not know. I feel desperately sorry for parents in
that horrible position. Has the Security Council not
adopted a resolution reinforcing the fact that countries
should not bomb hospitals? Yes: resolution 2286 (2016)
specifically covers that.

Finally, I am asked: what is the point of the
Security Council adopting such resolutions if States are
not going to comply with them? That, Mr. President,
is also a very good question. It is, of course, not really
addressed to me.

