Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank all Council colleagues for their engagement on
resolution 2479 (2019) and for coming together in this
constructive way, and I am very pleased today to see
the resolution adopted unanimously. I particularly want
to thank our good friends from Germany, with whom
we have worked so closely on this resolution as our
co-penholders.

With the adoption of this resolution, the Security
Council has made the responsible decision to pause the
withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). This was the right
decision and aligned with the decision of the African
Union Peace and Security Council on UNAMID.
Moreover, it recognizes that Darfur is affected by wider
instability in the Sudan and that there is a need for the
continued protection of civilians in Darfur.

In requesting options for a follow-on mechanism
to UNAMID, we have demonstrated to the people of
Darfur that we will remain committed to supporting
efforts to achieve the sustainable peace and stability
they rightly deserve, even after UNAMID's eventual
departure, and that should include tackling the root
causes of the conflict.

The current situation in Darfur and, indeed, across
the Sudan is deeply concerning, as are the recent
attacks on United Nations property and assets. We call
for an immediate end to all violence, and we urge the
Sudanese authorities to fulfil their obligation to protect
United Nations and other international staff operating
within the Sudan.

In order to resume the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding, we must see progress, and in
particular the Rapid Support Forces must withdraw
from all former UNAMID team sites so that they can be
used for civilian purposes, as the Transitional Military
Council has committed to.

All of this should take place alongside a transition
to a legitimate civilian-led Government, a Government
that is accepted by the people of the Sudan and therefore
the wider international community. The African Union
and the United Nations need a legitimate partner with
which they can engage on the modalities of UNAMID's
withdrawal and the broader transition to peacebuilding
in Darfur.

If these conditions are not met, and if there is no
improvement in the situation in Darfur, we will find
ourselves in the same predicament at the end of October
as we are now, unable to continue with a responsible
and sustainable transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding in Darfur.

The United Kingdom, along with a number of other
countries, would have liked a longer extension at this
point to provide greater space for the talks going on in
Khartoum and to align ourselves more clearly with the
position of the African Union. I would just signal at
this point that if we find ourselves here again in four
months' time with the same sorts of conditions, then we
may well need a further extension.

Let me conclude by echoing a call I have made
on previous occasions, and that is to talk about the
choice that I believe faces the Sudan. That is a choice
around ending all violence, a choice around a transfer
to a civilian-led authority, a choice that enables the
international community to come in and really support
the Sudan as it deals with a legacy of economic
mismanagement over several decades and provide some
of the economic and long-term support required for the
Sudan to be able to retake its place in the community
of nations, as it truly deserves. The opposite choice,
I fear, will lead to greater division, greater instability
and greater problems for the Council.

