Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Today, as we meet to consider the situation in Iraq, it is
imperative to recognize that the issue before us
concerns not only the future of Iraq, its territorial
integrity and independence, or even the dire
humanitarian situation of the Iraqi people, but also the
direct implications of the issue on the entire Middle
East.

Our meeting today has set out to consider the
Security Council resolutions relating to Iraq and to
determine how much progress has been made in their
implementation. There is no doubt in our mind that
significant progress has been achieved in implementing
the disarmament provisions of these resolutions during
eight years of inspections, something to which the
periodic reports produced by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Special Commission
until mid-1998 bear witness.

After a hiatus of approximately four years in the
arms inspections, Iraq took the initiative of resuming
dialogue with the Secretary-General with a view to
resolving the outstanding issues that stood in the way
of resumption of inspections and to completing the
remaining tasks. Iraq also accepted Security Council
resolution 1284 (1999) and the idea of cooperating
with United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC). We all followed
closely the outcome of the trilateral discussions
conducted in Vienna between Iraq, UNMOVIC and the
IAEA that resolvedly indicated a maximum degree of
cooperation with regard to the return of inspectors.
This commitment to full cooperation was affirmed in
the correspondence between Iraq and the Secretary-
General, as well as with the Executive Chairman of
UNMOVIC.

The situation therefore indicates a positive
momentum based on the mutual goodwill of the parties
towards implementing Security Council resolutions
relating to proscribed Iraqi military activities and the
speedy return of inspectors to Iraq. This is the focus
and objective of Security Council concern, and
attention should be directed towards the prompt
resumption of inspections in Iraq pursuant to relevant
Council resolutions in order to complete the mandate
established by those resolutions, particularly resolution
687 (1991) and 1284 (1999). It is our hope therefore
that all parties concerned will cooperate in order to
ensure meticulous, rapid and unimpeded
implementation of these tasks.

While Egypt urges Iraq to work seriously towards
full implementation of all Security Council resolutions,
we also stress the need for the utmost integrity and
professionalism in future inspection activities of
UNMOVIC, with adherence to the letter and spirit of
all the resolutions. It is therefore essential that
UNMOVIC move rapidly towards fulfilling the tasks
entrusted to it in an atmosphere of calm and
constructive cooperation in order to ensure the
destruction of prohibited weapons of mass destruction,
if their existence is ascertained.

In this context, the Security Council must remain
fully aware that the efforts to destroy this proscribed
Iraqi potential, if it exists, are a step towards a broader
objective, namely the establishment in the Middle East
of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction, as
outlined in paragraph 14 of resolution 687 (1991) and
reaffirmed in resolution 1284 (1999). These efforts
need to be undertaken within the framework of a
comprehensive approach to the question of Iraq by the
Security Council as provided for in resolution 1284
(1999) and the terms of reference in that resolution.
The aim would be to achieve progress towards lifting
the sanctions imposed on Iraq while ensuring full
respect for its sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence.

In this regard, I also wish to recall the statement
issued by the Arab Summit held in Beirut seven
months ago and Iraq's commitments to fulfil it
obligations under relevant Security Council resolutions
concerning Kuwaiti prisoners of war and missing
persons, or those of third countries, and the return of
Kuwaiti property. We accordingly encourage Iraq to
cooperate with the United Nations High-level
Coordinator responsible for this issue and urge the
Iraqi Government to implement scrupulously its
obligations in order to assist in settling this issue with
the same speed that we hope to see in progress on
disarmament and the lifting of sanctions. At the same
time, we expect all parties to fulfil their obligations,
thereby enhancing international legitimacy and
permitting the Security Council to fulfil its unique role
in accordance with the Charter.

The Security Council's mandate to preserve
international peace and security on behalf of all
members of the international community is a
responsibility that must be fulfilled with the utmost
credibility and without discrimination or double
standards. We trust that the members of the Security
Council will discharge their responsibility in a sincere
and objective manner, bearing in mind that the
convening of this formal session to consider an issue
that is of the utmost gravity and sensitivity is in itself
an important step towards averting an armed
confrontation whose many casualties will be innocent
civilians and that will undermine development and
reconstruction efforts.

In conclusion, Egypt affirms the importance of
Iraq's full and strict implementation of all relevant
Security Council resolutions in order to steer us away
from the path of military confrontation. We also stress
and draw attention to the common responsibility that
we all bear as Members of the United Nations, an
Organization that was established to preserve peace
and security for the mutual benefit and preservation of
all rights of all members of the international
community.

