Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Before starting my
briefing, I would like to recognize Ambassador Ranko
Vilovic': of Croatia, from whom I took over the
chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) five months ago. I thank him once again for his
country's excellent leadership of the Committee in
2008 and 2009.

The CTC continues to work actively to advance
the global fight against terrorism, and today it gives me
great pleasure to brief the Council on the work of the
Committee over the past six months.
Although nearly a decade has passed since the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), terrorism continues

to be a major threat to international peace and security,
compelling us to be ever-vigilant and steadfast in our
fight against this scourge. Hence, the provisions of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) are as
relevant as ever, and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
plays a critical role in promoting and facilitating their
implementation.

Before addressing the substance of the issues
related to the work of the Committee, let me touch
briefly upon the changes that the Committee made
earlier this year regarding its working methods. As
indicated in the work programme of the Committee,
which covers the first half of 2010, the Committee
decided to adopt a more strategic and transparent
approach in its deliberations while raising the visibility
of its work within the wider United Nations and
counter-terrorism community.

Based on this understanding, the Committee, in
January, streamlined some of its working methods in
order to devote more time to substantive work.
Accordingly, the procedures for the adoption of
Preliminary Implementation Assessments and the
preparation of country visits have been significantly
amended in a way that reduced the time spent in the
Committee on those issues. That said, the Preliminary
Implementation Assessments remain one of the main
instruments available to the Committee for effectively
monitoring the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001).

The Committee is trying to improve and make
better use of the thematic discussions that it organizes
on the issues mentioned in Security Council resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). In the past six months,
the Committee has taken up issues such as border
control and security, the implementation and
assessment of resolution 1624 (2005), maritime
security/terrorist acts committed at sea, the
implementation of extradition requirements and law
enforcement. Those discussions have proved to be
highly useful in helping us to understand such issues in
greater depth and to consider any possible concrete
steps that the Committee could take. For instance,
based on our thematic discussions, the Committee is
now working on policy guidance on international legal
cooperation, which we expect to finalize soon.

In fact, that issue was also the subject of one of
the two thematic briefings open to all Member States,
held in February. The other was in April on maritime
security/terrorist acts committed at sea. Those open
briefings set the stage for a lively exchange and many
useful views were expressed. The Chief of the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime also contributed to the
second briefing. I take this opportunity to thank
Member States for their attendance and contributions
to those discussions.

Apart from those thematic discussions, the
Committee has also decided to hold regional
discussions, at which the specific challenges of some
regions will be taken up in detail. Such issues have
already been indicated in the survey of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States (S/2009/620, annex), and the
first such regional discussion will be held this month.

Another step taken by the Committee to provide
more transparency was to make public the technical
guide to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
That guide is now posted on the Committee's website.
It is also being translated into all United Nations
languages and will be a very relevant tool for the
Committee to use on country visits. The Committee has
already started working to further improve its website,
with a view to making it more helpful and user-friendly
TO all. With the technical support of the Committee's
Executive Directorate (CTED), we hope to finalize that
work soon.

Finally, as part of our efforts to render the
Committee more transparent, on 8 April 2010, the
Committee's Executive Director, Mr. Mike Smith, and
I gave a briefing to United Nations Member States on
the Committee's work in the first three months of this
year.

Now, let me briefly mention some of the
Committee's core activities that are undertaken in
accordance with its mandate and work programme.

First, as regards Preliminary Implementation
Assessments, I am pleased to report to the Council and
to the wider membership that the Committee has
finalized the analysis and adoption of those documents
for all Member States. The ensuing stocktaking
exercise is now allowing the Committee to enhance its
regular dialogue with Member States and to further
identify areas where the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) is still inadequate. The Committee has
already finalized 48 files within the framework of the
current stocktaking exercise. The Committee and
CTED stand ready to assist Member States, wherever
possible, in the preparation and submission of their
responses, including further information on their
efforts to implement the resolution.

Secondly, the Committee has continued to
organize and conduct visits to Member States, with their
consent. Such country visits are a fundamental
component of the Committee's efforts to monitor and
promote the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
Acting on the Committee's behalf, CTED conducts not
only comprehensive visits, but also shorter and more
targeted visits that focus on one or two specific aspects
of the resolution. CTED is also conducting regional
visits aimed at analysing examples of good practice or
addressing regional vulnerabilities. Over the past six
months, the Committee has concluded successful on-site
visits to Timor-Leste, Brunei Darussalam, Tunisia,
Greece and Yemen. I wish to take this opportunity to
thank the Governments of those Member States for their
exemplary cooperation before and during the visits.

Thirdly, the Committee and CTED have worked
to enhance their ongoing dialogue with Member States,
donors and beneficiaries on the facilitation of technical
assistance. In that context, the Committee continues to
look for opportunities to match current and potential
donors with recipients so as to enhance cooperation
between the donor community and recipient States.
Since capacity-building remains one of the main
challenges in our fight against terrorism, the
Committee will make an assessment on that issue in
June in order to explore ways of further facilitating the
provision of assistance to relevant Member States.

Finally, in its dialogue with Member States, the
Committee has continued to include discussion of their
efforts to implement resolution 1624 (2005). Thus far,
a total of 108 States have submitted reports to the
Committee on their implementation of the resolution.
The Committee will continue to encourage those States
that have not yet done so to submit the relevant
information to the Committee as soon as possible.

The Committee also continues to encourage
Member States to become parties to and to implement
the 16 international counter-terrorism instruments. In
its dialogue with Member States, the Committee has
continued to remind them that any measures taken to
combat terrorism must comply with all their obligations
under international law, in particular international
human rights, refugee and humanitarian law.

Now, I would like to give a few examples of the
Committee's cooperative activities with its partners.

First, through CTED, the Committee continues to
participate actively in the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, with a view to
implementing the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. CTED co-chairs the Working
Group on Integrated Assistance for Countering
Terrorism and also participates in the work of the two
other Task Force working groups that deal with the
counter-financing of terrorism and with human rights
and counter-terrorism.

Secondly, the Committee and CTED continue to
engage actively with the other Security Council
subsidiary bodies and relevant entities working on
counter-terrorism issues, namely, the 1267 Committee
and its Monitoring Team, and the 1540 Committee and
its experts group. In that regard, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee invites the Monitoring Team, the group of
experts and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the INTERPOL Liaison Office to its
thematic discussions.

Thirdly, in accordance with its work programme,
the Committee has placed particular emphasis on
maintaining and increasing its dialogue and
cooperation with other relevant international and
regional organizations. So far, I have visited two
regional organizations. During my visit to Addis
Ababa, I had a meeting with officials of the African
Union. Later, in Washington, DC, I attended the Inter-
American Committee against Terrorism of the
Organization of American States. Both visits proved
useful in enhancing our dialogue and exploring new
areas of cooperation with those regional organizations.

In the past six months, the Committee has also
continued the practice of hearing briefings from
relevant international and regional organizations and
United Nations bodies.

Before concluding, allow me to mention three
important events that the Committee is planning to
hold in the upcoming period. The first one will be a
seminar on bringing terrorists to justice, to be held in
New York. The seminar will bring together a select
group of national counter-terrorism prosecutors who
have been involved in highly visible cases within their
national jurisdictions. We will make sure that the
participants represent different regions, levels of
development and legal systems. Apart from that
seminar, the Committee is also considering organizing
two special meetings, one with international, regional
and subregional organizations and the other to review
global efforts to implement resolution 1373 (2001).

As I mentioned at the beginning of my statement,
we will continue to work in the Committee with vigour
and determination. Our emphasis will be on raising
awareness and strengthening the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). And we will try to do so in a
more strategic and transparent manner so that we can
more effectively contribute to the global counter-
terrorism efforts within our mandate. To this end,
Mr. Mike Smith and his team in CTED continue to
provide valuable assistance to the Committee. I would
like to express our sincere appreciation for their
excellent work. I also wish to thank the Secretariat for
its continuous support.

Last but not least, I would also like to take this
opportunity to report, in my capacity as Chairman of
the Working Group established pursuant to resolution
1566 (2004), that a meeting of the Working Group was
held in March 2010 after a four-year interval. At that
meeting, Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, the head of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, gave a
briefing on assistance to victims of terrorism, which
was followed by a general discussion on both aspects
of the Working Group's mandate.

