The Secretary-General: I very much welcome the
adoption of resolution 2139 (2014). We are all keenly
aware of the profound and prolonged desperation of the
Syrian people. If this resolution is implemented quickly
and in good faith, at least some of the suffering can be
eased.

The resolution builds on presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/15, adopted last year, and strengthens
the Council's engagement in protecting civilians and
ensuring the delivery of relief. The humanitarian
situation in Syria continues to deteriorate. Half of the
country's people need urgent assistance. Host countries
need support in caring for more than 2.5 million
refugees.
Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the conflict.
They are the daily victims of brutal violence and
indiscriminate attacks, including the use of heavy
weapons, aerial bombings, mortars and car bombs
in populated areas. There are continued reports of
massacres and atrocities throughout the country.
Women and girls have been subjected to sexual and
gender-based violence.

The Syrian Government and allied militias have
been responsible for countless killings, disappearances,
the horrendous use of barrel bombs and torture on a
massive scale. Opposition groups have carried out
summary executions, the recruitment of children for
combat and the use of terror tactics in civilian areas.
Attacks against civilian infrastructure, including
schools and hospitals, continue unabated. These heinous
acts are unacceptable and must stop immediately.
A11 combatting parties in Syria must abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law.

I commend United Nations humanitarian personnel,
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and our other partners for
their bravery and commitment. Despite the dangerous
circumstances, United Nations humanitarian agencies
and our partners are reaching millions of people.
But too many millions are beyond our reach, and
funding continues to fall short. I urge the international
community to step up its contributions.

This resolution should not have been necessary.
Humanitarian assistance is not something to be
negotiated; it is something to be allowed by virtue of
international law.

It is profoundly shocking to me that both sides are
besieging civilians as a tactic of war. Some 200,000
people are under siege in Government-controlled areas,
and 45,000 in opposition-controlled areas.

More broadly, this resolution highlights again the
urgent need to end the conflict.

While the political process continues, we will
continue to do all we can to provide relief and protection
to people in need on the ground.

