Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Ijoin earlier speakers in
welcoming Foreign Minister Ayrault to the presidency of
theSecurity Council. I also thank the Secretary-General
and the President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their respective briefings. On this note,
I greatly appreciate and value the participation of His
Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President
of the Central African Republic, and thank him for
for his briefing, which my delegation followed with
much interest. His presence here today signifies to us
the commitment of the Government and people of the
Central African Republic to moving forward and leaving
behind the troubling days of the past. The presence of
so many high-level dignitaries among us today clearly
manifests the importance ofthe topic of our discussions.
We thank the French presidency for bringing it into
sharper focus by organizing today's debate.

In aligning ourselves with the statements to be
delivered later by the representatives of Thailand
and Iran, who will speak on behalf the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and the Non-Aligned
Movement, respectively, and with a view to engaging
on the question posed in the concept note (S/2016/503, annex), I wish to highlight the following points.

The Secretary-General's latest report on the
protection of civilians (S/2016/447) underscores the
grim reality that, overwhelmingly, civilians and
non-combatants continue to bear the brunt of armed
conflict at all stages. The numbers are staggering
and horrifying. In 2015 alone, hundreds of thousands
perished during conflict and even while fleeing it. The
survivors, after enduring perilous journeys, have ended
up living in appalling conditions where the majority
eke out a miserable existence as refugees and displaced
persons in desperate need of food, shelter and medicine.
Others who are unlucky face death and the destruction
of their villages and homes. The horrors of conflict
became even more gruesome when women and girls
became targets of terror groups like Da'esh and Boko
Haram and were sold into sexual slavery or were used
as objects for recruitment or ransom.

In many instances, we have followed the stories
with a sense of helplessness, strengthening our resolve
that the perpetrators must be held accountable. We have
been briefed on how emboldened the perpetrators are,
continuously committing heinous crimes with a sense
of impunity. In today's world, we are no longer remotely
detached from the battlefields and conflict zones. Our
conscience bleeds at the savagery and brutality inflicted
on the innocent trapped in conflict zones.
Humankind has seen so many killing fields. We
must do more to stop this carnage. Where we can
make difference, we should make a difference. In
conflict zones where we conduct United Nations peace
operations, we must ensure that the hopes that we bring
to the people are not dashed. We need to invest greater
efforts to translate civilian-protection norms and
standards into actions that ultimately save lives.

The lessons learned in Bosnia, Rwanda and
elsewhere on the role of the United Nations, particularly
with respect to the efficacy ofpeacekeeping operations,
have been instructive in spurring our collective
efforts to prioritize the protection of civilians. The
Security Council has since sought to address the
gaps and challenges exposed during the handling
of those tragic situations by the United Nations. A
paradigm shift occurred with the introduction of
multidimensional mandates, a core component of which
is civilian protections.

In addition to prioritizing protection for the
most vulnerable segments in conflict situations, we
established clear normative standards prohibiting harm
directed against humanitarian personnel, including
medical and health-care personnel and even journalists.
The call for protections also extends to civilian
infrastructure, especially schools and hospitals.
The civilian-protection agenda has also benefited
from further mainstreaming during the course of
the three-year review exercises last year, in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and at the recently
concluded World Humanitarian Summit.

In the light of these recent positive developments
and the far-reaching commitments made by States, it
would seem that the civilian-protection agenda is firmly
entrenched and fully implemented. Unfortunately,
much more needs to be done by States.

There are key issues that we must collectively
address and on which the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446)
and the Secretary-General's implementation report
(S/2015/682) have provided relevant commentary
and recommendations Among them are the tensions
inherent in the first principles of the United Nations
peacekeeping and protection-of-civilian imperatives.
In this context, we are of the View that the Council
should remain open to reviewing mandates if or
when a situation warrants it. Furthermore, given that
United Nations peace operations today are deployed in
increasingly complex and challenging environments,
sometimes in theatres where there is hardly any peace to
keep, mandates should be realistic and implementable.

While closer triangular cooperation and coordination
are central, particularly during the mandate design
phase, similar emphasis should be placed on engaging
with the host States, including on status of mission and
status of forces arrangements, with a View to ensuring
the smooth deployment of troops and assets. In that
context, we welcome the proactive steps taken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to
conclude so-called compacts with host States, including
the Central African Republic, that seek to enhance
understanding on those arrangements so as to facilitate
their full and effective implementation.

While we believe that troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) in any given peace operation maintain their
sovereign rights, including on prescribing caveats
regarding their troops and personnel, we are of the
View that to the extent possible, such caveats should
accommodate civilian protection mandates. We
therefore encourage and support DPKO's ongoing
efforts to engage and sensitize TCCs on the need to
minimize or rescind caveats, particularly those that
may impair the protection of civilians mandate.

In terms of prevention, the Secretary-General's
Human Rights Up Front initiative is a concrete example
of the operationalization of the conflict prevention
imperative. That and other relevant recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
should enjoy our full support to ensure that United
Nations peacekeeping remains relevant and effective.

Effective partnerships are equally crucial if United
Nations peace operations are to effectively implement
the protection of civilians mandate. As mentioned
earlier, while cooperation at all stages is key, at the
same time collaboration and cooperation with the
United Nations system and other actors on the ground
are equally important. Additionally, cooperation
with regional organizations, particularly the African
Union, on the early mobilization of a peacekeeping
presence could be further explored. The possibility of
inter-mission cooperation should also be left open.

I wish to stress that we have seen the alarming
plight of innocent civilians in conflict zones and why
we need to do more to help them. We have seen too
many deaths and the numbers presented to us represent
our fellow human beings - human faces that we must
not ignore. They include those suffering from sexual
abuse. The only way to conclude is to reaffirm our
commitment and resolve to help those who beg us to
intervene and save their lives.

