Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the
Ukrainian presidency for convening such an important
debate. Faced with multiple challenges and new
threats, today more than ever we are called upon to find
collective and peaceful solutions, including in Europe.

Exactly 60 years ago, Europe's founding fathers
signed the Treaty of Rome, the first crucial step
towards the establishment of the European Union.
Re-emerging from the horrific ashes of the Second
World War, against all odds they initiated an era of
unprecedented and unsurpassed peace and prosperity.
Most importantly, they proved that the people's innate
longing for solidarity and peaceful coexistence can, if
given a chance, prevail over the sterile push towards
ultranationalism, isolation and exclusion.

Having experienced the self-destructive
repercussions of such impulses, my country was proud
to host the dawning of Europe, which is and remains
a model of peaceful coexistence, common values,
democracy, solidarity and openness. It is an approach
that, we believe, will best serve the future of our own
children. On 25 March, in cooperation with the Maltese
presidency of the Council of the European Union,
we will host in Rome a summit of the Heads of State
and Government of the European Union members. It
is a way to honour a symbolic moment, but also an
important occasion to reinvigorate the spirit of the
European project and to underscore the European
Union's potential as a force of peace and for peace.

In the current situation where instability and
isolationism are reawakening in Europe and beyond,
it is imperative in our view to foster a multilateral
approach vis-a-vis protracted crises on our continent,
to leverage all the tools at our disposal to prevent
conflicts, and to respond to whomever threatens to
violate the principles embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations, the international legal order and the
equal rights to existence of any country or people. In
that regard, I would like to reaffirm Italy's commitment
to ensuring that any international dispute in Europe
is resolved through legal and peaceful means, while
upholding the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States, the inviolability of frontiers and the principles
embodied in the Helsinki Final Act.

Italy views with great concern the tensions on the
eastern flank of the continent, starting with Ukraine,
in the Caucasus and in the Balkans. We believe that the
only acceptable and possible outcome of the crisis in
Ukraine lies in a lasting political solution preserving
Ukraine's territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty. That can be attained only through a
constructive dialogue involving all concerned parties
and actors. Italy firmly supports the pivotal role of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the reconciliation efforts of the
Normandy group, which convened in Munich on
Saturday to facilitate progress towards the swift and
full implementation of the Minsk agreements, which
incorporate not only security aspects, but also political
clauses, as well as the necessary economy-boosting
measures, and are the only platform for a lasting
compromise.

We also support the efforts of the OSCE for
a peaceful and comprehensive resolution of the
Transnistrian conflict, based on the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Moldova, with a special status
for Transnistria. In this framework, we welcome the
resumption of talks in the 5+2 format last June.

Looking at the long-running tensions in the
Caucasus, I reaffirm in the same spirit my country's
commitment to Georgia's territorial integrity and call
for an intensification of the dialogue with the breakaway
regions to relaunch the Geneva talks. I also would like
to reassert Italy's support to a peaceful solution of
the situation in Nagorno Karabakh and welcome the
efforts of the three co-Chairs of the Minsk Group for
a compromise grounded on the Helsinki Final Act and
the 1997 Madrid Principles.

The persisting difficult political situation in the
Western Balkans is a dire warning of the risk of relapse
into conflict in a region, which is at the very heart of
Europe and essential to its security. We call on all local
leaders to tone down their rhetoric and to genuinely
embrace the European Union's steadfast support to
dialogue and peace in the region. Only by following the
path of mutual collaboration and regional cooperation,
countries of the Western Balkans will be able to ensure
a better future for their own people. We continue to
work in this direction also as Chair in 2017 ofthe Berlin
Process, in view of the summit on the Western Balkans,
which we will host in July in Trieste.

Today, an agreed settlement for a reunited Cyprus
is closer than ever. We strongly support the continuation
of the talks, the two communities' ownership of the
negotiations and the mediation role played by the
United Nations and the European Union. No prosperity
or achievement is borne out of division, and the people
of Cyprus deserve a workable agreement and to prosper
in a common endeavour.

Europe turned last century's scars into a formidable
set of tools to prevent and resolve further conflicts. Italy
welcomes the renewed dedication of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres to political solutions to crises and will
work with all the members of the United Nations and of
the Security Council to sustain peace in Europe and
beyond. By leveraging Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, we entrust regional organizations,
such as the OSCE and the European Union, with the
responsibility to promote conflict resolution across
the continent, reaping substantial results, such as the
progress achieved in the Ukrainian crisis.

Finally, the European Union, thanks to ambitious
and effective stances, such as its enlargement and
neighbourhood policies, is the strongest driver for
peace and resilience in Europe and, through its vast and
substantial external action, an irresistible stabilizing
force for the whole world and for our collective security.

