Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I congratulate Ukraine on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I would also like
to thank the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General
and the representatives of the various entities who
shared their points of views this morning on a matter
of global concern.

The convening of this debate comes at a time
when the frequency and threat of terrorist attacks
witnessed around the world is latent in all countries
without any distinction. We are confronting new
challenges that challenge our capacity for prevention
and effective responses.
For Colombia, the protection of critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks has been at the
centre of our Government policy. As a result of the
internal conflict that affected us for more than 50 years,
my country has suffered terrorist acts that have sought
to destabilize the functioning of the Government and
society. Those attacks or attempted attacks targeted
oil infrastructure, telecommunications centres, power
grids, transportation, networks for the warehousing
of gas and fuel, banking and financial systems, water
supply systems and emergency services.

Those attacks forced us to develop within our
armed forces the Centres for Special Operations for
the Protection of Critical and Economic Infrastructure
of the State, which make cooperation possible
among communities, the public service and the
private sector - the businesses who provide those
services - by launching initiatives such as those
involving the development of standardized documents
and security protocols, which are developed jointly
between security agencies and sectors that seek to
optimize security in their activities. Fortunately, the
peace process will make it possible for those lessons
learned to be shared with others and, hopefully, that
will be of use to the international community.

As you, Mr. President, emphasized in your concept
note (8/2017/104, annex), in my country we have been
working with various communities based on trust and
dialogue, and, as the Chef de Cabinet and the Secretary-
General of INTERPOL mentioned this morning, States
must identify vulnerabilities in all possible sectors,
strengthen cooperation on prevention and mitigation
and ensure greater technical cooperation to enhance the
capacities of States, including through the exchange of
intelligence, good practices and lessons learned.

For Colombia, acts of terrorism are criminal and
unjustifiable, whatever their motivation, wherever
they occur and whoever commits them. Terrorism
cannot and should not be associated with any religion,
civilization, ethnicity or nationality.We reaffirm
our commitment to prevent, combat and eliminate
terrorism and its financing, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, with
full respect for the sovereignty of States, the rule of law
and international law.

