Mr. Yakovenko (spoke in Russian): I am grateful
to the President of Burkino Faso, Mr. Blaise
Compaore, for convening such a timely meeting of the
Security Council.

Since the topic of today's discussion is mediation
and settlement of disputes, I cannot fail to mention the
mediation role of the President of France, Nicolas
Sarkozy. I thank his presidency of the European Union
and his sobering influence on the Georgian leadership.
The President of France ably fulfilled his principal
function as a mediator in the achievement of a
preliminary settlement that, I hope, will help to ensure
regional stability.

In consideration of the theoretical background of
mediation, I note that a mediator normally does his or
her utmost to work out preliminary arrangements based
on areas in which the parties can agree. The
implementation of those agreements should lead in turn
to a definitive and lasting settlement of the conflict.
The events in the Caucasus have demonstrated that
modern conflicts cannot be solved by the use of force.
In that regard, we have always insisted on the
agreement on the non-use of force between Tbilisi,
Abkhazia and South Ossetia.

The mediator acting in good faith should possess
a number of qualities. For instance, he or she should be
impartial so as not to undermine the confidence of the
parties; above all, the mediator should observe strict
confidentiality. Unilateral decisions should not be
imposed nor should reason be given to believe that the
mediator is biased towards or has preferences for one
of the parties. A mediator's failure to meet any one of
those requirements inevitably creates problems. There
are ample examples of that, but it is enough to recall
the evolution of the Kosovo settlement.

Recent events throughout the world demonstrate
that the role of mediators in dispute settlement is on
the increase. Let me mention just a few. As a result of
mediation, the conflicts in Africa have become less
intense, the Democratic Republic of East Timor has
been established, a settlement has been achieved in
Aceh, and United Nations-mediated talks between the
parties to the conflict in Cyprus have been engaged.
Lastly, a comprehensive political agreement has been
achieved in Zimbabwe through the mediation of the
President of the Republic of South Africa.

I believe that all present here will agree that the
activity of mediators requires great skill and is the
product of a combination of persistence, tact,
knowledge of the historic, cultural and other specifics
of a conflict, and - no less important - patience. The
mediator, even if compelled at times to be tough,
should not use gross interference or violate the
legitimate rights or interests of any of the parties. It is
necessary to work patiently towards a result acceptable
to all parties to the conflict and not be tempted to make
hasty decisions in search of momentary political
dividends.

Experience in conflict settlement to date clearly
demonstrates that only the mediator who does not rely
on violence or the imposition of terms of settlement but
seeks instead to reconcile the positions of the parties,
find areas of convergence and reach mutually
acceptable understandings has a chance of succeeding.
On the basis of the aforementioned principles, Russia
participates in mediation or decides to support relevant
efforts of the United Nations or other international or
regional organizations.

