Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I, too, welcome Under-
Secretary-General Holmes and thank him for his
briefing, which has helped us to better understand the
sources and the dynamics of the instability prevailing
today in the regions bordering Darfur.

Let me say at the outset that Italy joins other
delegations in expressing deepest concern about the
humanitarian situation in the region and in
commending the role of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the personal efforts of
Mr. Holmes.
The protection of civilians on the ground is a
widely shared priority. It is the guiding principle of our
work - a principle on which we must always focus in
our discussions and in our decisions. Italy supports the
role of the United Nations in that regard. We underline
the need for full cooperation by the Sudanese
authorities with the United Nations and with the
humanitarian organizations involved in the region. We
believe that security and access are of capital
importance, as has already been stated this morning.

At the same time, we welcome the attention that
Under-Secretary-General Holmes, visiting Juba, paid to
the unsolved problems of South Sudan. We believe that
that is an important signal in order to tackle those
problems within an appropriate regional framework.
The Council should not let the Darfur crisis divert its
attention from the peace process in the south and
should renew its collective and individual pressures on
the parties in that respect.

Finally, we welcome the consensual position
expressed by the Human Rights Council regarding
respect for human rights in Darfur. We look forward to
operational follow-up.

I have a few questions to bring to the attention of
Under-Secretary-General Holmes.

First, on the signing of the joint communique
between the Government of the Sudan and the United
Nations, we believe that it is an important and timely
commitment that comes at an appropriate time for the
activities of the humanitarian operations. Similar
documents have been signed on previous occasions,
but unfortunately they have not been fully
implemented. Has the Under-Secretary-General
received any further guarantees concerning the
implementation of the communique?

Secondly, what is Mr. Holmes' opinion regarding
the possible implications of the good news on the
humanitarian assistance track? Can it be considered a
sign, a positive indication, of goodwill on the part of
the Sudanese authorities, making it possible to
strengthen the current efforts on the political track as
well?

Finally, on Chad, I think that Under-Secretary-
General Holmes, after meeting with the Prime Minister
in Chad, publicly expressed some signs of relative
optimism. Would he please elaborate further on that
and tell us whether he has reason to be confident.
I cannot conclude without expressing Italy's
deepest condolences to the Senegalese authorities and
the families of the peacekeepers of the African Union
Mission in the Sudan who were killed last Sunday.

