Mr. Deng (South Sudan): I thank you, Mr. President,
and members of the Security Council for giving me
another opportunity to address the Council on the
unfolding tragic situation in our country. I am also
pleased and honoured to share the platform with the
Secretary-General, whom I served for five years as
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.

The reports of violations of human rights law
and international humanitarian law associated with
the devastating conflict that our country has been
experiencing are extremely disturbing. In my previous
statement (see S/PV.7168), I reported on what the
Government is trying to do by creating a national
investigation committee and cooperating with the
African Union commission of inquiry.

On a positive note, the recent developments point at
a more encouraging direction towards peace. Following
the much appreciated visits of United States Secretary
of State John Kerr, and Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, who successfully persuaded the leaders of the
warring factions to meet face-to-face, President Salva
Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar did indeed meet under the
determined and unrelenting mediation of the Ethiopian
Prime Minister, Hailemariam Dessalegn, and signed a
framework agreement for the peace process.

The agreement not only stipulates the immediate
cessation of hostilities, in reaffirmation of the
23 January cessation of hostilities agreement, but also
commits the parties to the separation of their forces
and the deployment of the monitoring and verification
mechanism of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). The agreement also stipulates
opening humanitarian corridors and unconditional
cooperation with the United Nations and humanitarian
agencies to ensure that humanitarian aid reaches the
affected populations in all areas of the country.

The parties also agreed to establish a transitional
Government of national unity and to engage all
stakeholders, including the former detainees, political
parties, civil society and faith-based organizations,
in negotiating the formation of the transitional
Government, agreeing on the permanent Constitution
of South Sudan and addressing any other issues
concerning the future of the country.

The credit for that positive turn of events must
of course go first and foremost to the leaders of
South Sudan, especially President Salva Kiir for
heeding requests to reach out to Mr. Riek Machar, and
Mr. Machar, in turn, for responding positively, making
it possible to end the massive destruction of life and
property that has devastated the country. Considering
the bitterness of the conflict and how divided the
nation has become, that remarkable shift could not
have been possible without international pressure. The
South Sudanese people, who have been the primary
victims of such rampant violence, are most grateful to
the international community, in particular the leaders
of IGAD, the African Union, the United Nations
and the United States. It is further testimony to the
commitment of the United Nations and the international
community to support South Sudan in overcoming the
formidable challenges that it has faced since achieving
independence after half a century of a devastating war
of liberation.

It is also testimony to the increasing international
commitment to assist post-conflict countries in
consolidating peace, security and stability as
preconditions for socioeconomic development. Even
more significant is the international commitment to
assist Governments in protecting their populations,
which is first and foremost their responsibility.
However, when a State lacks the capacity to discharge
that national responsibility, it is incumbent upon the
international community to provide the necessary
support to enhance State capacity in fulfilling its
national responsibility.

The Government of South Sudan is well aware of its
responsibility to protect its people, even though, as we
have often acknowledged, the capacity of the State to
do so is extremely constrained by a number of historical
factors related to the long war. International support to
enhance the capacity of the State is therefore of critical
importance. That is why we have consistently argued
that, while the international community will need to
reorder its priorities in the light of the current crisis,
support for State capacity-building should remain high
in the new order of priorities.

As someone who observed first-hand the response
of the United Nations Under-Secretary-General
and Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
the Prevention of Genocide, I have witnessed the
compassion and passion with which the Secretary-
General and his senior managers have dedicated
themselves to assisting South Sudan in consolidating
peace, security and development. It is also known that
the troika comprising Norway, the United Kingdom and
the United States, in addition to our sister countries in
the region and international friends and partners, have
been steadfast in their support for South Sudan before
and after independence.

South Sudan has been experiencing one of the
worst atrocities that the world has seen in recent years.
By the same token, it has also received concerted
international attention and support. We hope that the
spectacular accomplishment of Secretary Kerry and
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon will be sustained and
will lead South Sudan to a renewed commitment to
peace, security, stability and dignity for all its people.

As President Kiir said to Secretary Kerry, he is a
man of his word and is committed to honouring the
agreement. That is why he immediately gave orders
for his troops to stop any military activities against the
rebels except in strict self-defence if attacked. We trust
that Mr. Riek Machar will also honour his word. Both
the principles to which President Salva Kiir has always
expressed his commitment and those that Mr. Riek
Machar has often invoked to justify his rebellion should
provide a basis for common ground.

It has always been my belief that the cultural values
of our people advocate peace, unity and harmony.
Even when the society is shattered by violent conflict,
the objective of the peace process has always been a
balance between justice and accountability through
the restoration of unity, forgiveness and reconciliation.
That does not, however, mean compromising the
principles of justice and accountability. The challenge
then becomes how to balance such principles so as to
maximize the positives and minimize the negatives.

We fully realize that those are the challenges that
our country and the international community face to
ensure peace, while also holding accountable those
responsible for the gross violations of human rights and
humanitarian law.

