President Blaise Compaore: with Mr. Guillaume
Soro, the new Prime Minister of the Republic of
Cote d'Ivoire; and with Mr. Laurent Gbagbo,
President of the Republic.

"In addition, the mission had a working
meeting with the Acting Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abou Moussa, the
commanding Generals of the military component
of the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) and the French forces that support it,
the main civil officials of UNOCI and the United
Nations team in Cote d'Ivoire.

"Thanks to these meetings, the mission
observed certain matters that I will now bring to
the Council's attention. I must state that the terms
in which these preliminary observations are
drafted are entirely my responsibility.

"The political Agreement of Ouagadougou
has created a new atmosphere in cote d'Ivoire
that all our interlocutors highlighted. It is true
that the Agreement has not immediately resolved
the problems of substance that are at the very
heart of the C6te d'Ivoire crisis, but it has
unleashed a new dynamic to resolve those
problems at the initiative of the parties
themselves. Both President Gbagbo and
Prime Minister Soro sought to emphasize that
delays in the past two months were due
exclusively to technical reasons. The negotiators
of the Agreement had underestimated the time it
would take to set up a new Government.
However, at the political level, the determination
of the parties to apply the agreement remained
intact.
"The mission's interlocutors also appealed
to the United Nations to continue assisting Cote
d'Ivoire and to extend UNOCI through the period
leading up to the elections. The process needs to
be continued. Technical assistance and support in
the field of security must be provided;
international assistance for Cote d'Ivoire must be
mobilized; and the certification of the electoral
process must be carried out. I will refer
specifically to this latter process in a moment.

"As regards security, the mission's
interlocutors pointed to a very meaningful
improvement of the situation, which has
remained fairly calm since the Ouagadougou
Agreement was signed. The commanders of the
neutral forces estimate that the risk of a return to
hostilities is minimal. Indeed, since the
elimination of the confidence zone on 16 April,
there has not been a single significant armed
incident in that sector.

"But there are still elements of concern. The
first is in the west of the country, where there are
still active militias. The second has to do with
criminality, which, though stable, remains high.
In this respect, the commanders of the neutral
forces have confirmed that there are still many
illegal control posts on the roads, particularly in
the eastern part of the country, and even inside
Abidjan. The third factor of concern relates to the
process of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, disarmament of the militias and the
reform of the security forces. The commanders of
the neutral forces have pointed out that there has
been very little progress in this area. They did,
however, welcome that the Facilitator is presently
trying to resolve the problem of ranks and quotas
in the army, because if that were solved the
process could be reinitiated.

"In reply to our questions about President
Compaore's request addressed to the Security
Council for a partial lifting of the arms embargo,
Mr. Bassole confirmed that the request sought to
endow the police forces and the gendarmes with
the tools suitable for maintaining law and order.
He clarified that in presenting this request to the
Council, the Facilitator had merely transmitted a
request from the parties. Several members of the
mission expressed doubts about a partial lifting of
the embargo, as disarmament and reforming the
security sector were still pending. Some courses
of action were outlined to bring these
contradictory concerns into convergence, but I
must note that on this score, the mission did not
have a mandate to adopt a stance, since it was
confined to pointing out that the Council would
'examine the sanctions regime in order to
contribute to the peace process, taking into
account the peaceful implementation of the
Ouagadougou Agreement'.

"Among the problems of substance to be
resolved in order to find a lasting solution to the
crisis, the Prime Minister emphasized the
importance of identification. The representative
of the Facilitator also recognized that
identification was at the heart of the concerns of
Cote d'Ivoire's citizens. He highlighted that the
prefects had been appointed to deploy the
administration in the northern part of the country,
and the judges in charge of holding court had
already been appointed. The main matter still to
be resolved has to do with the appointment of the
technical private operator. The bidding process
had been carried out, and it was not felt that there
was any need to re-do it. The President of the
Republic expressed optimism about the
possibility of moving ahead rapidly in the
identification process, in parallel with voter
registration.

"As to the electoral process, the parties
agreed with the mission on the importance of
securing the credibility of the process overall. We
saw that there is consensus about the need for
certification of the electoral process to be carried
out by the United Nations at each stage. The
request to terminate the High Representative for
the elections - which had been made last April
to the Secretariat's technical evaluation mission,
should not be seen as any sort of reservation in
respect of the certification, which was considered
necessary. As for the institutional model to be
established in the new resolution on the UNOCI
mandate, Prime Minister Soro encouraged the
mission to go along with the opinion of the
Facilitator. The mission assured Mr. Bassole that
the Facilitator's opinion would duly be taken into
account at the time of preparing the draft
resolution.
"In conclusion, on behalf of the members of
the mission, I would like to thank Mr. Abou
Moussa and his team in UNOCI for their
assistance, but more importantly for their daily
activities in the service of peace in Cote d'Ivoire.
The mission left Abidjan encouraged by the new
dynamics it had noted, but also convinced that the
international community had to continue
accompanying this process resolutely. We have
given assurances to Burkina Faso about the
Council's support for its role as a Facilitator. We
have exhorted the parties to persevere along the
path they set out on in Ouagadougou. And finally,
I would like to place on record my personal
gratitude to the French delegation and, in
particular, to Mr. Clement Leclerc, for the support
he gave me in carrying out the responsibility that
the Council was kind enough to entrust to me."

