Mr. Danon (Israel): As Israel's new ambassador to
the United Nations, I have been charged with a sacred
duty: to represent the people and the State of Israel
before the nations of the world.
Like people everywhere, the people of Israel seek
to live in peace and to see their children prosper. For
the Jewish people, who have suffered centuries of exile
and persecution, our dream can be summed up in the
words of our national anthem: "To live as a free people
in our land".

Tragically, since the establishment of the State
of Israel, every Israeli in every generation has been
touched by war and by terror. My own father, Joseph
Danon, was severely wounded by terrorists while
protecting the Jordan valley during his reserve duty.
After sustaining critical head injuries and hearing loss,
he eventually passed away after a long and painful
struggle. This was a tragedy for me and for my family.
I have experienced at first hand the price of war. We all
hope and pray for peace with our neighbours, and we
will do all that we can to achieve this noble goal, but we
will never compromise the security of the Jewish State.

Today, I address this Chamber at a time of great
difficulty and pain in my country and for my people.
This is not how I envisioned my first address to the
Security Council. Over the past six weeks, a savage tide
of terror has swept over the streets of Israel, and yet, to
my disappointment, all I hear are calls to end the cycle
of violence. Let me make one thing clear - this is not a
cycle of violence. These are simply unprovoked attacks
against Israelis for no reason other than the fact that
they are Jews living in their historic homeland. Like any
country, Israel has the right and the obligation to defend
its citizens, and this is exactly what we are doing. Any
country - any country - whose people were being
attacked in the streets on a daily basis would act in the
exact same way.

Since Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year,
Israelis have endured a season of sorrow. Men, women
and children have been maimed and killed on the
streets of Israeli cities in broad daylight. Palestinian
terrorists have chosen Israeli Victims at random, using
rifles and rocks, butcher's knives, screwdrivers and
even two-ton vehicles to shed the blood of innocents.
Israelis today know that an attack can come at any
time, in any place, without warning and without mercy.
From Haifa to Beersheva, from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem,
Israelis walking through their own neighbourhoods
are constantly looking over their shoulder to see what
might come. People are afraid to stop for coffee on the
way to work or even to take a public bus.

All of us here have families. Mothers and fathers
worry that their children could be knifed to death when
they leave the house, and children worry that their
parents will not make it home. This is the true meaning
of terror. When someone leaves home holding a kitchen
knife with the intention of killing another person - any
person - this stems from a deep hatred. When that
someone is a 13-year-old boy who stabs an Israeli boy
riding a bicycle 15 times - 15 times - this stems from
a culture of hate. Nelson Mandela once said, "No one
is born hating another person People must learn to
hate".

Tragically, Palestinian children have been
receiving lessons in hatred from their leaders, in their
schools and on children's television programmes.
A children's programme was aired on the Palestine
Public Broadcasting Corporation media station called
"Palestine This Morning", in which a young girl recited
a poem calling for the killing of Jews. The poem called
Jews "barbaric monkeys" and "the most evil among
creations," and those who murdered "Allah's pious
prophets". The young girl concluded, "I do not fear
barbarity as long as I have my arm and my stones".
This is Palestinian public television.

As we saw in this Chamber during last week's
emergency meeting of the Security Council
(S/PV.7536), many seem to be confused about the cause
of the current escalation. The words of this young girl
hold the answer. An entire generation of Palestinian
youth is being brainwashed with bigotry, brought up to
glorify violence, and raised to dehumanize Jews. This
indoctrination poisons the minds of youth; evidence of
this is only a Google search away. All we need to do
is take a look at what is showing on Palestinian social
media - vicious cartoons showing brutal killings of
Israelis, instructional videos on how to commit a terror
attack in the most efficient way, even an animated clip
of the murder of Eitam and Na'ama Henkin - Israeli
parents who were killed in front of their children.

Since most Council members have not seen this clip,
let me tell them that a special effort was made to show
the fear and terror in the eyes of the Henkin children
who were sitting on the backseat of their car as they
watched their parents being murdered. It is no wonder
that, in the current wave of attacks, at least nine of the
attackers have been Palestinians under the age of 18.
When children are taught hostility and hatred instead
of math and science, when teenagers are encouraged
to grab a knife instead of a book, when young people
are shown images of violence instead of a vision for
peace, then they too are victims. When we ignore this
deliberate corruption of the minds of children, we are
not part of the solution - we are part of the problem.

The history of my region demonstrates that hatred
starts with falsehood and incitement and ends with
violence. The spree of stabbings, shootings and stonings
we are now facing began with lies about the Temple
Mount. President Abbas and the Palestinian leadership
have repeatedly and systematically accused Israel of
trying to change the status quo. This inflammatory
allegation is false, and President Abbas knows it is false.
Yet this deliberate and malicious lie is told over and
over again. Not only is this conspiracy theory not true,
but it is also not new. Allow me to quote the following:

"We hereby announce that no one has any
intention of infringing the rights of Muslims to
the places that are holy to them Any attempt to
describe the desire of the Jews to pray at this holy
place as the creation of a strategic base for an
attack on the mosques of the Muslims is nothing
but the fruit of a fevered imagination or a malicious
libel."

Do the words I have just read out sound familiar?
The statement they come from was not issued last week.
It was not even issued last year. It was made in 1928
by the National Committee of the Jews of the Land of
Israel. Even then, 20 years before the establishment of
the State of Israel, lies were spread about the Temple
Mount in order to incite Violence against Jews. In
the violence that followed back then, 133 Jews were
massacred and hundreds more were injured.

Today, when President Abbas declares, "Israel
intends to make Al-Aqsa Jewish" and says, "We
welcome every drop of blood spilled in Jerusalem", he
understands the consequences of his words. He knows
full well that they will lead to new waves of violence
and terror and that lives will be lost. Then as now, the
story is the same - same plot, same characters, same
ending. Actually, there is one major difference. In 1928,
the convenient explanations that we now hear so often
in this Chamber did not apply. There was no Israeli
presence on the Temple Mount. In 1928, there were
no settlements; there was no State of Israel; and there
were no excuses to sell to the international community.

Whoever claims that Israeli actions and policies are the
reason for the Violence needs to learn a lesson from
history.

The Palestinians are employing old tactics and
are trying to score easy Victories without having to
negotiate. They are using the violence that they have
incited and instigated in order to manipulate the
international community. Instead of penalizing the
Palestinians, the international community rewards
them.

Israel is fully committed to the status quo. Under
the agreement, Muslims are free to Visit and pray at
the compound at any time. Members of other religions,
including Jews and Christians, may only visit, and may
do so only on weekday mornings between 7 am. and
11 am. Israel has not only accepted that arrangement;
it is responsible for enforcing it. The facts speak for
themselves. Let me share some statistics with the
Council.

Every year, there are 3.5 million Visits by Muslims,
who come to pray in the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and 80,000
non-Muslims Visit the site, of whom only 12,000 are
Jews. The status quo on the Temple Mount is the only
guarantee of the freedom of religion in Jerusalem. We
have said it before and we will say it again - Israel will
not agree to an international presence on the Temple
Mount. If the international community wishes to be
constructive, it should focus on ending the incitement.

No nation represented in this Chamber would accept
the presence of international forces on its sovereign
territory. I would like to tell my colleague, the French
representative, that we know that his country wants to
see peace in our region. We too want peace, but the only
way to achieve peace is through direct talks between
the parties. That is the only way. It has proven so in the
past, and it is the only way that should be promoted.
The best way to reduce tensions in the region is to urge
President Abbas to accept Prime Minister Netanyahu's
call to meet with him, here at the United Nations, in
Ramallah, in Jerusalem or anywhere else. It is the only
way to promote peace.

Israel opposes any change in the status quo on the
Temple Mount. The place where the status quo needs
to change is here at the United Nations. If the United
Nations is truly interested in calming tensions and
bringing peace to the region, it must change its default
settings. The United Nations must end its usual practice
of calling on both sides to show restraint, and state
clearly that there is one side that is instigating a wave of
terror. It must stop making excuses for the Palestinians
and start holding them accountable. It must demand that
Abbas cease his incitement and insist that he return to
the negotiating table. Only then, once the Palestinians
see that promoting violence will get them nowhere, will
the reality on the ground change and the prospects for
peace return.
Please allow me to conclude with a quote from the
Bible: "The Lord will give strength unto his people; the
Lord will bless his people with peace" (The Holy Bible, Psalms, 29:11).

