Mr. Eide: When I briefed the Council in July (see S/PV.5930), I spoke about the outcome of the Paris
Conference in support of Afghanistan, which was a
success in several ways. The Conference provided
$21 billion for the reconstruction of Afghanistan, and it
also gave us a road map for how to proceed together
with the Afghan leadership; the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy and the Paris Declaration. So
there was a road map then, and the road map remains.

Since then, we have, I believe, been distracted
from the commitments undertaken in Paris. The main
reason for that is the deteriorating security situation, as
we have seen over the last few months. In July and
August, we witnessed the highest number of security
incidents since 2002. It was an increase of up to 40 per
cent, compared to the same months of July and August
last year.

In the report before the Council (S/2008/617),
three characteristics of the security situation have been
highlighted. First, the influence of the insurgency has
spread beyond the traditional areas in the south and the
east and has extended to provinces around Kabul.
Secondly, there has been an increase in asymmetric
attacks, some of them very sophisticated, which has
contributed to an increase in civilian casualties. And
thirdly, there were more and sometimes deadly attacks
against aid-related and humanitarian targets, including
deadly attacks against non-governmental organization
and United Nations personnel.

During September, the month of Ramadan, we
saw a decrease in the number of incidents, as we had
expected. On International Peace Day, on
21 September, we saw that hostilities were almost
brought to a halt, including by the Taliban, following
an appeal by the United Nations. That allowed us to
vaccinate 1.6 million children against polio, which was
a major achievement.

However, we are now seeing a new increase in
the number of incidents, and we must expect that the
number of incidents will continue to climb further over
the next weeks, with at least four good weather weeks
remaining after the end of Ramadan. We should be
prepared for a situation where we do not experience the
08-54872
same winter lull - the same reduction in the level of
hostilities - that we have experienced in past winters.
So the situation is challenging, and it is indeed
complex.

I would nevertheless caution against the kind of
gloom and doom statements of which we have heard so
many recently: many of them really go too far. Also,
some of them come from people who have scarcely put
their feet on the ground in Afghanistan. There are
positive developments that we must take advantage of,
and these positive developments affect some of the
critical elements in our common agenda to solve the
conflict. Let me mention three of them in particular.

First, the relationship between Afghanistan and
Pakistan has improved. Instead of acrimonious
statements, we now see a more constructive working
relationship emerging. Following President Karzai's
attendance at the swearing-in ceremony of President
Zardari, the political dialogue is expanding, and it is
based on an understanding that a threat from the
insurgency is a shared threat. In addition to this
political dialogue, I hope that the jirga process of last
year will soon get under way again. It is a useful
instrument for helping to address challenges that the
two countries have in common. The international
community must strengthen this improved relationship
in a wise, thoughtful and generous way.

The second development is the changes made by
President Karzai in his Government last Saturday. I
know from numerous conversations with the President
that those changes reflect a desire to better address
some of the key areas that have been identified in the
ANDS and the Paris Declaration as our common
priorities. I am first and foremost thinking of the
strengthening of the Ministry of Interior and of the
Afghan police, the latter of which lags seriously behind
the army. This could affect security on the ground, the
respect for rule of law, the fight against corruption and
our counter-narcotics and border control efforts. The
implications could thus be very significant. I know that
the new Minister, who has previously successfully built
two ministries, is dedicated to doing his utmost and
will approach this task also with great determination.

The changes in the Ministry of Agriculture must
also be used to inject new energy into boosting
agricultural production and to help us to avoid serious
and frequent shortages of food and stimulate economic
growth. It is an area that we, the international
08-54872

community, have neglected for too long; and the price
of such neglect is too high. Over the last few days, the
United Nations has already been working with the
Afghan Government and key partners on the ground to
determine how we can use this opportunity to address
our common priorities.

The third positive development is that the latest
statistics for drug production show a mixed picture, but
with some important positive trends. The overall
production area has been reduced by 19 per cent, and
the number of poppy-free provinces has gone from 11
two years ago to 13 last year and to 18 this year. And
further can progress can be made here. Today, poppy
cultivation is not an Afghanistan-wide phenomenon,
but rather a phenomenon limited to a number of
provinces, primarily in the south, and particularly, of
course, Helmand, which accounts for the vast majority
of the production. At this stage, we must do our utmost
to consolidate this progress and make sure that, next
year, more - and not fewer - provinces are poppy-
free. As I have said previously, that is achievable.

If we make good use of these positive trends in
critical areas, then the overall impact could also be
very significant. I am cautiously - I repeat,
cautiously - optimistic that we can start replacing the
current negative atmosphere with an atmosphere of
greater confidence in what we are all doing. That is
important for the Afghan people, and it is important for
the public in donor and troop-contributing countries as
well as for the international community as such.

There is one other priority that has to be urgently
addressed. The humanitarian challenges are serious and
increasing. First and foremost, we may soon be facing
a serious food shortage. Again, I would urge donors to
ensure that the requirements of the joint appeal
launched by the Afghan Government and the United
Nations in July are covered, so that food and other
assistance can be available to those who are the most
vulnerable.

Let me draw the Council's attention to another
important priority for the United Nations, for the
Afghan Government in particular, for the Afghan
authorities and for us all. A week ago, the election
process started with the first phase of voter
registration. Despite delays in the opening of some
voter registration centres, due to logistics,
communication and security issues, 90 per cent of the
registration centres were open this week. Together with
3
the Afghan authorities, we are monitoring the situation
closely to overcome operational challenges and to do
our utmost to ensure a safe and credible registration
process.

A part of our mandate is to ensure better civil-
military cooperation. I believe that, today, we have a
better relationship with the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) than we had half a year ago. It
is a relationship based on respect for each other's
distinctive mandates. We have worked together closely
on the election process, which is now under way. We
work better on humanitarian issues, where a set of
guidelines have been agreed upon to ensure that
humanitarian assistance is delivered in an impartial
way, respecting humanitarian principles. We work
together on human rights issues, not least to avoid
civilian casualties as a result of the use of force. It is
my hope and belief that the current work in this area
will have a positive impact on the ground, and I am
convinced that a clear and independent United Nations
voice in this area is of benefit to all, and that a good
and constant dialogue with the military forces is
essential. My recent and very constructive
conversations with key military leaders confirm that
impression.

However, when we talk about civilian casualties,
I should add something fundamental here. When we
speak about this topic, we must all remember that the
clear majority of such casualties are caused by the
insurgency. The increased use of asymmetric attacks
has also led to a significant increase in civilian victims,
and such attacks must be firmly condemned.

As part of our civilian-military cooperation, we
have also elaborated an integrated approach under
civilian leadership. The challenge will be to translate
this strategy into practical policies. And in this respect
I would like to make one comment that I consider to be
of great importance. To me, a comprehensive approach
is not first and foremost a question of how to organize
our efforts in a post-operational landscape; it is about
how we allocate our overall civilian and military
resources to produce optimal effects on the ground.
Today, a growing amount of civilian resources is
allocated to conflict provinces to support military
operations. I understand that, and I understand the
logic that countries need to demonstrate that where
they fight they must also build. But the result could
easily be that more and more of us adopt a province-
based perspective. We must avoid a donor-generated
fragmentation of Afghanistan. There must be a balance.
That is my appeal.

Civilian resources will inevitably have a limited
impact where and when the conflict is most intense. At
the same time, a number of provinces and districts are
in the balance. A number of provinces have seen
progress that must be urgently consolidated. But they
receive very modest resources. And these are provinces
that could be stabilized and where progress could be
consolidated with limited means and limited civilian
economic resources. But the effect would be
tremendous. That view is shared by the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Antonio Costa. And let me add that, without a
balanced and equitable distribution of resources, the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, to which
we have all committed ourselves, cannot be
implemented.

There is today much talk about reconciliation. I
have always believed that a solution to the conflict in
Afghanistan will depend on the continued and robust
presence of military forces but that the solution in itself
will ultimately be a political solution. However, we
must avoid speaking of reconciliation in a way that
does not reflect the complexity of such a process and
does not fully respect the lead and the ownership of the
Afghan Government. A policy of engagement will be
required. It must be led with strength and confidence
by the Afghan Government, based on the constitution
and the other achievements we have made so far, and it
must be supported by a strong and confident
international community. The United Nations stands
ready to assist in such a process, in accordance with
the mandate given to us in Security Council resolution
1806 (2008).

Finally, I have a few words about the work of the
United Nations Mission. It is still a small mission in
need of qualified staff to fulfil its mandate. We have
asked for a significant increase in staff and in budget,
and I appeal to all Council members for their support.
However, I am more concerned about the quality than
the quantity of the staff. At the present stage, we need a
number of people with very specialized qualifications
within aid effectiveness, agriculture, et cetera. I am
grateful for the many offers that made been made, but I
also ask for understanding for the fact that the
regulations we have to respect in this building make it
difficult to respond as positively and as quickly as we
would have liked. There is a need for all of us to find
08-54872
creative solutions within existing regulations that
enable us to meet specific requirements quickly.

With regard to the substance of our work after
Paris, we have set up a new and more results-oriented
consultation machinery, and it is starting to work. We
have worked with the Afghan Government to establish
an implementation structure for the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy. We have worked with
international donors to obtain the clarity we have
sought in the important social outreach programme of
the Independent Directorate for Local Governance,
where discussion has gone on for many months and
delayed important efforts. We have worked with the
Afghan Government to strengthen institution-building
and to move toward a more professional civil service.

Over the past few days, as I mentioned, our
efforts have been concentrated on the need to build
support around the new ministers who are about to take
up their functions. We are addressing critical issues of
data collection in order to monitor and improve aid
effectiveness.

Some have asked where I would like the United
Nations Mission to be six months from now. So let me
mention some achievable targets: to agree with donors
on specific criteria to measure aid effectiveness, such
as the amount of money spent through the core budget;
appropriate mechanisms to provide orchestrated
support to the Afghan National Development Strategy;
the equitable nationwide distribution of resources; the
percentage of resources spent in Afghanistan in
opposition to resources being spent in donor countries;
and the level of resources spent to build Afghan
capacity. None of these are new; they are all Paris
commitments that we have all undertaken.

Second, we must establish one databank instead
of many, allowing the Afghan Government and the
United Nations to track resources spent through
provincial reconstruction teams, development agencies
and non-governmental agencies. That is critical for
transparency and aid effectiveness. Today, the United
Nations and, even more important, the Afghan
Government do not know how many resources are
going into the country or what they are being spent on.
That must be corrected.

Third, we must set up a mechanism for joint
audits, enhancing accountability on each side.
08-54872

Fourth, we must strengthen the recently
established Government mechanism for combating
corruption.

Fifth, we must agree on a plan as to the kind of
police we want - because we are not even there yet -
how we should train them and how we should equip
them, and then we must start implementing that plan.

Sixth, as I have stated, we must put discussion
behind us with regard to the Afghan social outreach
programme and start implementing it.

Seventh, we must develop a design for
agricultural reform that enables all of us to follow the
same priorities and to maximize the impact of the
resources available to us.

Eighth, we must solidify the Pakistani-Afghan
relationship within a wider regional confidence-
building framework.

I have often talked about a political surge. By
that, I do not mean to minimize the importance of
military forces, but it is important to focus on how to
give the political dimension of our work greater
prominence. The issues that I have mentioned belong
to the political agenda, where we have to seek a surge.

I hope that we can all work together on that
agenda. We will do our best to coordinate, but
coordination does not depend on mechanisms; it
depends on commitments and the implementation of
commitments. That is the main challenge: to take
commitments seriously. We will do our work, and I
trust that we will have the Council's full cooperation.

