Ms. Coninsx: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Council on the eighth report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/103) on the threat posed
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) to
international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States
efforts to counter the threat. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for his overview of
the report, both the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism (UNOCT) and the Analytical and Sanctions
Monitoring Team for their support and collaboration in
preparing the report.

As we have heard, despite its dwindling territorial
over territory that once provided it with resources and
a base from which to plan and launch attacks, ISIL
continues to present us with many complex challenges.
This change in circumstances has forced the ISIL core
to adapt and transform itself into a covert and more
locally focused network in Iraq. Yet, ISIL has retained
its global intent and global networks, with a presence
not just in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, but also
in many other regions of the world. Of all international
terrorist organizations, it remains the most likely to
carry out a large-scale, complex attack. Its continued
determination to undermine stabilization efforts and
fuel sectarian tensions is also a major concern.

As the report of the Secretary-General makes clear,
Member States continue to face complex challenges in
responding to the threat posed by ISIL and its affiliates.
I wish briefly to highlight three of those challenges.

First, in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic,
ISIL's destructive legacy remains. That legacy is
manifested not only in the millions of displaced
persons who continue to live in camps for internally
displaced persons, but also in the damage inflicted
upon buildings, infrastructure and the social fabric.
During the joint high-level bilateral consultations
held in Iraq with the Under-Secretary-General and
myself last year, I witnessed the physical and social
devastation caused by years and years ofconflict. It was
apparent that reconstruction would take many years
and require significant resources, as well as restoring
and reconciling communities after so many years of
conflict. It will require comprehensive criminal justice
that abides by the rule of law. And it will succeed only
through the continued commitment and involvement of
local, national, regional and international actors.

The process of restoring justice and accountability
will, of course, also require the effective collection,
preservation and use of evidence. Member States
operating in conflict and post-conflict environments
face significant challenges in obtaining admissible
evidence to prosecute and convict ISIL members for
their crimes, including crimes of sexual violence and
trafficking in persons, and to do so in accordance
with international law and fair-trial standards. Where
criminal-justice officials are unable to operate in high-
risk environments, the military can play a crucial
role in the collection, preservation and lawful sharing
of evidence. Given those challenges, I welcome
the establishment and work of the United Nations
Investigative Team for Accountability of Da'esh/ISIL.
CTED stands ready to support the Investigative Team
in any way possible.

Secondly, ISIL's territorial losses have brought
about an increase in the number of terrorist suspects
and offenders in custody, including returning and
relocating foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs) and their
family members. Many States have alerted CTED
to their difficulties in adequately assessing the risk
posed by such prisoners, including men and women,
and managing them in a manner that prevents further
radicalization to violence in prison systems. It is vital
that States continuously monitor, evaluate and review
the effectiveness of their prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration strategies programmes. Any
review of and oversight over those comprehensive
strategies must include appropriate protection for
international human rights, taking into consideration
age and gender sensitivities. And those strategies
must be comprehensive and mutually consistent with
rehabilitation, whether in prisons or alternative settings,
and linked to prosecution and reintegration.

Thirdly, terrorist groups, including ISIL and
its affiliates, have consistently demonstrated their
intention and ability to exploit new technologies and
seek innovative ways to circumvent obstacles to their
financial, technical and recruitment capabilities. I will
highlight a few examples in that regard.

During our assessment visits to West Africa, we
identified and flagged the increased use of mobile
payment services by terrorist groups as a potential
terrorism-financing risk. With concerns about the
possible exploitation of blockchain technology,
States are also seeking ways to address the potential
risk posed by the misuse of cryptocurrencies for
malicious, criminal or terrorist purposes. States are
also increasingly concerned by the use of improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) in terrorist attacks around
the world. Access to the relevant know-how, including
through the Internet, and the ability to obtain precursor
materials allows terrorists to build IEDs with relative
ease. The gathering, preservation and sharing of
digital evidence relating to terrorists' exploitation
of the Internet continues to play a crucial role in
the prosecution of suspected terrorists. Within the
framework of a joint global initiative implemented
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the International Association for Prosecutors,
CTED will continue to support Member States' efforts
in that area, while facilitating the delivery of technical
assistance and enhancing cooperation with the relevant
stakeholders, including the private sector.

We continue to face many challenges indeed in those
areas, but we must also recognize our achievements. In
that regard, I would highlight the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and CTED in developing
the addendum to the Madrid Guiding Principles.
Formally adopted by the CTC on 27 December 2018,
the addendum serves as a practical tool to assist
States in addressing the FTF phenomenon, including
by addressing the challenges posed by returnees and
relocators. Its adoption followed extensive consultations
with a broad range of stakeholders, including the wider
United Nations membership, civil society, academia
and the private sector. It provides guidance to Member
States on responding effectively to the evolving FTF
phenomenon, with a focus on measures to be taken in
a number of areas including, but not limited to, border
security information-sharing, countering terrorists'
narratives, countering violent extremism conducive
to terrorism, risk-assessment and intervention
programmes, judicial measures, including prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration, and international
cooperation. The CTC and CTED will work closely with
Member States to promote effective use of the Guiding
Principles. The CTC will also hold an open briefing
on the addendum to raise awareness on the Guiding
Principles, facilitate open and interactive discussions
on the Challenges posed by the FTF phenomenon and
promote discussion of priority capacity-building needs.

In our country assessment visits on behalf of the
CTC, CTED will continue to emphasize the need for
Member States to implement the relevant Council
resolutions and employ a comprehensive and a holistic
response to the terrorist threat. We will also continue
to support Member States in developing comprehensive
responses to terrorism and to facilitate, in cooperation
with UNOCT, the targeted delivery of technical
assistance to States. We will continue to work with our
implementing partners to deliver as One UN. CTED's
strategic support, UNODC's technical expertise and key
contributions from other United Nations partners have
helped Member States in the Lake Chad basin to begin
developing comprehensive strategies to prosecute,
rehabilitate and reintegrate persons associated with
Boko Haram.

UNODC and UNOCT, in close cooperation with
CTED, are currently engaged in a joint project to
provide tailored capacity-building assistance to prison
staff and other relevant stakeholders. The project aims
to enhance prison security and safety, strengthen risk
and needs assessments and enhance rehabilitation and
reintegration. UNODC, CTED and the International
Association of Prosecutors together developed the
Practical Guide for Requesting Electronic Evidence
across Borders. And UNODC and CTED recently
deployed a United Nations consultant to support Iraq
in the development of a comprehensive and integrated
counter-terrorism strategy that will help Iraq address
the post-ISIL environment in a holistic manner.

Those are just a few examples of our collaborative
efforts to support Member States in countering the
continuing threat posed by ISIL. We will continue to
work together with our many implementing partners,
including Member States, other United Nations entities,
international and regional organizations, civil society,
academia and the private sector, to ensure a holistic and
effective approach to this grave threat to international
peace and security.

