Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), and Mr. Miguel de Serpa
Soares, Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and
United Nations Legal Counsel, for their informative
briefings on the progress made in recent months in
Kosovo. I also thank His Excellency Mr. Ivica Daeie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and to Ms. Vlora
Citaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the United States, for
their statements.

Equatorial Guinea wishes to express its concern
and condemn the events that took place in the north of
Kosovo on 28 May, during which two United Nations
personnel were detained by the Kosovo police. We echo
the words of Mr. Tanin in highlighting the need for all
parties to commit themselves to respect the principles of
law and dignity for all, to work constructively together
with the United Nations and to refrain from any action
that could lead to the escalation of tensions in order to
maintain calm and security on the ground.

As reflected in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/46l) and Mr. Tanin's briefing, the situation in
the Kosovo region is still worrying. The lack of progress
in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina and the
inflammatory rhetoric and provocative actions of the
parties are having a negative effect on the situation
on the ground and hindering initiatives to relaunch a
productive dialogue between the parties.

During our last briefing on Kosovo (see S/PV.8459),
several members of the Council expressed our concern
about the impact that the decision to increase tariffs on
the importation of Serbian and Bosnian products would
have on the normalization of dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina. As reflected in the Secretary-General's
report, this decision is resulting in an escalation
of tensions between the parties and undermining
diplomatic efforts to reach a final agreement on the
Kosovo issue.

Likewise, we are also concerned that, during the
reporting period, no meetings were held between
Belgrade and Pristina. In this regard, we remind the
parties that ensuring security and stability in Kosovo
requires the commitment of both parties to pursuing
the dialogue. We therefore encourage them to continue
these efforts with the aim of achieving stability on
the ground and respecting the implementation of the
agreements reached.

We also wish to highlight the fact that the reporting
period also saw some significant progress. In this
regard, we welcome the new measures taken in the fight
against corruption, progress in the prevention of violent

extremism and support for initiatives to facilitate the
return of displaced persons throughout the region, as
well as other projects that are being carried out on the
ground, with the help of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, UNMIK and the United
Nations team, to foster dialogue and trust between
the parties.

For these reasons, we call on the parties to intensify
their commitment and efforts to generate the conditions
conducive to a constructive dialogue and thereby the
resumption of relations between Belgrade and Pristina.
This would demonstrate their commitment to improving
and protecting the rule of law, as well as safeguarding
the good relations of trust among communities
throughout Kosovo, thereby promoting development,
peace and security in Kosovo.

In conclusion, we believe that all parties should
continue to act in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and within
the framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and existing
agreements so that, through dialogue, they can find a
peaceful and lasting solution that benefits everyone.

Once again, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
reaffirms its respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia,
and appreciates its continued efforts to facilitate
an inclusive, peaceful and political solution to the
situation. We encourage UNMIK to continue to achieve
its goals and priorities to promote security, stability and
respect for human rights in Kosovo. We also commend
the support it provides to all communities in Kosovo
and all regional and international actors.

