Mr. Kromah (Liberia): I bring the members of the
Security Council fraternal greetings from my Government
and people. We are grateful for the support that the United
Nations continues to demonstrate for the peaceful resolution
of the conflict in Liberia. Indeed, for half a century now the
United Nations has remained the hope of the universal
human family, struggling in most cases to defend the
deprived and to enhance the inalienable mission of humankind.

We in Liberia are indeed thankful to almighty God
for preserving our nationhood and sovereignty during the
past six years, most of which have witnessed a
devastating and tragic war, clearly generated by internal
and external interests. More than ever before in this
running saga of hardship for our people, there is hope
now for lasting peace. The leaders and the people of
Liberia have no choice but to obey the call of reality: live
in peace or live no more.

Consequently, the various peace accords brokered by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and witnessed by the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity have culminated in a
unified Government in Monrovia, with all parties to the
conflict participating. The Liberian Government, headed
by a six-man Collective Presidency called the Council of
State, has established the hope that full normality will be
restored in Liberia. The principle of collective fate is
today working so heavily in favour of peace that I and
my colleagues on the Council of State consider the peace
process now to be irreversible, no matter what happens
and no matter what one hears or sees.

Our objective is not to impress any powerful nation
or the international community that we are making
progress. Our target is realistic in that we Liberians were
the direct and immediate victims of the conflict and are
equally the front-line and immediate beneficiaries of any
resulting peace and democracy. This is the basis of the
goodwill, sincerity and commitment that must necessarily
be demonstrated by the Liberian side of the conflict.

I make reference to a Liberian side because there is
a non-Liberian side to the problem and its resolution. It
is common knowledge that Liberia cannot produce
weapons or ammunition; and yet these have been present
in abundant quantity and sophisticated quality to inflict
the calamity at hand. There were also all sorts of
sanctions imposed on Liberia, and yet everything
prohibited found its way into the country. Even the
planning and activities that immediately preceded the war
were not information and knowledge exclusive to
Liberians. At the peak of the war, invisible hands were
felt under and on top of the debris. Yet it was convenient
to say the Liberian conflict was an internal matter and
needed to be resolved by Liberians alone.

Technically, that declaration was correct.
Notwithstanding the acts of external commission or
omission, the Liberian people had the ultimate
responsibility to reject undesirable influences, whether

 

internal or external. I assure the Security Council that we
have learned our lessons. And from these lessons we are
optimistic that our country has a new opportunity to
develop faster and better; a new opportunity to build
according to our legitimate taste and size; a new
opportunity to convert the bitterness, mutual distrust and
suspicion, prejudice and hatred into elements of unity and
prosperity. We are coerced by our immediate past to
achieve peace and democracy.

With this vision, we are not surprised by the reporting
of a New York Times journalist, who, after having spent
less than 10 hours in Monrovia several days ago, considers
our reference to an emerging renaissance in Liberia as an
example of our "going out of our mind." The journalist in
question is not alone in his analysis. His opinion is
certainly shared by those who are equally impatient over
appreciating the complexity of the Liberian conflict, who
prefer to confine their perceptions to the surface of the
problem and yet venture to appear to be making profound
analyses of the situation and its current status.

It is important to note that more than 65 per cent of
fighters in the various warring factions in Liberia are
relatives of more than half a million refugees and of nearly
an equal number of displaced Liberians. Let me therefore
assure the Council that the vast majority of these fighters
want to disarm this very minute.

That is one of the fundamental reasons why the
warring party leaders hastened to sign the Abuja
Agreement, which brought the current Government into
office. Upon our inauguration on 1 September last year, we
immediately invited the Field Commander and staff of the
ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) to the Executive
Mansion and clearly indicated our readiness for the
deployment of the peace- keepers and the subsequent
disarmament of our fighters. The Field Commander was
very blunt and simply told us that he was not ready, due to
the lack of logistics and additional manpower.

We quickly launched a campaign to sensitize the
international community to the need to fulfil its promises to
cooperate with the Liberian peace process. The Government
of Liberia took the lead in this public relations drive and,
thanks to the overwhelming impetus of ECOWAS and the
United Nations, a donors conference was subsequently
organized by the Secretary-General in conjunction with the
ECOWAS Chairman, President J.J. Rawlings of Ghana. We
hope that the initial pledges made at that conference here in
New York will not only be fulfilled expeditiously, but that
further consideration will be given to the rest of the
expenditure requirement, which will be useful in aborting
and preventing the regrettable and undue military and
political hiccups in the peace process.

A key factor in paving the way for peace and
guaranteed elections in Liberia is disarmament. In
addition to the efforts of the Government that I have
already mentioned, we have set up the National
Disarmament and Demobilization Commission (NDDC),
empowered, among other things, to educate and inform all
of the combatants about the timetable for deployment and
disarmament, as well as to explain the process of
reintegration into the larger community. The NDDC,
composed of senior warring party officers and civilians,
seems properly poised to have a positive impact on the
fighters.

Deployment of the peace-keepers has started, and we
expect the completion of this exercise, accompanied by
the backing promised by the international community, to
set the real pace for disarmament. It is not only
ECOMOG that is underequipped, but also the Liberian
Government and the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL), the two other institutions that are
required by the peace agreements to implement various
relevant provisions of the accords. We hear the good
news of more helicopters coming for UNOMIL, but the
chronic need for UNOMIL to prepare the assembly sites
and to marshal the provision of food for the disengaged
soldiers is another determining factor in disarming the
fighters. The logistical strength of the NDDC and other
relevant institutions of the Government is also decisive in
the disarmament exercise. We have submitted preliminary
packages for these programmes.

Equally important is adherence to the provision in
the agreements that there shall be no use of the
communications media or other methods to propagate
hostility between the warring groups. There is presently
an internal campaign being orchestrated in Monrovia to
make future political capital, in the midst of the current
military arrangements to disarm. With the Council's
support, the Government of Liberia intends to deal with
this matter amicably and properly.

We are studying a strategy whereby the Government
will encourage consultation and dialogue with civic and
political groups on major issues, in a bid to find common
ground. This, we hope, will improve the security
psychology, and reduce feelings of isolation.

 

I turn to the question of the aid channel. In troubled
spots around the world, this decade has seen the
proliferation, rapid expansion and deployment of
international non-governmental organizations through which
massive bilateral, institutional and international funding has
been channelled. Along with certain specialized agencies of
the United Nations, these non-governmental organizations
have effectively been in exclusive charge not only of
receiving funds, but of determining, in many cases, where
in their country of assignment they want to be. Less than
half of their budgets serves as assistance for the declared
targets and beneficiaries. There is certainly a need for
adjustment in these arrangements and attitudes.

My next subject is the election programme. One of
the best things the Liberian people expect to gain from their
bitter experience is guaranteed elections for national and
local officials of the government. This is provided for in the
peace agreements as a final stage following deployment,
disarmament, repatriation of refugees and registration of
voters.

At this point, we are seeing only marginal
international interest in the election programme. We appeal
for greater assistance and encouragement: everything must
be done to ensure that we have the type of elections that
will engender lasting peace.

Many of us in the current Government are impatient
with the form of government which has been put together
with the sole aim of bringing peace to our nation.

I come now to the matter of public services. While
endeavouring to manage the business of disarmament, the
Liberian Government also has the mandate and the
obligation to supervise the provision of basic public
services. Public expectations here are high, and the
demands on those services are no less so. All these
variables affect the nature of the peace process: local
politicians are making full use of the strains and gaps in
public services to strengthen their individual positions, as
if these were normal times. The Government has therefore
implored its Vital agencies and institutions to confront face
on the basic economic and other problems at the root of
reconstruction.

In the past few months, Liberia has reinforced
relations with the International Monetary Fund and held
discussions with the World Bank, the African Development
Bank and other multilateral creditors. The discussions have
been centred on the need to provide technical assistance for
capacity-building. In the meantime, the Government is
putting in place certain minimum fiscal policies intended
to improve tax and revenue administration and check
government spending. A debt-relief strategy is also being
designed, with the assistance of the multilateral
institutions.

In the public safety area, we have given priority to
the police and other civic-oriented institutions to cater to
the social and other problems attendant on a society at
war with itself. An effective and efficient police service
will not only raise the public's confidence and sense of
security, but will also provide a proper substitute for the
warring factions as the first line of contact with civilians
throughout the Liberian countryside.

Delivery of basic health care and provision of safe
drinking water, together with the supply of electricity,
particularly in the densely populated city of Monrovia,
have also become priority concerns for the Government.
We are encouraging the privatization of important
components of the public service institutions as a measure
to speed up recovery in these areas.

An inter-ministerial economic management
committee is now carrying out a special study on how
natural resources can be utilized to the full for
reconstruction, taking into consideration the crucial
mistakes that were made in the past.

In conclusion, my colleagues and I in Liberia's
Collective Presidency are not under the illusion that this
Government is the panacea for Liberia's problems; nor do
we believe that the United Nations should do for Liberia
what Liberians can do and ought to do for themselves.

On behalf of all my colleagues, I can say that we
take the blame for the past and will take the blame for the
future: we accept the responsibility of restructuring our
country, shoulder to shoulder with our compatriots. It is
only natural that the United Nations and the rest of the
international community should assume their moral
obligations towards Liberia as a founding member of the
United Nations and as a place where human beings live.

We are particularly delighted by the fact that, since
our Government was installed in September last year, the
United Nations has been pleased to send us important
visitors, led by the Secretary General himself,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, followed by the United States
Ambassador to the United Nations, Her Excellency
Mrs. Madeleine Albright, and the United Nations
Development Programme Administrator, Mr. James

 

Gustave Speth. The members of the Collective Presidency
had extremely useful exchanges with these visitors in an
atmosphere of mutual respect. The Government was left
with the distinct impression that these visitors fully
appreciated the level of commitment to the peace process
of the members of the Presidency, three of whom are the
leaders of the key warring parties.

It is unfortunate that the mass media have portrayed
the United States Ambassador as having gone to Monrovia
to issue instructions and orders to us, when in fact the
scenario was quite respectful and encouraging.

Liberia is the portion of God's planet that has been
given to us. We almost lost it. This has strengthened us.
The Economic Community of West African States has done
well on behalf of the international system. More than ever
before, the United Nations and the individual States
concerned should fully identify with our just aspirations at
this time: the areas of involvement are clear, and we will
do our best to help ourselves, with the Council's solidarity
and cooperation.

