Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation joins in
extending our heartfelt condolences to the Government
and people of Somalia and to the bereaved families
following the terrorist attack on the United Nations
compound in Mogadishu this morning.

My delegation sincerely commends the United
Kingdom presidency for convening this open debate,
which provides us with a unique opportunity to continue
to exchange views on this important agenda item. We
welcome in particular the concept paper (8/2013/334, annex), which clearly outlines the correlation between
conflict and natural resources.

We also thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson; the Chair of the Africa Progress
Panel, Mr. Kofi Annan; the World Bank Managing
Director, Ms. Carolyn Anstey; and the United Nations
Development Programme representative, Ms. Rebeca
Grynspan, for their very insightful contributions.

I wish to begin by reaffirming the importance that
Botswana attaches to the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. In this regard, we fully support
the primary responsibility of the Security Council to
maintain international peace and security.

The issue under discussion today is not new to the
Security Council. We all know why natural resources
often cause conflicts. While there are various forms
of natural resource conflicts, there are also a few
underlying common causes. Greed and corruption
driven by the self-interest of governing elites are in
most cases the primary motivation. There is ample
evidence that predatory governance leads to the
chronic mismanagement of natural resources, which is
often accompanied by disproportionate investment in
military expenditures for the purposes of suppressing
the population.

The mismanagement of natural resources goes hand
in hand with societal warfare. Every society that feels
neglected by governing elites is susceptible to violent
conflict. That is because poor economic performance
constitutes the breeding ground for rebellion. There
are also instances where spoilers promote the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, despite the best
intentions of legitimate Governments to equitably share
economic resources, some of those spoilers going so far
as to promote secession in order to maintain control
over natural resource-endowed areas in their countries.
We believe that the Security Council is uniquely
placed to play a leading role in the prevention of
conflict. Just as we support the concept of doing more
with less in the United Nations system, we are also
in favour of a paradigm shift in the business of the
Security Council. Rather than being crisis-driven, the
Council should invest in the prevention of conflict by
aggressively pursuing the use of early-warning systems.
Any scan of the horizon that yields the suggestion of an
environment conducive to conflict should be met with
the Council's unwavering resolve to deploy preventive
tools, such as fact-finding missions. Existing regional
structures can also come in handy in that regard.

Where there is evidence of a smouldering
situation, a panel of high-level mediators should be
deployed to stop the situation before it develops into
conflict. My delegation believes that prevention is
more cost-effective than peacekeeping. The cost of
human suffering resulting from conflicts rooted in
natural resources cannot be ignored, nor can resource
requirements for peacekeeping operations.

Botswana has avoided the so-called resource
curse thanks to the country's prudent and visionary
leadership. We are in a position to offer valuable
lessons on the sound management of natural resources.
We are very humbled by the frequent mention of our
country by a number of the delegations that took the
floor before me.

Botswana graduated to middle-income status
from being a least developed country at the time of its
independence mainly because of the investment of the
revenue from natural resources in various sectors of the
economy, such as education, health and infrastructure
development, to mention but a few. That is because
mineral rights in Botswana were vested in the State.
That arrangement has guaranteed stability, openness
and transparency and promoted a responsible policy
regime for the management of natural resources, one
that is free of corruption and political interference.
Theat arrangement also ensures that there is an equitable
distribution ofthe proceeds from the exploitation ofthe
country's natural resource base. Furthermore, to that
end, we remain firmly committed to the Kimberley
Process and the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative.

In conclusion, we call on the international
community to scale up its cooperation assistance to
strengthen institutions that promote good governance
and the rule of law. We believe that such an approach
can go a long way towards impeding the development
of breeding grounds for conflict.

Lastly, there should be periodic review of existing
multilateral mechanisms that facilitate the prevention
of conflict associated with natural resources, which
is necessary for the required flexibility to adapt to
evolving challenges.

