The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Colombia,
the Czech Republic, Georgia, Guatemala, Indonesia,
Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kenya, Liechtenstein, Morocco,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Peru, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the consideration
of the item, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 16 June
2009 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2009/324 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council which will
be held on Friday, 26 June 2009, regarding the
protection of civilians in armed conflict."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate
2
in the meeting, in accordance with the rules of
procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took the seat reserved for him at the
side ofthe Council Chamber


The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 25 June
2009 from the Permanent Representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, in which he requests that the Senior
Political Affairs Adviser at the Office of the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
Mrs. Alice Mungwa, be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mrs. Mungwa to take the seat reserved
for her at the side of the Council Chamber.

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. John Holmes, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Holmes to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/277, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. John Holmes.

I now give him the floor.


