Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting, and I
thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), whose
work we commend and continue to support, for his
updated briefing on the situation in Afghanistan.

I welcome Foreign Minister Rangin Dadfar
Spanta of Afghanistan and thank him for his statement.
I also recognize the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Ahmet Davutoglu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Turkey.
09-53153

As Norma Chan, Chief of the Security Council
Secretariat Branch, is retiring tomorrow, I would like
to extend to her our sincere congratulations and
gratitude for the great service she has accomplished
over many decades. As upcoming President of the
Council, I very much regret that she cannot stay for
another month. I wish Norma all the best in her new
undertaking and new life.

We welcome the positive developments in
Afghanistan over the past three months, especially the
holding of the presidential and provincial council
elections on 20 August 2009, which were the first
elections run by the Independent Election Commission.
Despite many irregularities reported, we could see
from the elections the strong aspiration of the Afghan
people for peace and stability.

We respect the choice of the Afghan people of
their leadership and hope that the election results will
lay a sound foundation for political stability in the
country. In the short term, we hope valuable lessons
learned will be useful in planning Afghanistan's 2010
parliamentary elections. In the face of the present
delicate situation, we urge all parties concerned to
constructively cooperate with a View to establishing a
new, strong Afghan Government that is capable of
moving the country forward.

From another perspective, those elections
revealed a more comprehensive picture of the current
situation in Afghanistan, in which major challenges
such as insecurity, weak institutions and insufficient
human and financial resources are prominent features.

A steadily increasing number of attacks and other
security incidents since the beginning of this year,
particularly during the weeks prior to the elections,
reconfirm the shared assessment that insecurity
remains the biggest challenge to Afghanistan. The
deteriorating security situation in many parts of the
country has significantly hampered not only attempts
to hold the elections peacefully with broad
participation of eligible voters, but also efforts to
consolidate institution-building and governance and to
improve the safety and living conditions of the people.

Most of the current infrastructure-building
projects are confined to the centre, unable to reach
remote localities where poor people are in urgent need
of assistance. The alleged electoral irregularities
indicate that there should be more focus on training
09-53153
Afghans to develop capacities of participating in and
contributing to the country's political process.

Against that background, we welcome the
inclusion of benchmarks and indicators of progress in
the Secretary-General's report. They will provide a
good basis for determining the priorities in the next
stage, for measuring progress and for making the
adjustments necessary to achieve the goals set in all
areas, ranging from institution-building, security
improvement and socio-economic development to
human rights promotion and the fight against drugs.
We would like to emphasize our View that protection of
civilians and the improvement of living conditions of
the Afghan people must be accorded top priority.

At this critical stage in Afghanistan's peace
process, the long-term commitment of international
donors is of still greater significance. We support the
early convening of an international conference to
reassess the assistance needs of Afghanistan in this
post-election period. However, the Afghan
Administration and people, as the owners of the
county's peace process, must be able to play a decisive
role in this process. The Government of Afghanistan
must be enabled to assume all the responsibilities that
belong to a sovereign State. The support and assistance
of the international community, including UNAMA,
should therefore be geared toward the achievement of
this objective.

