Mr. Egeland: On behalf of the humanitarian
workers of the United Nations system, I wish to thank
the Security Council for its continued interest in and
support for our work.

The war, the terror and the attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure have to stop in Lebanon and
northern Israel, as they have to stop in Gaza. Too many
children, women and elderly people, as well as other
civilians, have already lost their lives or are struggling
to survive their wounds.

The United Nations humanitarian agencies would
again want to repeat the appeal of our Secretary-
General for an immediate cessation of hostilities. This
is the only way civilians can truly be protected and
humanitarian work can become effective as we try to
reach the civilian populations.

With the conflict in Lebanon now in its second
week, the humanitarian crisis continues to worsen. The
most severely affected areas are southern Lebanon,
Beirut and the Beka'a Valley. More than 300 people
have reportedly been killed and 1,000 wounded. A third
of the casualties are reportedly children.

In northern Israel, rockets continue to rain down
on civilians and civilian infrastructure, with some 30
persons killed and 200 wounded, including children.

In Lebanon, there is widespread destruction of
public infrastructure, including residential housing,
health facilities, schools, roads, bridges, fuel storage,
airports and seaports.

Of concern for future humanitarian relief
operations is the destruction of roads and bridges
linking Beirut to the populations of southern Lebanon.
As a result of the targeting of petrol stations and fuel-
storage facilities, it is estimated that Beirut has only
days of fuel supplies remaining.

Access problems are severely hampering
humanitarian action. It is either too unsafe or
physically impossible, due to destruction, to move
relief supplies into or around large parts of the country.
There are sufficient food supplies, including wheat
stocks, to cover national consumption for one or
possibly up to three months. The primary concern is
the disruption to food supply chains and the ability of
the local population to purchase food from functional
markets.

In the cities, hospitals are functioning, but they
are overwhelmed by the number of wounded and are
suffering from power outages. Too many critically ill
and wounded persons cannot, however, reach hospitals
in time, as they are blocked by the bombardments or
road destruction. With the number of people in shelters
increasing, access to safe drinking water is also a
growing concern. Some reports suggest that small
dispensaries and clinics in the south of the country are
beginning to run out of medicines. The Lebanese
Government has requested international humanitarian
assistance and has appealed for medical supplies,
materials for shelter and construction, tents, blankets,
generators and firefighting equipment.

While figures as to affected populations remain
only indicative, current planning figures suggest that
there are more than a half million conflict-affected
people, including the internally displaced and those
unable to relocate. More than one third of those
affected are children. There may still be some 115,000
third-country nationals from some 20 countries in
Lebanon. It has been reported that there are more than
100,000 Lebanese now located in Syria, many of whom
need assistance.

The United Nations humanitarian agencies are
increasing our capacity to respond on the ground inside
Lebanon. UNICEF has strengthened its capacity in
Lebanon to conduct assessments, in particular of
schools that are being used as temporary shelters for
displaced people. Key needs there include lack of
water, sanitation and health care. UNICEF is also
preparing to deliver critical emergency supplies in the
areas of essential drugs, water, sanitation and
recreation. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is undertaking
border monitoring in countries surrounding Lebanon,
for refugee outflows, and has pre-positioned stockpiles
of emergency shelter material in Jordan and Syria.

In Beirut, UNHCR is assisting refugees, asylum-
seekers and internally displaced persons, helping them
to get access to public shelters and assistance. UNHCR
has a presence in three mountain areas and is also in
beleaguered Sidon, in the south. The World Food
Programme (WFP) has arranged for food loans to
Lebanon and has pre-positioned food supplies ready to
be deployed. A humanitarian logistics capacity is being
set up to meet the food needs of the displaced people,
taking into account the food aid activities of other
partners.

The World Health Organization (WHO)
emergency staff is undertaking health assessments and
monitoring health threats, with a special focus on the
most vulnerable groups and areas. WHO is supporting
the Lebanese Ministry of Health and coordinating with
health partners. WHO also aims to establish public
health services for displaced populations and provide
emergency supplies.

Colleagues from the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) have also established joint
coordination centres for humanitarian activities in Tyre
and Marjayoun. They have successfully dispatched
convoys with humanitarian aid to some affected
villages.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) have deployed a three-person
coordination support team to Lebanon, which will
work closely with the resident coordinator and the
country team. We are also looking into deploying civil
military coordination officers to the area. Our
colleagues from the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) and the Lebanese Red Cross are
undertaking a big and very impressive operation.

My colleagues and I have consistently called
upon all parties to the conflict to live up to their
obligations under international humanitarian law and to
grant access to humanitarian workers and relief items
to those most affected by the hostilities.
06-43869

Yesterday I had the opportunity to hand over to
the Israeli Permanent Representative here present a
formal request to the Government of Israel. Today I
could do the same to the Lebanese representative. The
request calls for the acceptance and guarantee of safe
passage routes - so-called humanitarian corridors -
into and out of Lebanon, privileging land-bound
humanitarian convoys and supplies via the northern
border town of Aarida - indicated on the map before
the Council - sea-bound cargo via the ports of Beirut,
Tripoli and Tyre, and air-bound cargo via Beirut's
Rafik Hariri International Airport.

Additionally, within Lebanon, including in the
south, we are urgently asking for the opening of
humanitarian corridors for the distribution of urgently
needed relief items and the deployment of
humanitarian workers. From the indicated entry points,
this will then be distributed to the people most in need.
For that purpose, we have already identified cargo
consolidation points and requested the parties involved
to identify focal points in their government and
military forces who will discuss the modalities and
technical aspects of that concept.

Our country team, with the support of OCHA, is
currently in Beirut working to produce a flash appeal
that will address the most pressing humanitarian
concerns for a period of three months. We ask for your
generous and immediate contributions to this appeal,
which will be launched on Monday.

At the request of the Secretary-General, I will be
travelling to Lebanon this afternoon, where I will be
able to assess the humanitarian situation, consult with
humanitarian colleagues and the Government. On
Monday, I will launch the flash appeal there, and at the
same time here in New York, where donors will be
asked to come. I will then travel to Jerusalem for
consultations with the Israeli authorities. I also hope to
visit Gaza. As my colleague Mr. Nambiar has said, the
situation in Gaza remains as critical as ever. After that,
I intend to report back to the Council, with its kind
permission, next Friday, 28 July.

