Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, at the outset, to express
my delegation's gratitude to Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for her
efforts and courage in the discharge of her duties, as
well as for the outstanding briefing she delivered to the
Security Council on the fifteenth report on the situation
in Libya.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea strongly
condemns the terrorist attack on Libya's High National
Election Commission in Tripoli on 2 May, in which
approximately 15 people died and several others were
injured, including staff members of the Commission
and police officers. In that regard, we wish to convey
our most sincere condolences to the Libyan people and
the families of the victims.

It is clear that, despite the enormous efforts by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and
of some local stakeholders working for reconciliation,
the security situation in Libya remains serious and
unstable. That leads to continued armed clashes among
the various factions involved in the conflict, adding
to a climate of impunity, extrajudicial executions,
widespread arbitrary detentions, trafficking in persons
and sale of migrants and ongoing violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. All of that
raises grave concerns due to the threat posed to peace
and security in the country and beyond its borders.
We therefore call on the international community to
cooperate in good faith with the International Criminal
Court and to redouble efforts to fight this epidemic of
crime. We also strongly call on the various factions
in the conflict to immediately put an end to this
grave situation.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses its
deep concern about the situation prevailing in Libya,
as was just detailed and illustrated in Ms. Bensouda's
briefing. I should point out that the situation in Libya
has serious implications, not only for the entire Sahelo-
Saharan region but for other regions of Africa, with
the consequent growing wave of terrorist activity and
attempts at destabilization. It is therefore obvious
that, if a drastic solution is not found to the situation
in Libya, the efforts deployed to respond to terrorist
actions in western and central African countries will all
be in vain, since the root causes of the evils affecting
the countries of these regions can be found in Libya
due to the support provided to terrorist groups like
Boko Haram and other Libyan criminal gangs. That is
why my Government strongly calls on the international
community to resolutely support Ms. Bensouda in
putting an end to the reigning impunity in Libya. We
also once again strongly condemn all the criminal
activities taking place in this brotherly country.

In conclusion, we welcome and greatly appreciate
the work of the Court through the Prosecutor and her
Office despite the difficulties she faces. We thank her
for the efforts to re-establish justice in Libya. We also
express our appreciation to UNSMIL for the major
support and cooperation it provides to Ms. Bensouda.
That appreciation is extended to the Office of the
Libyan Prosecutor General for having facilitated her
mission in March.

