Mr. Shearer: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
invitation to address the Security Council and touch
on some critical issues in South Sudan. I will provide
a brief update on the situation in the country, as well
as United Nations efforts to protect civilians and build
durable peace, as per our mandate.

As we approach the end of the rainy season,
South Sudan remains beset by social, economic and
humanitarian challenges. The Government appears
emboldened by its recent military gains, including in
some key strongholds of the Sudan People's Liberation
Army in Opposition (SPLA-IO) that are loyal to
leader Riek Machar. Deep mistrust of military forces,
exacerbated by human rights abuses, fuels flights
into neighbouring countries. Across the country, the
opposition remains deeply fractured and has suffered
significant military setbacks in recent months.

At the same time, the economic crisis is further
fuelling public frustration and undermines the
Government's capacity to deliver governance and
services to its people. In many cases, civil servants
have not been paid for over four months and salaries
to security forces are also delayed. Localized conflicts
continue to flare - their impact greatly magnified
by automatic weapons and affecting areas outside
the central conflict. There is now growing discussion
about moving swiftly to elections. I continue to stress
to my Government counterparts that elections must
be inclusive, credible and fair, but they should also
represent the consolidation of a genuine peace process.

Along with others here today, I remain deeply
concerned by the humanitarian situation. This is a
conflict in which the greatest number of casualties are
civilians and not combatants. United Nations agencies
assess that the total number of people in need is
7.6 million. The burden that humanitarians and donor
countries shoulder to support those people with food,
health care and education is enormous. The recent
humanitarian response plan, which at one point was
budgeted at $1.6 billion, is so far 66 per cent funded.
I must underscore that without such humanitarian
support, thousands of people would simply not survive.

The number of people displaced in South Sudan
rose to nearly 4 million during the first half of this
year. Of those, 2 million have fled to neighbouring
countries: Uganda, the Sudan, Ethiopia, Kenya and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I wish to express
my appreciation to those countries for shouldering
that burden.

I continue to applaud the efforts made on the ground
by our humanitarian partners, who reach millions of
the most vulnerable people in the country. However, in
critical areas, and often at critical times, communities
cannot be reached because access is denied. Those
include areas of the Greater Upper Nile region, parts
of the Equatorias and areas south and west of Wau,
where active Government military operations against
the SPLA-IO continue. For example, humanitarian
partners were only in the past month able to reach
the populations of Bagari, outside of Wau, after being
denied access for almost one year. Sustained, regular
access is what is required and needed.

The splintering of opposition forces has had a
negative consequence on humanitarian efforts. For
example, the World Food Programme's regular convoys
to Yambio - about two days travel from Juba - now
require 13 separate permissions from armed groups
along their route. Increasingly, combatants are shifting
into criminality along major roadways, with civilian
and aid convoys being a target. Two weeks ago, a driver
for the International Committee of the Red Cross was
killed when his relief convoy was attacked in Western
Equatoria. His death brings the number of aid workers
who have been killed in South Sudanjust this year to 18.

Government officials need to take a more positive
attitude towards our humanitarian partners, whom
they often blame for creating a negative international
perception of the country. Removing numerous
bureaucratic impediments, including additional taxes
and fees on humanitarian organizations, is required to
acknowledge the valuable work that they carry out on
behalf of the people of South Sudan.

As the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), we are working hard to support our
humanitarian colleagues. Our modus operandi is to be
robust, nimble and proactive. We have provided surge
support to help protect key humanitarian facilities, such
as in Bunj, in the northern part of the country. However,
sadly, our missions have also included evacuating
personnel during active fighting. I anticipate that, while
we respect each other's mandates, that collaboration
will intensify if security trends continue.

We are far from the conditions for safe return in
most areas, but we are continuously looking to seize
opportunities to support communities in returning to
their homes, where that is possible. UNMISS will soon
open a permanent presence in Yei and reinforce our
presence in Torit and Yambio - all of which are in the
Equatorias, to the south - to deter violence and human
rights abuses and build confidence for people to return
to their homes. The small Melut protection site in the
north will be closing in coming weeks, in line with the
desire there for people to return to their homes. We
are looking at downsizing protection sites in Wau and
possibly even in Bor.

We are working closely with our humanitarian
partners to align our efforts so that people have a
real choice to return home. The quality of services
inside the protection of civilians sites and outside
communities needs to be looked at to provide more
balance. Having a first-class medical facility inside
a protection of civilians site and no medical support
outside clearly deters people from returning to their
homes. Those efforts will also coincide with UNMISS
efforts to increasingly project our peacekeeping forces
from static duties out into communities where they are
most needed.

However, ultimately, that movement will critically
depend on how the Government and opposition forces
behave. Where there is discipline, the results have been
encouraging, but where those forces continue to prey
on civilians, the protection of civilians site will remain
a necessary refuge. Meanwhile, increased efforts are
being made to identify malign and criminal elements
inside our sites. Identified perpetrators and combatants
will be ejected to reinforce the civilian character of
the sites.

I wish to briefly address the deployment of
the Regional Protection Force (RPF). While the
Government has officially repeated its acceptance
of the RPF and UNMISS has closely adhered to the
Government's clearances and protocols, the positioning
of the RPF in relation to Juba airport - including at the
Mission's adjacent Tomping base ~ remains a vexed
issue. The RPF mandate is clearly and unambiguously
set out in resolutions adopted by the Council. Together
with my Force Commander, I am engaging with the
Government in discussions over unresolved issues and
will reach out to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the African Union (AU) to
meet with the Chiefs of Defence Staff from IGAD RPF
troop contributors and the Government in Juba, as soon
as possible.

We must also remember that the situation on the
ground has changed significantly from a year ago,
when two separate armies were positioned inside Juba.
Today, security threats in Juba, we believe, are more
likely to come from civil unrest that is sparked by
potential economic collapse. However, the intensity of
fighting in the Equatorias was not present a year ago.
As a consequence, those areas are where the more than
1 million people who have fled to Uganda have come
from. The bolstering of UNMISS forces with the RPF,
as it gradually arrives, will enable UNMISS to further
project into those areas, in line with its protection of
civilians mandate.

Allow me to make a few observations about the
current political situation. I believe that the space for
compromise over the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan is narrow.
The parties have shown little interest in engaging in
serious negotiations on the way forward, despite the
various initiatives aimed at finding a political solution
to the conflict. The central conflict-resolution strategy
must be political mediation via the IGAD high-level
revitalization forum.

For its part, the United Nations will continue
to support the national dialogue with caution and
conditional on its remaining transparent and inclusive.
I acknowledge that the process might appear partisan to
an increasingly disillusioned and fractured opposition,
but in past months it has provided a useful platform for
open and highly critical discussion. By engaging with
it, we hope to encourage a process that is aligned with
best practices, while still nationally driven.

There is both a humanitarian and a political
urgency to our meeting here today. In the past week,
there has been renewed enthusiasm for and solidarity
with the revitalization process. There are only a few
months remaining in the transitional period stipulated
by the peace agreement. External momentum to support
peace is needed. It is critical now that the international
community show unity of purpose in supporting
an implementable peace process would that lead to
credible elections in due course, but only after a period
of transition marked by inclusivity and stability.

I am committed to continue that engagement.
Together with the Special Envoy for Sudan and South
Sudan, we maintain our good offices to engage all
parties to meaningfully participate in the political
process. We will continue to work with AU High
Representative Alpha Oumar Konare and support
IGAD and its Special Envoy Ismael Wais, together
with President Mogae and the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, to hasten preparations and
convene the high-level revitalization forum to bring the
parties together. We will bolster collaboration among
the region, the African Union, IGAD and the United
Nations to prevent forum-shopping by the parties.

In all of that, South Sudan needs the unified efforts

and attention of the Security Council, building on the
AU Peace and Security Council collaboration and its
communique of a few days ago. We are all aware that the
country risks remaining a source of continued regional
instability and a drain on international resources. The
wider region has a critical role to play in convincing
the parties of the need to compromise and find
peaceful solutions. Collectively, we will need to deliver
a clear and unified message to the parties on the way
forward. The consultations of the past few days here in
New York have been encouraging, but we are backing
a process to which we urgently need to add substance. I
count on the continued support of those present.

Finally, I want to thank the members of the Council
for backing UNMISS over the past week as it has been
truly gratifying.

