Mr. Mayr-Harting: I speak on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. For the sake
of time, I shall shorten my spoken remarks. The full
statement of the European Union will be available in the
Chamber. The acceding country Croatia; the candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
country Norway, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

At the outset, please let me thank the Togolese
presidency for organizing today's debate and, in
particular, the President of Togo for coming to
personally preside over this debate on the challenges
that terrorism poses to peace and security in Africa. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.

International terrorism constitutes a very
significant threat to peace and security in many parts
of the world. Regrettably, that is also true in Africa.
The increasingly international, and even global, nature
of the terrorist threat means that no continent is spared.
Spillover effects between countries and continents are
now a reality. That is also true for Africa and Europe.
While the effort to prevent and counter terrorism
starts at the national level, only regional cooperation,
in particular cooperation between regions in a global
context, will have any chance of sustainable success.

At the global level, the European Union fully
supports the high priority given to the fight against
international terrorism by the United Nations. The
Organization has a crucial role to play in harnessing
regional efforts in a coordinated, global framework. In
that context, I would also like to mention the important
role of global counter-terrorism. Before turning to the
specific situation in Africa, I would like to take this
opportunity to enumerate the five conditions that, in
the European experience, are required for successful
counter-terrorism efforts.

First, global counter-terrorism efforts must be
underpinned by solid efforts at the regional level,
including action to stop vulnerable individuals from
being drawn into terrorism and conflict. Every region
needs to fully commit to addressing the problem and,
as far as possible, to take a lead in responding to it.
Regional and subregional organizations need to engage
actively. In that regard, we welcome the steps taken
by the African Union (AU), notably the AU Plan of
Action on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism
in Africa, and the appointment, in 2010, of Francisco
Madeira as the AU special representative in charge of
counter-terrorism cooperation. We also welcome the
recent adoption of a far-reaching counter-terrorism
strategy by the Economic Community of West African
States, about which the representative of cote d'Ivoire
has just spoken.

Secondly, to be successful, counter-terrorism
efforts need to address not only the symptoms but also
the root causes that create the environments that enable
terrorist organizations to develop.

Thirdly, we need to pay due attention to risks related
to radicalization. While specific anti-radicalization
actions, in particular through education, can have
a positive effect, they need to be accompanied by
development support that addresses the root causes of
radicalization.

Fourthly, we should not separate counter-terrorism
efforts from support for good governance in the regions
affected by terrorism. Steps to end the use of torture,
enforced disappearances and extrajudicial killings will
stifle terrorist recruitment. Equally, steps to enhance
local governance and democratic participation by
local communities will have beneficial effects, as will
strenuous efforts to fight corruption and strengthen and
reform an independent judiciary.

The European experience of counter-terrorism
has shown the paramount importance of keeping the
fight against terrorism solidly within the bounds of the
rule of law, including international human rights law,
refugee law and humanitarian law. Violations of such
law will play in the hands of terrorist organizations.

The European Union is stepping up its support
for counter-terrorism and development efforts in
West Africa and the Sahel, as well in as in the Horn
of Africa. We are firmly committed to enhance the
implementation of the EU Sahel strategy, with counter-
terrorism as a key theme. Allow me to salute the efforts
made in the region to draw up and implement national
counter-terrorism and stabilization strategies. Also, in
2012, the EU launched EUCAP SAHEL, a training and
capacity-building mission based in the Niger.

The crisis in Mali has further accelerated the
European Union's engagement in that region. On
2 April, the European Union launched EU Training
Mission Mali, a new mission to train the Malian army.
That mission will work hand in hand with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.
In that context, please allow me to also mention
the international donors' conference on Mali that
the Presidents of Mali, France and the European
Commission will host in Brussels on Wednesday. We
are grateful for the significant high-level participation
from the region at that conference.

The other focal point for EU counter-terrorism
support in Africa is Somalia and the wider Horn of
Africa region. Since the adoption of the its strategic
framework for the Horn of Africa in 2011, the
European Union has stepped up its involvement linking
political, security-related and development support.
In that context, let me refer, inter alia, to our crisis-
management missions, the European Union military
mission to contribute to the training of Somali security
forces, EU NAVFOR Atalanta, which contributes to the
deterrence, prevention and repression of acts of piracy,
and EUCAP NESTOR.

The EU also continues to provide significant
financial support through the African Peace Facility to
the African Union Mission in Somalia, whose efforts
and sacrifices have been crucial in the still-ongoing
extension of State authority across the territory of
Somalia.

The European Union on 31 January also adopted
the EU counter-terrorism action plan for the Horn of
Africa.

Finally, let me mention that the European Union
is also pursuing the initiative of stepping up the
mobilization and coordination of international support
for Somalia, and will host a major international
conference in Brussels on 16 September.

While the recent progress in Somalia is encouraging,

the scourge of terrorism in Africa is far from defeated,
as the recent crisis in Mali has shown particularly
dramatically. Comprehensive preventative strategies
are key to countering the process of and thereby
reducing the likelihood of terrorist groups developing
the ability to plot attacks. Further attention and
resources should be devoted to effectively examining
and addressing the connections between terrorism and
transnational organized crime. We need to be vigilant
so that terrorist organizations do not exploit the positive
political changes in North Africa.

The lead for these efforts lies clearly with African
Governments and African regional and subregional
organizations. For its part, the European Union will
continue to develop its support for their efforts to build
national and regional counter-terrorism strategies and
capacities, including work to counter the process of
radicalization, in line with the comprehensive approach
addressing poverty, development, governance, the rule
of law and respect for human rights and international
law.

