The President: In accordance with Article 11 of
the Statute of the International Court of Justice, the
Security Council will now proceed to hold this eighth
meeting to elect a member ofthe International Court of
Justice by further ballot for the one seat that remains to
be filled.

May I take it that the Council is now ready to
proceed with the election of the one remaining member
of the International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

The Council will now proceed to a new ballot. I
request the Conference Officer to distribute the ballot
papers.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gombo
(Chad) and Mr. Cabezas (Chile) acted as tellers.

The President: Members of the Council should
place an "X" in the box next to the name of the one
candidate for whom they wish to vote. I remind members
of the Council that only those candidates whose names
appear on the ballot papers are eligible for election.
Ballots containing votes for more than one candidate
will be considered invalid.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: I take it that all the members of
the Council have now voted and I ask the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.

>l<>l<=l<


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind Council members
that, in accordance with the established practice, the
ballots will not be counted until it has been verified
that the ballot papers in the General Assembly have
also been collected. The Council will remain in session
pending the receipt of that information.

***


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:
Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: O
Number of valid ballots: 15

Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Ms. Susana Ruiz Cerutti 9
Mr. Patrick Lipton Robinson 6

Accordingly, Ms. Susana Ruiz Cerutti has received
the required majority of votes in the Security Council.
I have communicated the result of the voting to the
President of the General Assembly in writing.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received from the President of the General Assembly
the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
46th plenary meeting of the General Assembly, held
today for the purpose of electing the one remaining
seat of the five members of the International Court
of Justice, the following candidate obtained an
absolute majority of votes in the General Assembly:
Mr. Patrick Lipton Robinson."

Accordingly, no candidate has received the required
absolute majority of votes both in the Council and in
the General Assembly.

I understand that the President of the General
Assembly has proposed that the Assembly end
its meeting and reconvene at 3 p.m. on Monday,
17 November, to hold the next ballot. I propose that,
with the consent of the members of the Council, we
proceed in the same manner and reconvene at 3 p.m. on
Monday, 17 November, to hold a new ballot.

It is so decided.

Before I adjourn the meeting, I should like to use
the role of the presidency to briefly remind ourselves
of what we are doing. It is true that these elections
are a baroque process, but we must not forget that the
International Court of Justice is one of the world's
primary institutions for the peaceful settlement of
disputes and the rule of law. The maintenance of
international peace and security is of course the
fundamental responsibility of the Security Council; it
is why we exist and why we are sitting here today.

All Member States are sovereign and have the
right to stand for election to both of these bodies and
others. We all take this very seriously. A process such
as this is simply a reflection of the importance of the
principles by which the international community that
we represent has organized itself to preserve peace
and security. I know that sounds a little elevated, but
I think it is useful at the end of a process such as this,
which has been quite protracted and is by no means
concluded, that we remind ourselves of exactly what
we are doing. It is a great deal more than just a baroque

process of filling in ballot papers and sitting around
doing other things.

1 therefore thank everyone for their patience over
the past couple ofdays, but it is important that we do it,
I thank the interpreters and the conference staff for all
their assistance.

The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

