Mr. Gambari: The Secretary-General is deeply
alarmed at the escalation of violence in Lebanon and
3
Israel. Parts of Lebanon are under blockade and heavy
Israeli military action, while Israel is being subjected
to indiscriminate attacks by Hizbollah forces.
Escalations have occurred on both sides. We are
particularly alarmed at the suffering that has been
unleashed on civilians on both sides.

The Secretary-General condemns all actions
which target civilians or which unduly endanger them
owing to their disproportionate or indiscriminate
character. The parties should be reminded that, under
the law of armed conflict, attacks must not be directed
against civilian objects. In particular, they have an
obligation to exercise caution and to respect the
proportionality principle in all military operations so as
to prevent unnecessary suffering, particularly among
the civilian population.

The Secretary-General has been working
ceaselessly on this evolving and dangerous situation.
He calls on all parties to adhere to their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
agreements, and he has been in close consultations
with leaders around the world to find an urgent
solution to the crisis, to urge restraint and to prevent
the situation from spiralling even further out of control.
We hope that the parties heed that counsel, and that
regional players who have influence will do likewise.
Reckless and dangerous actions will only lead to
further bloodshed and further instability, inflaming an
already highly volatile region.

In this regard we must give support to the
Government of Lebanon, and we are encouraged by the
recent statement by the Lebanese Cabinet which
reaffirms its commitment to international resolutions
and respect for the Blue Line. We are emphasizing to
all concerned that a qualitative escalation of the
conflict is in no one's interest and that the space for
diplomatic initiatives is quickly closing. All parties
should do their utmost to ensure that that space remains
open.

In the light of these alarming developments, the
Secretary-General has decided to send a mission to the
Middle East to exercise good offices and help defuse
the major crisis in the region. The team is led by his
Special Adviser, Mr. Vijay Nambiar, and comprises two
other senior United Nations political officers,
Mr. Alvaro de Soto and Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen.

The mission will endeavour to contribute to
deescalating the situation by conveying the Secretary-

General's call for the release of the captured soldiers,
for restraint by all parties and for a ceasefire. All
parties will also be encouraged to use their influence to
defuse the situation. In all instances, the team will also
emphasize the message of the Secretary-General to
respect international humanitarian law and to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure.

The mission arrives in Cairo today, where it will
conduct meetings with Egyptian officials and hold
consultations with the foreign ministers of the League
of Arab States. The team will then travel to Israel,
Lebanon and Syria, and other places as may be deemed
necessary by the Secretary-General. The team will
report to the Secretary-General upon its return to New
York. I believe, of course, that the Secretariat will
continue to keep the Security Council constantly
briefed on further developments.

