Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, my delegation would like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, Mr. Youssef
Mahmoud and Ambassador Gert Rosenthal for their
critical and thought-provoking briefings. We also thank
the Egyptian delegation for having organized this open
debate, which enables us to continue the dialogue on
the various dimensions of sustaining peace.

Today we analyse the contribution of peacekeeping
operations. Peru believes that such operations can
and must contribute to reaching the general goal of
sustainable peace. The United Nations, including the
Security Council, is called upon to support transitions
in conflict and post-conflict situations and to promote
peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development, with access to justice for all and
effective and responsible institutions - in line with
the Charter of the United Nations and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, particularly Sustainable
Development Goal 16, which have universal scope.

From the traditional perspective of international
peace and security, we strive forpeacekeeping operations
to address and overcome the root causes of conflict.
For example, efforts to create basic infrastructure on
the ground, as conducted by a Peruvian engineering
firm in the Central African Republic, leaves a legacy
that transcends the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. The institutionalization
of those concrete goals must be systematized starting at
the planning stage of peacekeeping operations, which,
in turn, requires renewed cooperation and coordination
among the numerous players called upon to reach said
goals within and outside of the United Nations.

In that regard, the contribution of peacekeeping
operations to sustaining peace must go hand in
hand with the multidimensional processes on the
ground - including military and security aspects,
which, incidentally, must be adequately financed
and supported - but must transcend them to tackle
new and complex challenges. The Peacebuilding
Commission is called upon to play an advisory role and,
within its sphere of competence, to contribute to more
comprehensive, effective and efficient approaches.

My delegation stresses the importance of developing
a common political vision to enable integrated action
by all agencies linked to peacekeeping operations,
inter alia troop-contributing countries and regional and
subregional organizations. Above all, the Governments
concerned need to participate in the transition process,
as do other relevant national actors, including women
and youth, as they are the ones who are ultimately
called upon to maintain peace in their countries.

The principles of responsibility and national
ownership and inclusion cannot be ignored. When
the Security Council establishes the mandate for a
peacekeeping operation, it must specifically take that
political perspective into account and define realistic,
concrete and measurable goals for the mission. The
terms of its mandate must be set in accordance with
the general goal of sustainable peace. The ensuing
monitoring should allow the Council to reassess the
information in the light of updated information and
relevant indicators as it relates to the fulfilment of said
goal, which, without a doubt, will enhance the process
and promote pragmatism, integration and flexibility
within the missions, and will empower the actors that
actually deploy on the ground.

In conclusion, Peru, a country that contributes to
peacekeeping operations and that is ready to serve the
international community as a non-permanent member
of the Council, renews - in the current context of
redefining new collective security paradigms - its
commitment to efforts under way to develop more sound
and effective United Nations responses, in line with
the purposes and principles enshrined in the founding
Charter of the United Nations.

