Mrs. Chikava (Zimbabwe): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the 15 members of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC). SADC
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate
on conflict prevention. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
comprehensive briefings.

Today's debate enables us to exchange views on
how to prevent conflicts against a backdrop of the
growing numbers of simultaneous crises that are
facing the world today. The nature of such conflicts
has changed dramatically in recent years and poses a
correspondingly greater challenge to the maintenance
of international peace and security. The causes and
dynamics of these threats to peace and security demand
innovative and robust approaches to conflict prevention
and resolution.

SADC believes that the top priority for the
maintenance of peace and security is enhancing our
ability to manage and contain disputes before they
break out into Violent conflicts. Our greatest challenge
is to accurately predict and be proactive in forestalling
armed conflict. The currently overstretched United
Nations peacekeeping missions, and their high
financial cost, as well as the human toll that war takes,
attest to the importance of conflict prevention. Given
that the overwhelming majority of contemporary
conflicts are intra-State, and that the dynamics of
such internal conflicts are often the result of poverty,
underdevelopment, economic deprivation and exclusion,
prevention should be underpinned by sustainable
development. SADC believes that there is an inexorable
link between peace and development. There can be no
peace without development and, conversely, there can
be no development without peace.

The billions of dollars spent on conflict every year
could be put to better use by humankind through the
prevention of conflicts before they occur. The human
costs of war, including death, injury, the destruction of
infrastructure, displacement and their repercussions,
cannot be allowed to continue and must be prevented.
It is our collective responsibility to stop this cult of
violence.

Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and has
been accorded specific tools for preventing conflicts.
Its preventive role is set out in paragraph 1, Article 33.
in Chapter VI of the Charter, which lists a variety of the
tools at the Council's disposal, including negotiation,
inquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial
settlement, preventive diplomacy and the involvement of
regional organizations. Effective prevention requires a
comprehensive and coherent strategy. The comparative
advantage of regional and subregional organizations
often makes the difference needed to prevent tense
situations from deteriorating into violent conflict.
They are well placed to understand the root causes of
a conflict because of their proximity to the crisis and
are well positioned to influence their prevention and
resolution.

The African Union, through its Peace and Security
Architecture, has managed to identify various factors
and root causes of conflict on the continent and has
established institutions and mechanisms to address
them. The establishment of a continental early-warning
system under Article 12 of the Protocol relating to
the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council
facilitates the anticipation and prevention of conflicts
in Africa. The Panel ofthe Wise also plays a significant
role in mediation and conflict resolution. In addition,
regional and subregional mechanisms have taken steps
to develop early-warning systems, although they are at
different stages in their efforts.

SADC launched the Regional Early Warning Centre
in July 2010, whose overall objective is to strengthen
the regional mechanism for conflict prevention
management and resolution in line with the provision
of the Protocol on Politics, Defence and Security
Cooperation in the Strategic Indicative Plan for the
Organ. The SADC system is based on the presence of
a national early-warning centre in each State, which
feeds into the regional early-warning centre based in
Gaborone.

SADC has also established a stand-by brigade,
whose mandate includes, inter alia, undertaking
intervention for peace and security restoration at the
request of a Member State. Such a request was made
with regard to the situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is essential for the United Nations to cooperate
with regional and subregional organizations and
harness their comparative advantage in order to develop
effective preventive mechanisms. SADC wishes to
reiterate that conflict prevention is more cost-effective
than peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We call on the
United Nations to continue its efforts to assist the
Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union
and subregional organizations in building capacity to
address the security challenges the continent is facing.

