Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me, Mr. President, to express our condolences to the Government and the people of the sisterly Sultanate of Oman following the death of the late Sultan Qaboos bin Said, who made important contributions to humanitarian issues and international peace and security. I also wish to thank you, Sir, for your response to my delegation's suggestion to hold a minute of silence. I extend my condolences as well to the brotherly Niger and express our solidarity with the Haitian people and the United Nations, which has lost more than 100 senior personnel, notably the Tunisian Hedi Annabi, who was the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti at that time.I want also to welcome the presence of Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Foreign Minister of Colombia, and her delegation, as well as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, whom I thank for his briefing this morning. I thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2019/988) and the valuable information it contains on various issues relating to the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia, which was signed three years ago. The agreement represents an important and historic achievement for the Republic of Colombia, paving the way for a new and promising period of peace, stability and well-being. We also commend the efforts of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. As my delegation expresses its satisfaction at the important steps that have been taken so far on the various political, economic, social and security tracks, we once again stress the need for all Colombian parties to pursue their efforts in the national interest in order to fulfil the remaining phases, strengthen security and stability and achieve national reconciliation. In that connection, Tunisia hopes that President Duque Marquez's initiative will be able to overcome the pending difficulties and disputes, while achieving the desired progress in the areas of inclusive growth, transparency, combating corruption, promoting education, the environment and youth, in addition to completing the "peace with legality" initiative launched by the Colombian Government. Tunisia believes in national dialogue as an effective mechanism for overcoming difficulties and resolving disputes. We therefore stress the need for all Colombian parties to continue to address all issues within the framework of constructive dialogue and compromise without excluding or marginalizing any party. Colombia's success in launching the comprehensive national dialogue and organizing local and provincial elections was a good indicator in that regard. Success in implementing the peace agreement, achieving national reconciliation and consolidating security and stability is not limited to progress made in terms of political reintegration, but also relies on achieving inclusive development and the provision of basic services in all regions. In that vein, my delegation underscores the need to continue efforts in the areas of social and economic reintegration, in particular through the provision of health services, education and vocational training to all, especially within local communities and former territorial areas for training and reintegration, with a view to reintegration. We also reaffirm the importance of advancing on the transitional justice track, providing security guarantees, ensuring State presence and authority, achieving inclusive development in all regions, creating aclimate of trust and laying the foundations for continued progress in all areas. Moreover, Tunisia emphasizes the importance of strengthening programmes for the reintegration of children and giving them access to education, health care and psychological and family support in order to set them on a different path of life and protect them from exploitation. It is also necessary to enhance the participation of women and young people in political and social processes, peacebuilding, enhancing human rights and rural reform, which are among the basic requirements for success in achieving peace and stability. In conclusion, the ingredients for achieving peace and stability in Colombia are available and successful results are being achieved, despite circumstantial difficulties. For its part, Tunisia continues to support the efforts of the United Nations and of all the Colombian actors as they advance along the path towards a lasting peace for the benefit of all.
