Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Permit me
to express my felicitations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of June. I would also like to express appreciation

 

to the Foreign Minister and the Ambassador of Kenya for
their leadership during the month of May.

The subject before the Council today is a vital issue,
one which needs to be addressed comprehensively with an
approach that looks to the future. The vital importance to
my country of the issue under consideration needs no
elaboration. The Islamic Republic of Iran is greatly
concerned about the recent nuclear tests, which raise the
potential for the escalation of tension, uncertainty and an
arms race.

My trip to Islamabad and New Delhi immediately
before my trip to New York is an indication of our concern
and of the importance that we attach to this issue, not only
for the future of our region but also for the implications
that it may have for international peace and security. In my
discussions with the officials of both countries, I listened
very carefully to their arguments and concerns, and the
bases of their decisions to conduct nuclear tests. Our
discussions centred around the possible dangers, as well as
the means to try to avoid an escalation of the situation.

The recent developments in South Asia are the
synthesis of a number of historical and legal factors, chief
among them the perception of the countries concerned
about the lack of political will on the part of the nuclear
Powers to heed the call of the international community for
comprehensive nuclear disarmament.

Inadequate attention and the failure to adopt concrete
actions on global nuclear disarmament, the unpopular
insistence on the part of the nuclear-weapon States to
remain on the same course, particularly after the indefinite
extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) and despite the wish of the international
community to make progress on the basis of the near-
universal consensus on the illegality of the threat or use of
nuclear weapons, and the selective approach to the
implementation of the Treaty's provisions are among the
reasons that are said to have contributed to the present
situation.

Furthermore, the refusal to allow the Conference on
Disarmament to commence negotiations on nuclear
disarmament, and aloofness to the legitimate concerns of
the non-nuclear-weapon States during the formative
deliberations on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT) are deemed to be instrumental factors in the
nuclear tests, which have raised international alarm and
which the international community regrets, to say the least.
Hence, the wilfully inadequate response to the international
call for serious progress on nuclear disarmament is partly
to be blamed for the situation at hand.

The recent nuclear tests have caused serious concern
to the entire international community, particularly to the
countries in the region. That has been the reason behind
our approach to both countries, expressing deep
concern to encourage them to sharpen their efforts at
defusing the situation and at finding ways to reduce
tension.

It is in this context that we view the present Security
Council resolution: as an attempt on the part of the
international community to manage the situation. The
reaction of the Security Council comes as no surprise.
Neither is it surprising that attempts are being made to
persuade both India and Pakistan to refrain from further
nuclear tests, exercise maximum restraint and resume the
dialogue between them on all outstanding issues, and to
impress upon them the negative impact of their nuclear
tests on peace and stability in the region and beyond in
order to defuse the situation.

We believe that the resolution would have been
more effective and representative of the views of the
international community were it to have reflected the
broader concerns of non-nuclear weapons States. These
concerns include the fulfillment of the commitment of
nuclear-weapon States to nuclear disarmament by
agreeing to commence international negotiations on
nuclear disarmament within a time-bound framework, the
necessity of ensuring the universality of the NPT in an
expeditious manner through urging all States to join the
Treaty without exception and a speedy commencement of
negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament on a
treaty banning the stockpiling and production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices.

Notwithstanding all these concerns, we believe that
capitalizing on an approach marked by positive
reinforcement in the subcontinent would be more useful
than concentrating on the negatives. Having said this, and
in the light of my discussions in Islamabad and New
Delhi, as I pointed out at the meeting of the Conference
on Disarmament on 4 June, I believe that the following
areas of common interests to both countries present a
basis for initiatives that they could explore.

The first is a renewed commitment to resume and
continue a comprehensive dialogue on all outstanding
issues in a sustained manner with a view to their early

 
resolution and with the objective of promoting a friendly
and harmonious relationship between Pakistan and India
and stability in the region. The dialogue would include,
inter alia, important issues of peace and security, Jammu
and Kashmir, nuclear issues, including joining the NPT and
the CTBT, and other measures to build confidence. These
issues could be dealt with through pre-arranged
mechanisms, which would include discussions at the highest
possible levels, where appropriate.

The second is a commitment to refrain from
conducting further nuclear tests to ensure the success of the
dialogue.

The final area is a commitment to engage in an
immediate discussion with a representative group of non-
nuclear-weapon States and nuclear-weapon States parties to
the NPT and signatories to the CTBT for the purpose of
joining those treaties. In this context, it seems that the
removal of export controls and other impediments to access
to material, equipment and technology for peaceful
purposes is an important consideration for signing the
CTBT and for making commitments consistent with the
letter and the spirit of the NPT.

In the light of the gravity of events and the strong
position of the international community against nuclear
tests, these ideas may seem disproportionately inadequate.
That may be the case. But if they are implemented, they
will be likely to provide a broad basis for a process to be
developed which would hopefully gain momentum of its
own and disclose the path to a more secure future.

The situation at hand is a good example of an area
where the good offices of the Secretary-General can be best
utilized. As a neighbouring country, the Islamic Republic of
Iran would find some comfort if and when the Secretary-
General, as a seasoned and globally respected diplomat and
figure of authority, could also be engaged in bringing
normalcy to the region. We stand ready to help and support
him in this endeavour.

Despite the setback in international efforts to prevent
nuclear proliferation in our region, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, as a party to the NPT and a signatory of the CTBT,
remains fully committed to its international obligations
under these regimes.

The recent developments in India and Pakistan have
highlighted the imperative of ensuring the universality of
the NPT. This imperative also applies to the Middle East,
where Israeli intransigence in refusing to accede to the NPT
and to accept International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards has endangered the entire region. It is
therefore necessary to develop a non-discriminatory
approach at the international level to the issue of non-
proliferation and to exert pressure on Israel to heed the
call of the international community and, by joining the
NPT, to allow for the establishment of the Middle East as
a nuclear-weapon-free zone.

