Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Allow me to express
our deepest condolences to the Russian Federation
delegation for the outrageous attack that killed the
Russian Ambassador in Ankara.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union. Italy also supports
the statement to be made by the representative of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands as part of our cooperation
in the framework of our upcoming split term in the
Security Council.

I would like to express my appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto for
his comprehensive briefing, and for the opportunity
of addressing the Council regarding the situation in
Afghanistan. We appreciate the briefing of the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. Fedotov, and express our tremendous
satisfaction over the work done by the delegation of New
Zealand as Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities.

The successful outcomes of the Warsaw Summit
and the Brussels Conference are a testament to the
enduring partnership between the international
community and Afghanistan. Together, we will persist
in our joint efforts to create an environment that
allows the Afghan people to envision a future of peace,
economic prosperity and self-reliance.

Our partnership is essential precisely because
Afghanistan continues to face daunting challenges, first
and foremost in the security arena. Since the previous
debate (see S/PV.7771), Afghan forces have continued
to confront a determined assault from a wide range of
violent extremist groups, which they have faced with
great courage and valour. Italy continues its support in
that area as a framework nation in the Resolute Support
Mission, which provides crucial training, advising
and assistance so that the Afghan security forces can
continue to make important progress in their ability to
counter those threats.

But the situation remains fragile, and we note with
concern that the violence continues to take its heaviest
toll on the innocent and most vulnerable. Civilian
casualties are still at record levels, and I also wish to
call the Council's attention to reports that, according to
several sources, the conflict has forced the closure of
up to 1,000 schools.

The plight of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and the general deterioration of humanitarian conditions
require our sustained attention. The dramatically
increased flow of returnees from neighbouring
countries this year is especially challenging, and Italy
is proud to support the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees with a voluntary
contribution of €1 million in order to meet the
humanitarian needs of IDPs and returnees.

Afghanistan must now complement that support
from the international community with an unwavering
commitment to carry out the reform agenda, in line with
the expectations of the donor community, the Afghan
population and the principle of mutual accountability,
reaffirmed at Brussels.

That effort will require a sustained unity ofpurpose
within the Government. The recent nomination of the
Commissioners of the electoral management bodies
is a positive step in that regard, which we hope will
be followed by further action, such as an agreed
electoral timeline.
The fight against corruption must also be a
top priority, and the recent inauguration of the
Anti-Corruption Justice Centre must be quickly
followed up with an effective investigation and
prosecution of cases, in close cooperation with all the
relevant institutions.

The renewed commitment at Brussels to the rights
of women and their empowerment in society is also
crucial. While the improvements made in the past 15
years are important, more must be done. Consider, for
instance, the fact that international lawliteracy rates
for women are still unacceptably high, especially in
rural areas.

We also take this opportunity to acknowledge the
important work by the Security Council's Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security.
Together with the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, they continue to assist the Afghan
Government in its commitment to implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). We endorse their recent
conclusions and we welcome the progress made by
Afghanistan thus far, while also encouraging more
focused efforts where gaps still remain, such as
women's effective participation in the security sector.
The only way for Afghanistan to fully achieve peace and
prosperity is if women become primary stakeholders in
the process.

The same concept applies equal1y to peace and
reconciliation, where women must play a prominent
role. Italy supports all efforts in that regard, and we
encourage the participation of all actors who can engage
positively in this area.

The involvement of regional partners is a key factor,
and we continue to encourage all initiatives aimed at
establishing a framework of dialogue and collaboration
between Afghanistan and its neighbours.

