Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to see participating in today's
meeting of the Security Council, Ms. Marjatta Rasi,
President of the Economic and Social Council, and
Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs. Their participation is further
testimony to the cooperation of the major organs of the
United Nations, in accordance with their prerogatives
in solving tasks common to the Organization.

The nature of current global challenges and
threats determines the need for a collective reaction to
them, on the basis of comprehensive concern and
respect for the legitimate interests of all members of
the international community in strict observance of the
existing international legal norms, and the
comprehensive involvement of the potential of various
multilateral institutions at the global and regional
levels.

We note with satisfaction that, over a relatively
short period of time, within the framework of the
United Nations it has been possible to achieve
substantial success in settling complex regional
conflicts. The examples include the operations in
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste, Liberia and in a number of
other crisis regions. They clearly demonstrate the
indissolubly linked tasks involved in ensuring that the
establishment of peace and the rebirth of statehood and
the full-fledged social and economic recovery of
countries suffering from conflict take place.

The experience of the conduct of peacekeeping
operations under the leadership of the United Nations,
and with its approval, has shown, in the past decade, a
radical change in the nature of the tasks facing us - a
transition from traditional ceasefire monitoring to the
complex settlement of problems which go as far as the
full-fledged governing of territories. We believe that
the United Nations Secretariat and the international
community must significantly restructure their work in
peacekeeping in keeping with the new tasks. So it is
that the interdepartmental groups established within the
framework of the United Nations Secretariat are
effectively working on the preparation of complex
operations for peacekeeping and the subsequent social
and economic recovery and nation-building of
countries suffering from conflicts.

A good example of that type of innovation, in
enhancing the effectiveness and output from United
Nations peacekeeping operations, is the coordination
meeting of the special representatives of the Secretary-
General to harmonize joint action and solve common
cross-border problems connected, inter alia, with
illegal arms deliveries and supplies, uncontrolled
movement of armed groups, regulating refugee flows
and providing humanitarian assistance in a number of
African States.

The example of the Afghan settlement gives us an
effective scheme for international support for the peace
process. The political timetable worked out on the
basis of the Bonn Agreement was materially
complemented by decisions taken at the Tokyo donors
conference and has been consistently carried out by the
team headed by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. Essential
assistance in stabilizing the situation has been lent by
the International Security Assistance Force. Important
work is being carried out by lead countries in the areas
of military and legal reforms, establishing national
police and combating drug trafficking. It seems to us
that the broad consensus, with regard to helping the
Afghan settlement which took place under the aegis of
the United Nations, is showing its effectiveness. For
that reason, it is no happenstance that the Afghan
model is being applied by many to Iraq.

The agreed-upon international steps taken under
the aegis of the United Nations have turned out to be
successful because of the unique ability of the
Organization to combine its leading role in the area of
security and restoring peace with the division of labour
within the regional and subregional organizations in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. That potential should, in fact, be developed to
ensure a truly legitimate collective reaction to complex
emergency situations under conditions of international
conflict.

The experience already accumulated by the
Organization in this sphere quite obviously shows that
the most effective results in the United Nations have
been achieved in those cases where constructive
interaction was ensured between international
structures, and local institutions and national
Governments. On the other hand, problems have arisen.
Even now, there are difficulties in carrying out the
mandates of the United Nations missions in Ethiopia
and Eritrea and Cote d'Ivoire and the activities of
United Nations agencies in the western regions of
Sudan. Moreover, the proper level of support for the
United Nations mission in Kosovo has not been
received from the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government of that province of Serbia and
Montenegro. We are convinced that only close
cooperation among all players, combined with the
United Nations presence, will enable us to ensure the
most effective and comprehensive treatment of crises.

There is special significance in the further
development of a new kind of partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations. Positive
examples of such cooperation are the conduct, under a
Security Council mandate, of a European Union
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
International Security Assistance Force under the
leadership of NATO in Afghanistan, the deployment of
multinational forces of Economic Community Of West
African States (ECOWAS) members in Liberia and
Cote d'Ivoire, the military contingents of the African
Union mission in Burundi and their subsequent
replacement by a United Nations peacekeeping
operation and the joint peacekeeping mission of the
United Nations and the Commonwealth of Independent
States in the Georgian-Abkhazian conflict zone.

A great deal remains to be done to improve the
peacekeeping potential of the United Nations,
especially in such areas as rapid response, the effective
use of material resources, financing, transport, the
training of staff, et cetera. It is precisely in that manner
that we must all go forward, in the light of our
collective desire to make United Nations peacekeeping
as effective as possible in order to settle the various
international and regional conflicts.
