Mr. Ndiaye (spoke in French): Following the
publication of the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in the Central African Republic, and
pursuant to resolution 2448 (2018), I am pleased to
inform the Security Council about recent developments
on the ground and in the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA).

It cannot be repeated enough: the signing of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic on 6 February gave rise
to many hopes, both in the country and the region as
well as within the international community, including
that there would be a definitive end to the long and
violent crisis that the Central African Republic has
been experiencing for decades. Since the signing of the
agreement, the Government and partners of the Central
African Republic have redoubled their efforts to
implement it. A new, more inclusive, Government was
established on 22 March following the Addis Ababa
consultations. The international community, under the
auspices of the United Nations, the African Union and
the European Union, met in Bangui on 17 April within
the framework of the International Support Group on
the Central African Republic in order to reactivate
regional and international actors.

On 31 May, a joint high-level mission made up of
the Government of the Central African Republic, the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States and MINUSCA was deployed to the field
to demand that the leader of the Retour, reclamation et
rehabilitation group cooperate with judicial authorities
with a view to arresting those responsible for the 21 May
massacres, dismantling all their bases and immediately
integrating their elements into the national programme
on disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation. A second joint mission visited Koui on
18 June, in the subprefecture of Paoua, the group's
stronghold. At the end of the mission, the head of that
armed group committed to beginning the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of its elements on
29 June, in order to enable the establishment of the
agreement of the first Unites speciales mixtes de
securite in the west ofthe country. He also committed to
continuing to cooperate with the judicial investigations
into the massacres.

I would also like to inform the Council that,
following those events, and in addition to our good
offices, the Mission launched a military operation,
thereby bringing additional pressure to bear to
strengthen the protection of civilians, prevent further
attacks or reprisals on civilians and stop all movements
of armed elements in the area of Paoua. Those joint
efforts, conducted under our mandate and in accordance
with the peace agreement, resulted in the arrest of three
members of the group suspected of having participated
in the massacres on 21 May.
As the incidents in Ouham-Pende' demonstrate,
the situation remains fragile. Every week, 50 to
70 violations of the peace agreement are reported,
committed mainly by armed groups against civilians.
Violence against civilians, illegal taxation, the
obstruction of the deployment of State authority and
the occupation of public buildings continue and are a
source of deep frustration for the people of the Central
African Republic.

Against that backdrop, MINUSCA continues to
implement the multidimensional mandate the Council
entrusted it with, while using its good offices to urge
the parties to scrupulously implement the commitments
made under the peace agreement and support them.
Despite the immense challenges, we continue to
work with the Government, the guarantors and other
facilitators and partners to provide the parties with
all the political and logistical support necessary
for the success of the agreement. We support all the
structures provided for under the agreement, including
the various monitoring mechanisms established at the
local and national levels, the Unites speciales mixtes de
securite, the inclusive commission that is responsible
for addressing justice related to the conflict, and the
future truth, justice, reconciliation and reparations
commission, whose consultations President Touadera
launched on 6 June.

We are also mobilizing to carry out an awareness-
raising campaign to inform local actors about the
peace agreement and solicit their cooperation in its
implementation. MINUSCA also continues to support
local peace and reconciliation committees throughout
all the country's prefectures. But the success of the
agreement will depend above all on the commitment
of the parties to put an end to all forms of violence and
promote dialogue to resolve all forms of disputes, as
provided for in the agreement.

In order to maintain a level of trust in the
agreement, armed groups must comply with the security
arrangements to which they committed themselves on
6 February. In that regard, yesterday's announcement
by the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique, which is the main armed group, that it
would dismantle all illegal barriers is an encouraging
sign that I hope will be followed by concrete action.

The full implementation of the security provisions
under the peace agreement, including the establishment
of the Unites speciales mixtes de securite, which
should contribute to reducing transhumance-related
violence, will be a crucial step in restoring security
and redeploying State authority. Rapid progress
in disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation is also needed to ensure lasting
improvements in security and stabilization.

I am pleased to report that the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration operations conducted
in May and June resulted in the demobilization of 90
combatants from the Revolution et justice Movement,
under the command of Armel Ningatoloum Sayo,
which had already begun to disarm in December 2018.
MINUSCA is working with the Government, guarantors
and other partners to launch the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme for other
groups in the coming months, which will enable the
rapid establishment, training and deployment of the
Unite's speciales mixtes de securite.

We also continue to support security sector reform.
I commend the Government's efforts to make the
defence and security forces more representative of the
population, more professional and more effective. In
line with that triple objective, the Government recently
completed a national recruitment campaign for the
Central African Armed Forces. A similar recruitment
campaign for the police and gendarmerie will take
place in all prefectures in the coming months.

Central Africans expect a lot from peace. They
want to be able to go about their activities safely and
have access to clean water, health care, education,
employment and justice. It is therefore necessary to
create the conditions conducive to economic recovery
that creates employment opportunities for young
people, in order to avoid the future creation of armed
groups. The Mission and the United Nations system
are therefore working together closely to ensure that
security, development and peacebuilding efforts are
coordinated to create the necessary synergies for
sustainable peace.

The dire humanitarian situation continues to
hamper the prospects for lasting peace, as people
are unable to meet their basic needs. Approximately
2.9 million people, half of whom are children, are in
need of humanitarian assistance and protection, while
2.1 million people face food insecurity. It is essential
that the peace agreement contribute to creating the
conditions for better access to humanitarian aid and
that development activities be launched in already
stable areas. Adequate support must also be provided to
the 622,000 displaced persons and the 590,000 Central
African refugees registered in neighbouring countries.
Our 2019 humanitarian response plan, which requires
just over $430 million, is only 28 per cent funded,
which is grossly inadequate. I appeal to the generosity
of donors to help those many vulnerable people.

(spoke in English)

The successful implementation of the peace
agreement will also depend upon its ability to address the
many human rights violations that have characterized
the crisis and whose victims demand redress. In that
regard, I am glad to stress that the national consultations
for the creation of the truth, justice, reparations and
reconciliation commission will allow Central Africans
to contribute their views on how best to ensure redress
for victims of abuse, the application ofjustice for those
involved in grave crimes, and the path towards national
reconciliation. Progress towards national reconciliation
and the integration of armed groups into State forces
and society will be critical for allowing elections to
take place in 2020 and 2021, as planned.

(spoke in French)

In that regard, the Constitutional Court declared
certain articles of the electoral code, recently adopted
by the National Assembly, to be unconstitutional.
The Assembly will soon be called upon to sit in
extraordinary session in order to adopt the text revised
by the Court, failing which the country could face a
serious institutional deadlock. A delay in the adoption
of the electoral code could lead to a delay in the
preparations for the elections. However, the elections
are a crucial step in strengthening democracy in the
Central African Republic. Everything must therefore
be done to ensure that the elections, the preparations for
which will require substantial international financial,
technical and operational support, take place within the
deadlines set by the Central African Constitution.

Similarly, for elections to take place in peaceful
conditions, all actors involved must henceforth exercise
restraint and wisdom. I have noted the establishment of
a political platform composed of 20 opposition political
parties and four civil society organizations that are
strongly opposed to the peace agreement. I hope that
this opposition to the agreement will not lead to the
rejection of the peace process, but rather to constructive
proposals for the development of the country.

MINUSCA will always be able to count on the
support of the Security Council and that of all Member
States of the international community so as to ensure
the success of its mandate.

