Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the associated countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey, and the European Free Trade
Association countries members of the European
Economic Area Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway
declare that they align themselves with this statement.

We have carefully read Secretary-General Kofi
Annan's new report on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2003/996), and we have listened attentively to the
comprehensive briefing by the Special Representative
and Head of UNMIK. The European Union thanks Mr.
Holkeri and commends the work he has done since he
began his assignment on 13 August; it reaffirms its
strong support for him in the challenging task of fully
implementing Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
in which he can count on our continued assistance. The
European Union urges all concerned in Kosovo and
elsewhere in the region to cooperate in a constructive
manner with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, while refraining from unilateral acts
and statements that risk jeopardizing the goal of a
stable, multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo.

The European Council of 16 and 17 October
welcomed the launch of the direct dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina on practical issues, held in
Vienna on 14 October, as a key benchmark in the
international community's strategy of "standards before
status", based on resolution 1244 (1999).

Because it addresses issues with a direct impact
on people's lives, it represents an essential step towards
normalization and further advancement in Kosovo
towards European standards within the Stabilization
and Association process.

The European Council has also expressed its
disappointment that some of the key interlocutors had
chosen not to attend. It has particularly stressed the
importance of establishing technical working groups in
November on energy, transport and communication,
returnees and missing persons. To this end, it has urged
both parties to make the necessary preparations and to
engage constructively and unconditionally in this
process on a multi-ethnic basis. It has also supported
Mr. Holkeri's efforts in this direction.

The European Union is confident that technical
talks in the working groups will begin soon, leading to
concrete solutions. For that purpose, the European
Union urges all parties involved, namely the
representatives from the Kosovo Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government, to fully commit
themselves, thus making an essential contribution to
the possibility of producing, as early as possible,
tangible results. The European Union does not consider
dialogue to be optional. We therefore expect both sides
to engage seriously and constructively in the working
groups.

The European Union fully shares the Secretary-
General's conclusions that:

"The ongoing transfer of non-reserved
responsibilities listed in chapter 5 of the
Constitutional Framework increasingly provides
the Provisional Institutions with the possibility to
demonstrate their capacity to assume additional
responsibilities, and their ability to ensure
efficient and effective administration"
(S/2003/996, paragraph 53).

The European Union encourages Kosovo's
Provisional Institutions to strengthen cooperation and
consultation with the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). In this
respect, it welcomes the development of a work plan
aimed at further operationalizing the "standards before
status" strategy. Direct dialogue talks on practical
issues should also be part of the work plan.

Much remains to be done in Kosovo to guarantee
full respect for the rule of law and for human and
minority rights, including adequate minority
participation at both the central and local levels of
Government. As noted in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2003/996), Belgrade has again been requested
to dismantle parallel administrative structures and
replace them through cooperation with Kosovo's multi-
ethnic Provisional Institutions.

The European Union reaffirms its strong
condemnation of all acts of violence and intimidation
in Kosovo, in particular those directed at minorities.
Their only effect is to jeopardize the process of
normalization and reconciliation. The return of
minorities remains an essential benchmark in the
framework of the "standards before status" strategy.

Allow us to conclude by saying that the European
Union continues to be firmly committed to supporting
Kosovo's economic recovery, which is indispensable
for ensuring stability and development within that
society.

