Mr. Agbenonci (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for the invitation to participate
in this open debate on the protection of civilians in
periods of armed conflict. 1 would like to extend my
warm congratulations to you on behalf of the President
of the Republic of Benin, Mr. Patrice Talon, on your
assumption of the rotating presidency of the Security
Council. I also wish to acknowledge and welcome
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadera, President of the Central African Republic,
the Secretary-General, and Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.

The issue on the agenda today for this open debate is
of crucial importance, given the purposes and principles
of the United Nations, whose primary mission is to save
succeeding generations from armed conflicts, which
unfortunately continue to be a blight on humanity.
In view of the mass atrocities committed in hot spots
around our planet, it is not surprising that your country,
France, the birthplace of human rights, has decided to
make the issue of the protection of civilians a major
theme of its presidency of the Security Council.

The stakes are high, and no one can remain
indifferent in the light of the multiple serious violations
of international humanitarian law and of the principle
of the inviolability of United Nations troops. Such
Violations have been effected by Government forces and
by extremist non-State groups, which, in the cross-fire
of attempting to destabilize States, also target peaceful
civilian populations.

The increasing efforts deployed by the United
Nations to strengthen the protection of civilians as part
of peacekeeping operations shows the willingness on
the part of the international community to strengthen
the capacity of countries to prevent gross Violations of
human rights affecting civilian populations in conflict
situations. In that context, matching the real threats
with the Security Council's mandates and the measures
deployed for implementing them are a problem to which
it is important to find appropriate solutions.

In addition to military means, the use of which
is bound by the rules of engagement, the issue of the
protection of civilians must be consistently addressed
on the agenda as a cross-cutting and multidimensional
concern. As such, it must be integrated into all
decision-making processes regarding the management
of conflict situations. It is up to those responsible
for the mission to be aware of and define the sources
of instability and the deep roots of the threats and
to neutralize them. That could entail carrying out
measures to anticipate threats and acting to mediate
and identify measures to contain or avoid the escalation
of violence.

Given the genuine limits on the use of force, soft-
power methods can be much more effective in certain
cases, as they make it possible, for example, to maintain
a dialogue between protagonists. The passive use of
military force could add to the deterrent function.
The value of mobilizing and engaging potential
trouble-making factions in income-generating activities
has been proven and demonstrated by the effectiveness
of rapid impact projects. That has worked, in my
experience, in the context of peacekeeping operations
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
a thought that came to mind when I was considering
the subject and related issues in the concept note
(S/2016/502, annex) prepared for this open debate.

On the second question, I must stress that
relationships with local actors and non-governmental
organizations, on the one hand, and with regional and
international organizations, on the other, are important
channels of influence, but must be used with caution,
so that they can become factors that can help anticipate,
manage and stabilize situations at risk. In that regard,
the contribution of non-governmental organizations
that deploy and manage early-warning mechanisms
is highly appreciated. They deserve to be duly taken
into account as full partners on the ground. Support for
those mechanisms could be a powerful lever to ensure
the protection of civilians.

Furthermore, it is also important to understand
that humanitarian actors can play a key role in the joint
implementation of quick-impact projects, which can
help to strengthen a constructive partnership between
them and the missions. Precautionary measures are
necessary so as to ensure that humanitarian actors can
maintain their separate identity on the ground as well
as their own rules of operation. I also think that more
importance should be attached to awareness-raising
and information-sharing measures among local and
international stakeholders in potential areas of tension
where there might be risks to the civilian population.

The latest generation of integrated missions has
received explicit mandates to ensure the protection
of civilians, but it is necessary that those mandates
be regularly assessed so as to ensure that they are
adapted to the actual situations. In order to increase
the suitability of Council resolutions, their elaboration
ought to include a meticulous assessment of the
situation at issue with the involvement of regional and
subregional organizations, which have the advantage
of being closer to the reality on the ground, of having
a better understanding of the intangibles and of being
able to weigh the local significance.

Affected troops assigned to protect civilians must
receive appropriate training as well, particularly in
order to ensure the proportionality of their responses
to anticipated threats. It is important that those troops
be well equipped and psychologically well prepared
to assume their responsibilities. In that regard, the
Government of Benin would like to express its support
for the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians,
which underscore the good practices of troop-
contributing countries in efforts to protect civilians.

Those are my thoughts on the theme of this open
debate. I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to speak, to
contribute to finding a solution to the serious challenges
facing the international community, which is currently
confronted with various trouble spots. I would like to
conclude by stressing the importance of the issue of
the protection of civilians, which should remain on
the Security Council agenda, so that there can be more
in-depth thinking on it and regular exchanges on the
topic, given its importance for the credibility of the
United Nations.

