Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you,
Sir, on your wise leadership of the work of the Security
Council this month, and I wish you every success. I
also Wish to thank you for convening this meeting on
the working methods of the Council. We agree with the
concept note (S/2015/793) that you have so carefully
prepared.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has, on several
occasions, called for the reform of the Security Council
and the improvement of its working methods. We live
in a world torn apart by war, violence and serious
extremism, so we look to the Council to defend
international security and maintain peace. The process
of Security Council reform began in 1993. A number
of reports and statements have been published since
that date in documents calling for improvements in
the Council's working methods and stressing the
complementary relationship among the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council. Although positive results have been
achieved in such areas as transparency and broader
participation, it has, unfortunately, not yet been
possible to find a comprehensive solution that allows
the Security Council to address its fundamental tasks
as we would have wished.

We have now reached a point in which a majority
of States Members agree that there is a fundamental
problem with the working methods of the Council,
which affects its credibility and weakens its ability
to resolve conflicts, as we can see from the Council's
deadlock with respect to several issues, including
the Palestinian question and the crisis in Syria. My
delegation therefore appreciates all the efforts underway
to improve the Council's working methods, including
the initiative of French President Francois Hollande
with respect to restrictions on the use of the veto in
situations involving serious crimes and the initiatives
that would support that proposal.

My delegation calls for the positive consideration
of all of the ideas for reforming the Security Council,
in particular those proposed by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group, to which my
country, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, belongs, with a
view to improving the working methods of the Security
Council and in favour of voluntary restrictions on the
use of the veto. We also support the idea of a collective
agreement to remove the obstacles to accountability
for war crimes and genocide, to increase transparency,
including in the selection of the Secretary-General
and in relations with regional organizations, and to
enable the Council to accomplish its most basic and
most important function, namely, the maintenance
of international peace and security with a view to
preventing conflicts and resolving the issues afflicting
countries in post-conflict situations.

The reform of the Security Council is one of the
major tasks that the international community should
take up as it celebrates the seventieth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations. My country stands
ready to cooperate fully with other Member States in
order to attain that important objective.

