Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you
for the initiative you have taken to convene today's
debate on the working methods of the subsidiary organs
of the Security Council, in particular its sanctions
committees, which we consider to be of great relevance.
We also thank you, Sir, for your substantial concept note
(S/2016/102, annex). Similarly, we would like to thank
Ambassadors Olof Skoog and Carlos Olguin Cigarroa
for their respective briefings.

As a member of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, Uruguay sees accountability,
coherence and transparency as being of prime
importance in improving the working methods of the
Security Council, including its subsidiary organs.
Uruguay supports the flexible use of methodological
tools that promote greater involvement of the United
Nations membership, knowledge of the issues seized by
the Council and the courses of action it adopts. In this
regard, as it concluded its presidency of the Security
Council in January, Uruguay proposed using more open
discussion formats in Security Council debates on the
issues on its agenda and make consultations into real
action-oriented exchanges.

Given that all States Members of the United Nations
have a fundamental interest in the work of the Security
Council as a body that acts on their behalf pursuant to
the Charter, Uruguay believes that ongoing dialogue
with non-members of the Council is a commitment
and a key challenge, because only through transparent
and accurate information management will a good
relationship be established, leading to the complete
and satisfactory fulfilment of the Council's mandate
for the benefit of all humankind. From this perspective,
Uruguay highlights the importance ofsanctions regimes
taking steps to achieve greater transparency, coherence
and accountability, without violating the privileged or
confidential nature of certain documents handled by
sanctions committees. Uruguay believes that improving
current working methods could have a positive influence
on the achievement of desired objectives, thereby
improving the effectiveness of sanctions regimes. At
the same time, Uruguay believes that when sanctions
are imposed, unintended secondary effects should be
considered, as increased tensions could hinder dialogue
aimed at finding political solutions to conflicts or have
other negative impacts on the civilian population.

For Uruguay, it is important that sanctions regimes
comply with due process, which supports the proposal to
open discussion on the expansion of the mandate of the
Ombudsperson to all the sanctions committees. Uruguay
also highlights its interest in greater transparency in the
allocation of chairmanships of subsidiary bodies and of
penholderships. Another aspect that could be improved
is the time allowed for different kinds of documents to
be distributed for consideration by Council members.

Uruguay fully supports the measures proposed by
Venezuela in the concept note with respect to, on the
one hand, the importance of having more frequent open
interactive briefings and consultations with countries
affected by sanctions regimes, greater dissemination
of information concerning the activities of sanctions
committees in the international media, regular
circulation of detailed summary records of sanctions
committees' meetings, and greater and clearer
dissemination of information concerning the duration
of sanctions, including actions to be undertaken by
individuals and entities under sanctions in order to have
sanctions lifted, and, on the other hand, the preparation
of new members of the Security Council for assuming
chairmanships of the sanctions committees. I take this
opportunity to express the support of Uruguay for the
draft note of the presidency of Venezuela on improved
working methods.

In conclusion, Uruguay, as a member of the
Security Council and as a troop-contributing country,
cannot fail to mention the importance of improving
the working methods of the Security Council in the
maintenance of peace, including of its subsidiary body,
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, and
its far-reaching impact.

