Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Allow
me to join my colleagues in thanking the Chairmen for
their briefings. Their dedicated leadership is central to
the effectiveness of the Council's three counter-
terrorism-related committees.

This meeting of the Council takes place at a
critical juncture in our collective counter-terrorism
efforts, with the death of Osama bin Laden earlier this
month and the tenth anniversary of 11 September 2001
approaching. Bin Laden's death is the most significant
blow yet to AI-Qaida's leadership, but it does not mark
the end of Al-Qaida or of terrorism. We know that
much work remains. Our partnerships have put
unprecedented pressure on Al-Qaida. The United States
will actively pursue its bilateral and multilateral
counter-terrorism efforts, including efforts at the
United Nations. For the United States, the United
Nations is a key partner in the collective effort to
combat and prevent terrorism.

I thank Ambassador Puri for his exceptional
guidance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
during his first five months as its Chairman. He has
fostered greater efficiency in the work of the CTC and
has worked closely with Mike Smith, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), to keep the general
membership up to date on the Committee's activities
through open meetings. The CTC and CTED made
great strides in 2010. We applaud CTED's increased
focus on developing innovative regional capacity-
building workshops. Whether in the Horn of Africa, the
Sahel, South-East Asia or South Asia, CTED has
proven itself by bringing together local officials from
the region to identify practical solutions to common
counter-terrorism challenges.

We are particularly pleased with how resolution
1963 (2010) has helped align the Council's counter-
terrorism framework with the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We support the emphasis
on addressing the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism and on reminding all that respect for human
rights and the rule of law is an essential part of a
successful counter-terrorism effort. We also need to
stress the critical role that local communities and civil
society can play in our collective efforts to prevent and
combat terrorism.

For over 11 years, the sanctions regime under
resolution 1267 (1999) has been one of the United
Nations most effective counter-terrorism tools and a
symbol of international consensus against the ongoing
threats posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban. The death
of Osama bin Laden must not slow the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
( 1999). The Committee should update its sanctions list
regularly to reflect the changing nature of the terrorist
threat.

The United States welcomes the significant
enhancements to the regime's listing and de-listing
processes, most notably the review of every name on
the consolidated list and the establishment of the
Office of the Ombudsperson to ensure that de-listing
procedures are fair and transparent. Over the past
several months, we have worked very closely with the
1267 Ombudsperson. She has performed an important
role in facilitating the flow of information among
petitioners, Member States and the Committee, and her
reports to the Committee have provided valuable
information. We look forward to continuing to work
with her to further enhance the integrity of the
sanctions regime.

In June, the Council will review the 1267 regime
and renew the mandates of the Monitoring Team and
the Ombudsperson. We hope that other members will
join us in considering a range of reforms to tailor the
regime to the unique threats posed by Al-Qaida and the
Taliban. In addition, we will continue to push for more
robust implementation of existing sanctions by all
Member States in order to make global sanctions more
effective.

Let me thank Ambassador Wittig and his team for
doing excellent work since he took over as Chairman
in January. They, along with the Secretariat, have
worked diligently to implement the latest round of
reforms. I also thank the Monitoring Team for its
important role.

The United States welcomes the Security
Council's recent adoption of resolution 1977 (2011),
which extends the mandate of the Committee

11-3390]
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for 10
years. Let me thank Ambassador Sangqu, the
Secretariat and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs for their work that led to
resolution 1977 (2011), as well as for their continuing
efforts to fully implement resolution 1540 (2004).

The United States will continue its commitment
to the work of the Committee under its new long-term
mandate, and in that regard we are pleased to announce
that we will make a contribution of $3 million for the
1540 Committee's work. Resolution 1977 (2011) urges
the Committee to actively engage in dialogue with
States on implementing resolution 1540 (2004), and we
are coordinating with the Group of Experts to conduct
a country visit to the United States in September 2011.
We look forward to the Committee's recommendations
regarding working methods, modality and structure to
maximize the Committee's efficiency and
effectiveness, and we strongly support appointing a
coordination and leadership position on the Group of
Experts, which would help coordinate the overall
activities of the Committee.

We support the efforts and overall direction of
these three committees. Under the capable leadership
of the Chairmen, the Council's counter-terrorism
efforts will guide and reinforce Member States' actions
to deter terrorism and proliferation efforts by non-State
actors.

