Mr. Dhanapala: The hour is late, and I shall be
brief.

Let me begin by thanking all those who
participated in this public debate for their very
constructive proposals and for advancing the cause of
the reduction of small arms and light weapons in the
current stage of their proliferation.

I believe that the debate has provided a major
impetus to the movement that has begun within the
United Nations on the control of the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and in the
implementation of the decisions that have been taken.

If I may respond to some of the points that have
been raised, the Conventional Arms Register as it
exists now is a voluntary transparency measure that is
confined to seven categories of conventional weapons;
it does not include small arms or light weapons. From
time to time a group of experts meets in order to
review the operation of this Register, as it will do next
year. In that exercise, there will no doubt be
consideration given to the possible expansion of the
Register to include small arms and light weapons.

With regard to the marking and tracing issue, the
recommendation that was included in the Secretary-
General's report was intended to encourage the efforts
of the group of experts to reach a consensus on this
issue, so that we may have progress with regard to a
legal instrument on the question of marking and
tracing.

The 2003 biennial meeting that was presaged in
the Programme of Action adopted at last year's
Conference is being prepared carefully, and I know that
the Ambassador of Colombia - Ambassador Reyes,
who presided over the 2001 meeting - will convene a
consultation on 18 October in order to discuss the
detailed arrangements for this meeting.

With regard to evaluation missions, the
Department for Disarmament Affairs is ready to
undertake them, but, again, the subject of resources
comes up, and that is why we have appealed for extra-
budgetary resources under the small arms advisory
service.

Coordination among all programmes, agencies
and departments within the United Nations system is
undertaken through the Coordinating Action on Small
Arms (CASA).

I would also like to reassure those who expressed
reservations about the possibility of established
priorities in the disarmament agenda being disturbed by
the focus on small arms and light weapons. Indeed, this
is already taken care of. Preambular paragraph 17 of
the Programme of Action states very specifically that
we recognize that

"these efforts are without prejudice to the
priorities accorded to nuclear disarmament,
weapons of mass destruction and conventional
disarmament." (A/CONF. 192/15)

Many questions were raised about the small arms
advisory service that has been proposed in one of the
recommendations. The main purpose of this unit is to
enhance the effectiveness of CASA, enabling the
United Nations better to assist Member States in the
implementation of the Programme of Action adopted
by the July 2001 Conference. The specific objectives of
the small arms advisory service are, first, to ensure
optimal coordination and harmonization of the

Organization's activities in the field of small arms:
secondly, to ensure that such activities are consistent
with, and build upon, the political framework reflected
in the Programme of Action; and thirdly, to provide
relevant information on small arms and light weapons
and other related issues to Member States and all
interested entities as appropriate.

It will serve as a permanent secretariat for CASA,
providing advisory services to Member States and to
United Nations agencies as requested and assisting
them in the formulation and implementation of
projects, particularly with regard to the conduct of
assessment missions and monitoring activities.

The financing of this advisory service will be
covered from the United Nations regular budget
through the provision of the Chief of Branch. who will
supervise the work of the unit. and a P-4 staff member.
Other outstanding costs will be covered either through
contributions to the Department for Disarmament
Affairs' Global and Regional Disarmament Trust Fund
or through the provision of associate experts by
Member States. The national points of contact will be
the primary partner of the small arms advisory service
in the task of the collection and circulation of
information about the implementation by States of the
Programme of Action adopted at last year's
Conference.

This will be a two-way street. The national points
of contact will send information on national activities
to the small arms advisory service, and they will also
make requests for assistance. which will be responded
to. The service will keep national points of contact
informed of developments and activities by other
States. United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations and about the availability of resources
and expertise. and provide assistance as requested. We
have a detailed document outside this Chamber
providing information about the small arms advisory
service that is available to all delegations.

