Ms. Alvear Valenzuela (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile emphatically and unequivocally
condemned the terrorist acts of 11 September. The
President of Chile, Mr. Ricardo Lagos Escobar, said in
his statement in the general debate that it was an attack
against our values and our faith in a better world based
on dialogue and cooperation. Such values became the
target of terrorist fanaticism, leading to the military
action that is being carried out in Afghanistan.

The Council and the General Assembly both
adopted resolutions aimed at creating effective
cooperation mechanisms between countries in order to
tackle international terrorism. We welcome that. It is a
reflection of the central role of the United Nations in
this process - a role that should be intensified when it
becomes necessary to adopt measures aimed at creating
conditions for national stability in Afghanistan and, as
a result, in the region.
That is the way to maintain international peace
and security, which is the primary responsibility of this
Council. Chile supports the proposals of Ambassador
Brahimi designed to establish a transition process that
would allow the people of Afghanistan to decide their
own fate and establish a democratic Government with
full respect for the rule of law, human rights and
fundamental freedoms. We would like to thank him for
his tireless efforts to find a negotiated and lasting
solution to an extremely complex situation.

Afghanistan is one of the poorest countries in the
world. It is crucial that, once we set up a democratic
government, the complex political efforts that will be
made by the Afghans themselves be accompanied by a
sustained commitment on the part of the international
community to help to alleviate the humanitarian crisis;
to allow for the return of refugees; and to lay the
foundation for sustainable economic and social
development, which is crucial for political stability.

It is clear, however, that resolving the difficult
situation prevailing in Afghanistan is but a step along
the path to defeating international terrorism. As
Ambassador Brahimi stated this morning, the
international community cannot allow the development
of new, destitute and collapsed states that will
reproduce the cycle of the terrorist threat. The anti-
terrorist coalition must elaborate development policies
for those areas that seem to remain on the margins of
globalization and of progress.

Chile trusts that the United Nations and the
Council will continue to make an effective
contribution, so that the Afghan people can recover
their legitimate right to live in conditions of dignity,
tolerance and peace.

