Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you on your
country's presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November. I would also like to thank you for
inviting me to participate on behalf the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), comprised of
Angola, Brazil, Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Portugal,
Sao Tome and Principe, Timor-Leste and my own
country, Mozambique, at this briefing on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau. The CPLP countries continue to follow
with great interest the ongoing process towards the
restoration of constitutional order and the conclusion
of the transition in Guinea-Bissau. We therefore
welcome the comprehensive report of the Secretary-
General (S/2013/681) on the latest developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS).

The delays in the electoral process continue
to prolong the people's suffering, hindering their
realization of their aspirations and forcing the country
to remain dependent on assistance for its basic survival
needs, since the April 2012 coup d'etat has exacerbated
social and economic hardships in the country.

We commend the recent positive developments,
particular the announcement of the voter registration
process planned from 1 to 21 December, and the
scheduling of presidential and legislative elections
for 16 March 2014. We welcome and commend the
Government of Timor-Leste's creation of a mission
to support the electoral process in Guinea-Bissau,
along with a contribution of $6 million to assist in the
voter registration process. The technical team will be
working in close partnership with the technical office
supporting the electoral process in Guinea-Bissau. The
mission will have a high-level technical capacity and
is committed to sharing its knowledge and experience
and providing assistance in conducting simultaneous
elections in the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, thereby
contributing to the restoration of constitutional order.

We hope that with the support of the international
community, in particular the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), as well as
Timor-Leste, Nigeria, and the European Union, the
transitional authorities will fully respect that calendar
by discharging their main responsibility for organizing
free, fair, inclusive and credible elections that are
a precondition for a return to constitutional order,
in line with resolution 2048 (2012), without further
postponements, which should clearly be unacceptable
to the international community. Recognizing those
positive developments in the country, we would like to
commend the tireless efforts and vision of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jose'
Ramos-Horta, aimed at a sustainable solution to the
cr1s1s.

The holding of elections is an urgently needed step
in establishing legitimate institutions. Their results
must be fully acted on in order to respect the true will
of the people of Guinea-Bissau. The election and the
establishment of a legitimate Government should also
strengthen civilian oversight and supervision of the
defence and security forces. We call on the transitional
authorities, with the active engagement of the
international community and in particular the Security
Council, to ensure that the elections are conducted in
a peaceful environment, with the safe participation of
all actors in the political process. In that regard, I must
convey our deep concern about the recent episodes of
violence and intimidation in Guinea-Bissau, affecting
representatives of the media, human rights advocates,
artists and political figures, as well as the lack of
concrete action being taken to fight impunity.

The international community, including the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
must firmly support the legitimate authorities of
Guinea-Bissau once they assume their functions, in
order to once and for all break the cycle of violence
and instability that has affected that fragile country
for many years. In a climate of inclusive dialogue,
the future legitimate authorities should implement
the reforms that have been identified as necessary in
the security, justice and administrative sectors. But in
order to do that, as Mr. Ramos-Horta has pointed out,
they will need international technical and financial
support. They will also need security and stability.
In that regard, the Council should discuss further
the Secretary-General's recommendation on the
importance of providing support for strengthening the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) in
order to guarantee adequate security for the elections
and in the post-election period as the country reforms
and strengthens its institutions. Such support could
include a broader international presence on the ground
under an enhanced ECOMIB.

As the Security Council has affirmed in previous
statements, combating impunity in Guinea-Bissau is
a priority and a condition for long-term stability. We
reiterate our concern about the prevailing culture of
impunity and lack of accountability in the country.
In that regard, we welcome the ongoing efforts of
UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime to support the fight against drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime in Guinea-Bissau.
They will continue to be key to helping the future
legitimate authorities to overcome that challenge in
a sustainable manner and to promote stability in the
country and beyond.

Let me conclude by reiterating the commitment of
the CPLP to continue working with the international
community to create the necessary conditions for
stability, the consolidation of peace and the restoration
of the foundations necessary to the development of
Guinea-Bissau.

