Mr. Kolby (Norway): My delegation, too,
welcomes this open debate on this very important item.

I shall refrain from reading out my full text.

I should like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Frechette, and also Mrs. Robinson for her introduction
and very active involvement in our discussion. We also
welcome the Secretary-General's report and in
particular the clear analysis and the concrete
recommendations set forth.
Regrettably, many of the recommendations
contained in the previous report on the same issue and
in resolution 1296 (2000) of last year have not been
sufficiently acted upon. The lesson to be drawn is that,
in addition to agreement on intent, we need to be
clearer on how we ensure the follow-up. We need a
road map for moving from intent to action. I shall
return to this issue after having made the following
observations on the basis of the recommendations in
the report.

Norway welcomes the Secretary-General's call
for a shift of focus in this debate from analysis to
actual implementation. It is our sincere hope that
today's debate will contribute towards this end. In this
regard, we strongly endorse the approach of creating a
culture of protection, with the aim of encouraging all
relevant actors to live up to their respective
responsibilities. National Governments, armed groups,
United Nations Member States, the Security Council,
other United Nations bodies, non-governmental
organizations and others clearly have different roles
and responsibilities in this field.

In line with this, any strategy aimed at enhancing
the protection of civilians in armed conflict should take
as a point of departure that the main responsibility lies
with the national Governments. Moreover, the nature of
most conflicts in today's world suggests an obvious
need to engage armed groups in a constructive dialogue
on protection issues.

In this context, efforts on the part of the Security
Council and other international actors should be seen
as complementary in order to provide civilians with the
protection they are entitled to under international law.
We believe this framework is fundamental in order to
set goals which are realistic and achievable.

It bears recalling also that protection of civilians
is not an option; it is a moral duty and a legal
responsibility, which flow from the legal commitments
in human rights and international humanitarian law. We
cannot consider whether to provide safe and
unimpeded access of humanitarian personnel to people
in need; we are bound to. We cannot decide to ensure
the well-being of refugees and internally displaced
persons; we have to. The parties to a conflict cannot
choose to ensure the safety and protection of
humanitarian agencies and their workers; they are
liable to criminal prosecution if they do not do so.

The ad hoc Tribunals established are already
making essential contributions to truth and long-term
reconciliation. We need to demonstrate the consistent
and unrelenting commitment of the Security Council to
fight cultures of impunity in armed conflict. The
message should be that the Council, within its powers
and mandate, will not passively stand by and accept
that large-scale atrocities go unpunished. The
implementation of recommendations 1 to 3 in the
present report will represent important steps in that
direction.

The permanent International Criminal Court
which is in the process of being established has the
potential to make decisive changes in the capacity of
the international community to react in a timely
manner to mass atrocities. A prospective institution
rather than a retrospective one has clear advantages in
this respect.

Norway wishes to place on record its high
expectations that the Security Council will play an
important triggering role in the establishment of the
Court. We urge all States that have not yet done so to
ratify or accede to the Rome Statute, as well as to all
relevant instruments of international humanitarian law,
human rights law and refugee law, including the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel.

Moreover, we support the recommendations to
emphasize the direct responsibility of armed groups
under international humanitarian law for crimes against
humanity, war crimes and acts of genocide committed
by them. A practical tool in this respect is the
promotion of international humanitarian law through
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
United Nations broadcasting.

We also support engaging armed groups in a
dialogue aimed at facilitating the provision of
humanitarian assistance, inter alia, through increased
interaction. Such contact should not in any way be
understood to confer legitimacy on any group.

The safety and security of refugees is an
important concern in armed conflict. A great threat to
refugee security is the infiltration of armed elements in
refugee-populated areas and the militarization of
refugee camps. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has proposed
the valuable concept of a "ladder of options" to ensure
refugee safety, including different degrees of
intervention, from an international presence to
intervention requiring police or military force. We
welcome the cooperation which has been established
between UNHCR and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in this regard, and we encourage the
continued efforts to come up with practically oriented
recommendations on this important issue.

Although complex and difficult to handle, the
separation of armed elements from civilians clearly has
great potential as a protection tool. It also constitutes
an important measure in terms of preventing conflict
escalation.

As regards further follow-up of this agenda item,
we would recommend the elaboration of a so-called
road map for further action. The recommendations in
the Secretary-General's report involve different types
of action to be undertaken by different actors. Some
recommendations are already under way or are being
implemented, while others will require further
conceptual development of the topics concerned. We
therefore support a regrouping of the
recommendations, with the aim of establishing a
targeted plan of action specifying who needs to do
what, when and in what sequence. In this regard, we
welcome the readiness of the Secretariat to report on
the progress of implementation, as indicated by the
Deputy Secretary-General in her statement.

We would suggest that the Secretariat be
requested to present regular informal briefings to the
Security Council on the progress of implementation on
this topic. We suggest that the first briefing be given in
six months' time, and thereafter as required.
Furthermore, a new comprehensive report on the status
of implementation of resolution 1296 (2000) and the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report
should be forthcoming within 12 months of the first
briefing on progress.

Moreover, to ensure proper follow-up, we also
need to ensure a more interactive dialogue between the
Secretariat and the Security Council. Closer
cooperation between the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is therefore encouraged to
ensure that protection-related considerations are
integrated at the earliest possible stage of planning and
implementation of peacekeeping operations.

More generally, there is also a need to ensure that
the protection of civilians does not remain merely a
thematic topic on the agenda of the Security Council. It
should take its rightful place in all relevant matters
addressed by the Council. The recommendations of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the Special Adviser
on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women should
also be fully considered in this context.
The issue of protection of civilians in armed
conflict is an issue of paramount importance that is
also of an operational character. It needs to remain on
the Council's agenda.

