Mr. Matussek (Germany): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia; the European Free Trade Association countries
of Iceland and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area; as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova align themselves with this statement.

Let me, first of all, express my gratitude for
Prime Minister Jose Ramos-Horta's impressive
statement to us today. On behalf of the European
Union, I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his latest report (S/2007/50) on the situation in
Timor-Leste. I think it is a good basis for further
discussion of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

The European Union acknowledges the important
work done by the Special Representative for Timor-
Leste, Mr. Atul Khare, and by the staff of UNMIT on
the ground, as well as the efforts of the Timorese
people, to build a viable, just and democratic State.

As the Secretary-General pointed out in his
report, the overall situation in Timor-Leste has
improved over the six months since UNMIT was
established. However, the security situation remains
volatile. Gang activity continues and there is increasing
discontent among internally displaced Timorese.

One of the key elements in the peace process is
the necessity of rebuilding confidence among the
various actors. That is an essential step towards
national reconciliation. UNMIT has begun to assist the
Timorese people in this delicate task by supporting
meetings, public events and dialogue programmes,
which include addressing the events of the past. It is
important that the forthcoming elections unite the
Timorese people and not create additional divisions.
All Timorese should be aware of their own
responsibility to promote national reconciliation, not
only in abstract, but also in concrete, terms. The
forthcoming presidential and legislative elections
should contribute to national unity and democratic
stability in Timor-Leste. The EU endorses the
recommendations of the Independent Electoral
Certification Team to the Timorese authorities in order
to implement key measures to ensure the full
credibility of the electoral process.

It is important to note that reconciliation and
viable peace can be achieved only in a secure
environment. In this context, the EU Union welcomes
the signing of a security agreement on 26 January by
the United Nations, Timor-Leste and Australia. The
agreement sets up a Trilateral Coordination Forum that
will allow better coordination on security issues. This
will be a particularly important element in the lead-up
to the elections.

Last month, the European Commission sent an
election exploratory mission to Timor-Leste. The
mission will shortly submit its conclusions with a view
to a likely European Union election observation
mission.
The European Union also welcomes the initiative
to support the electoral process with the deployment of
an additional United Nations police unit in support of
the Timorese national police. UNMIT's established
police units have, under adverse circumstances, helped
to restore and maintain public order. That is a
prerequisite if we are to implement other important
elements of the mandate. Capacity-building and reform
of the Timorese national police remain essential to
creating an effective police force capable of addressing
the security challenges. UNMIT will have an important
role to play in this process. Nonetheless, screening for
readmission of Timorese national police officers will
need to accelerate in order to meet security needs
during the elections.

As we all know, justice and accountability remain
key factors for lasting peace. The EU remains
concerned about the lack of progress in the judicial
system and the fight against impunity. The overall
capacity of the judicial system to deal with the number
of arrests is still inadequate. Reports of intimidation of
witnesses damage confidence in the rule of law
amongst the Timorese people.

Earlier this month, the Chairman of the
Commission for Truth and Friendship announced that
the Commission was ready to commence the truth-
seeking phase of its investigations. Seventy people
suspected of human rights violations during the 1999
independence referendum events will be invited to
share information from February to June 2007. We
hope the Commission will prove to be an effective
mechanism for dealing with the past and for building
bridges to the future.

The EU supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation for the extension of the UNMIT
mandate for 12 months with a particular focus on
maintaining public security before, during and after the
elections.

Much has been achieved; much remains to be
done. Most important, the Timorese themselves have to
campaign for national reconciliation. This
responsibility unites all political parties, the Catholic
Church and civil society. It is an essential task for the
Timorese people to undertake. The international
community can only encourage and support this
process.

The European Union and its member States have
for years been major development partners with Timor-
Leste. Since 1999, the EU member States and the
European Community have disbursed more than €600
million to the population of Timor-Leste. European
Community support amounting to €212 million so far

currently focuses on making an urgent response to
humanitarian and peacebuilding needs, notably to
support inclusive political dialogue and quick-impact
youth employment schemes, as well as on longer-term
needs such as institution-building and rural
development. This assistance will take on a long-term
perspective now that Timor-Leste benefits from the
European Development Fund. The nomination of a
special envoy and the upgrading of the European
Community office in Dili into a full-fledged delegation
further demonstrate the EU's willingness to strengthen
its cooperation with Timor-Leste.

I would like to conclude by expressing our
appreciation for the efforts of the Government of
Timor-Leste and the determination of the Timorese
people to build a viable, just and democratic State. The
European Union is committed to remaining a reliable
partner in assisting Timorese efforts to achieve long-
term stability and sustainable economic development,
in close coordination with other bilateral and
multilateral donors.

