I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by His Excellency the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres; Mr. Robert Malley, President and Chief Executive Officer of International Crisis Group; and Mr. Vitaly Naumkin, President of the Institute of Oriental Studies of the Russian Academy of Sciences; as well as the statements delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Wang Yi, State Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of China; Mr. Kalla Ankourao, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation, African Integration and Nigeriens Abroad of the Niger; Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation; Mrs. Naledi Pandor, Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of South Africa; Mr. Dang Minh Khoi, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam; and by the representatives of Belgium, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, in connection with the video-teleconference on "Maintenance of international peace and security: comprehensive review of the situation in the Persian Gulf region', convened on Tuesday, 20 October 2020. Statements were also delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Mohammad Javad Zarif, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran; Mr. Ahmed Berwary, Head of the Department of International Organizations and Conferences of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq; Mr. Nayef Falah Al-Hajraf, Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation Council; and Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary- General of the League of Arab States; as well as by the representative of Qatar. In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
