Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): We wish to thank you,
Sir, for your initiative to convene an open debate on
Somalia. We are of the view that matters like the one
before us today deserve our constant attention and
thorough examination. May I add, however, that the

 

Security Council has never been indifferent to the difficult,
complex and sensitive situation in Somalia. The open
debate last year and regular informal consultations and
briefings on this issue best demonstrate this.

During our last open debate on Somalia, my
delegation stated that only national reconciliation can bring
peace and stability to Somalia, and that it is the
responsibility of the leaders of that country to seek dialogue
and political solutions instead of hostility and violence.
Such an appeal is very much relevant today. And in fact, at
least now, it cannot be overstated.

The situation in Somalia has not significantly changed
since we last met in this Chamber to consider it. But there
are certain developments which might eventually lead to
Somali national reconciliation. We welcome the important
meetings in Nairobi and Sodere. In our view, they
constitute a significant step forward on the road to peace in
Somalia. But they have to be followed by concrete deeds.
In particular, the solemn declaration adopted on 3 January
1997 by the majority of the Somali factions will have to be
put into operation. Speaking realistically, only then will the
community of States be able to constructively assist the
process of normalization in this nation which has borne so
much.

One cannot question the will of the international
community to help Somalia. There are many examples of
concern and practical help from States. Here one should
speak of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and of the Organization of African Unity countries, in
particular Ethiopia, Kenya and Egypt. Also, the
Government of Italy should be commended for its
important contribution.

It is clear to us that the international community will
maintain or even increase its level of involvement provided
that all - I repeat all - Somali factions, and especially
those of Mr. Aidid and Mr. Egal, use the momentum
created at the Nairobi, Sodere and Cairo meetings to pursue
the common way to national reconciliation.

As we did last year, we would also like to underline
that the full observance of the arms embargo under Security
Council resolution 733 (1992) is one of the key conditions
for durable peace in Somalia.

Lastly, our delegation wishes to express its satisfaction
with the Secretary-General's decision to extend for another
six months the activities of the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia, which plays an important and
constructive role in the international efforts towards the
peaceful resolution of the Somali crisis.

