The President: Our next speaker is the Ambassador
of the Netherlands. However, procedurally speaking, I
would like to consult the Council for a minute. Under the
rules of the Security Council, Ministers of Security
Council members take precedence, and that is why we
began with the Vice-President of the United States and
the Minister of Namibia. However, under those same
rules, Security Council members have the right to speak
before Ministers of other countries that are not members.

 

In the last few minutes, I have received several notes
from Permanent Representatives of African countries,
pointing out to me that they feel it would be appropriate for
us to break into the procedural order and allow the
Ministers of Health of Uganda and Zimbabwe to join the
meeting and speak prior to the next scheduled speakers,
which are the representatives of the Netherlands, Argentina,
Canada, Malaysia, the United Kingdom, Tunisia, Ukraine,
Mali and Jamaica, and then, under the rules of the Security
Council, Uganda and Zimbabwe.

I have an informal proposal that the next group of
speakers yield to the two Ministers from Africa, and I
would ask - and I know this is a bit unusual, because we
normally would adjourn and go into executive session, but
we obviously cannot do that - if any of the speakers
would be willing to yield so that we could hear the
Ministers of Health who have travelled so far at the
personal requests of their Presidents. I have spoken to both
President Museveni and President Mugabe personally about
this, and they each told me how important their Ministers'
speeches are. I would ask if Council members would agree
to invite the Ministers from Uganda and Zimbabwe to join
us at the table and speak out of order.

Would this be acceptable to representatives?

I wish to thank Council Members for their indulgence
in this change of procedure.

At the invitation of the President, Dr. Kiyonga
(Uganda) and Dr. Stamps (Zimbabwe) took seats at
the Council table.

The President: It is now my honour to call on the
Minister of Health of Uganda.


