Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I
would like to welcome High Representative Lajcak, to
the Security Council today, and to commend him for
his outstanding performance and for the outstanding
performance of his staff.

We also welcome the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Nikola Spirie.

The role of the High Representative remains
critical in implementing the Dayton accords and in
ensuring that Bosnia and Herzegovina completes its
transition to a secure and stable sovereign State. I would
like to reaffirm the United States' strong support for the
Peace Implementation Council's decision to continue
the High Representative's mandate until the authorities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina fully meet the objectives and
conditions endorsed by the Council in February.

Thanks to the substantial efforts of all parties
involved, we have seen progress in the areas identified
by the Peace Implementation Council, as the High
Representative has noted in his report. We commend
Bosnia and Herzegovina's passage of police reform
laws that meet its requirements for concluding a
Stabilization and Association Agreement. That would
not have happened without the High Representative's
steadfast engagement. We are hopeful that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will set aside the zero-sum ethnic politics
that delayed agreement on police reform and the
conclusion of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement for three years, and that it will sign and
implement the Agreement as soon as possible.

We have also seen progress in the areas of
movable defence property and rule of law legislation.
We hope that the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina can resolve the remaining issues of State
property, Brcko, a national war-crimes strategy and
justice sector reform by the end of this year. In addition
to those issues, which will determine when the Office
of the High Representative can close, I would like to
highlight four areas that the United States believes are
also critical for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

First, NATO's offer of intensified dialogue so
soon after Bosnia and Herzegovina's joining the
Partnership for Peace is a credit to that country's
progress in implementing comprehensive defence
reform. We urge the country's authorities to cooperate
closely with NATO and to utilize the intensified
dialogue to the greatest extent possible so that Bosnia
and Herzegovina may ultimately put forward its best
candidacy for eventual NATO membership.

Secondly, regarding the upcoming municipal
elections, we urge the politicians of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to avoid the divisive rhetoric that
characterized the 2006 election campaign. Such
messages serve only to keep the country trapped in the
past and further delay progress towards integration into
Europe, a goal that is supported by the vast majority of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's citizens.

Thirdly, we believe that improvements to the
Dayton Constitution are needed to enable Bosnia and
Herzegovina to meet the requirements for Euro-
Atlantic integration. We are prepared to support the
Bosnians in such an effort if they demonstrate the
political will to pursue that approach. Those reforms
can be achieved only with support among all three
constituent peoples.

Fourthly, we would echo the comments of others
underscoring the importance of cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

The United States remains fully committed to
ensuring that Bosnia and Herzegovina completes its
successful transition to a stable and secure future under
democratic governance. Working closely with the High
Representative, we look forward to engaging with its
leadership and helping Bosnia and Herzegovina to join
with its neighbours in stabilizing the entire region and
taking its rightful place within the Euro-Atlantic
community.

