Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate Germany on having assumed the presidency of the Security Council for the month of July and to convey to you, Sir, the warmest greetings of your counterpart, Jean-Claude Gakosso, our Minister for Foreign Affairs, who was unexpectedly unable to take part in this important debate. I would like to express, on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Denis Sassou Nguesso, President of the Republic of the Congo and Chair of the African Union (AU) Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya, my delegation's heartfelt gratitude for the invitation extended to the Congo to take part in today's timely meeting on the situation in Libya. May I take this opportunity to reiterate our deep appreciation to Chancellor Angela Merkel for her commitment throughout the Berlin process. The Berlin Conference held on 19 January was critical, as it opened the path for all participating international stakeholders in the peace process in Libya to speak with one voice. On that occasion, all of them made a commitment to complying with the arms embargo and to refraining from interfering in Libya's internal affairs. As the Chairperson of the African Union's Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya underscored in his opening remarks at the meeting of the Committee held in January in Addis Ababa, following his participation in the historic Berlin Conference, the Conference created momentum for catharsis and acknowledged the critical role of Africa. Libya is an African country and a member of the African Union. On that account, Africa has been playing its part in the Libyan crisis. In that endeavour, I would like to recognize the commendable commitment of the Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, to working in partnership with the African Union - and, namely, with the AU Committee - and I invite him to diligently appoint his Special Representative. Unfortunately, the ongoing war in Libya has dire humanitarian consequences. Interference from global and regional Powers have transformed the Libyan conflict into a proxy international war. Libya has become a sanctuary for terrorist groups and mercenaries from various locations. On behalf of His Excellency Mr. Denis Sassou Nguesso, President of the Republic of the Congo, Chairman of the African Union Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya and Chair of its Contact Group, I convey the message that the mandate of the Committee, as set out in its road map, reflects the unwavering position of the African Union on the situation in Libya, which is in line with the Berlin Conference conclusions. Accordingly, the Committee calls for the urgent implementation of an immediate ceasefire in the light of the coronavirus disease, strict compliance with the arms embargo, the resumption of political negotiations with broader representation, the disarmament of armed groups, the revival of the Cairo process and the holding of a reconciliation forum in Addis Ababa, under the auspices of the African Union, in order to discuss the road map to the general elections. For those challenges to be successfully addressed, Council unity is key and foreign interference must end. The African Union Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya, in close partnership with the Secretary-General, continues to support a political approach that includes all Libyans with a view to ending this conflict, to which there can be no military solution. The Committee calls upon the Security Council to take on its responsibilities and reiterates its commitment to play its part, in harmony with the African Union Commission, and on the basis of the consensus reached in Berlin.
