Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
provided us to have here in the Council this afternoon
with us the President of the Government of Spain,
Mr. Jose Maria Aznar. He honours us with his
presence. We welcome the very insightful proposals
and suggestions that Mr. Aznar has put forward this
afternoon on the nature of international terrorism and
the efforts required to combat it.

Undoubtedly the painful but admirable struggle
carried out by the Government and the people of Spain
against terrorism within their own borders gives them
the greatest legitimacy to provide us with
unquestionable leadership in this sphere. Prime
Minister Aznar was quite right when he asked us today
to remember the deeper meaning of 11 September
2001, because we could not have seen in a more
transparent or brutal fashion the global and worldwide
character of this threat, which has no direct target but
rather crosses though and over borders, bearing its
hateful message against all civilizations and attacking
the very nature of humankind.

We welcome also the fact that Prime Minister
Aznar has practical suggestions for this Organization in
combating terrorism. As has been said earlier today,
coordinated action by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee established by resolution 1373 (2001),
chaired by my dear friend Ambassador Inocencio
Arias, and by the Committee established by resolution
1267 (1999) represents the basis for the success of our
efforts within the United Nations. While those
committees have a legal nature and different
competencies, they must be increasingly linked and
coordinated. Over the past month we have further
enhanced the level of cooperation and coordination
with Ambassador Arias, avoiding duplication in the
activities of those Committees, in order to ensure the
consistency of their joint efforts, thus giving us the
opportunity to work, on a periodic basis, to ensure the
effectiveness and the potential of the United Nations
and the role of the Security Council in this area.

Both Committees must involve the whole United
Nations membership in efforts to block funds used to
carry out or promote terrorist activities, to prevent the
free passage and circulation of terrorists and of those
who protect them, and to block the circulation of
weapons for use by terrorists. We must congratulate
make an effort to States that improve their domestic
legislation by incorporating new laws based on
Security Council resolutions and must provide
technical cooperation to assist those that have
difficulties in carrying out that effort.

The work of both Committees, the active
participation in them by all Security Council members
and the cooperation of all members of the international
community prove the indispensable and irreplaceable
role of the United Nations in the fight against
terrorism. The Organization's authority, its scope, its
legitimacy and, above all, the way in which it can
express its Members' will to cooperate are the best
guarantee of an effective fight against this blight on
humanity.

We know that, in a globalized world, the fate of
each of our countries is that of all peoples. Therefore,
the fight against terrorism is not only a matter for
Governments, but must involve our civil societies. It
must be developed within a framework of legitimacy
and clear respect for human rights and international
law. We therefore thank Prime Minister Aznar for his
presence and his statement today; They provide an
opportunity to reaffirm Chile's firm resolve to
contribute to the efforts of the international community
in a struggle that, as he said, must be relentless.

