Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his very informative
briefing on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I
would also like to welcome Mr. Ivica Daeie, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku, and to thank them for
their statements.

Egypt has been following political developments in
Kosovo closely and urges all the parties concerned to
shoulder their responsibilities, to demonstrate wisdom
and restraint and conduct a constructive and transparent
political dialogue aimed at reducing tensions, mitigate
and resolve the crisis and avoid moves that could lead
to confrontations with the potential to undermine the
stability of the entire region. We warn the various
parties in Kosovo against escalations and ratcheting up
tensions, which could have an impact on the agreements
that have been made with the Republic of Serbia.

Egypt supports every effort aimed at reaching a
solution that responds to all the issues under discussion
between Belgrade and Pristina, through dialogue and
serious negotiations based on good faith and mutual
respect and on the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 1244 (1999), as well
as the agreements concluded between the parties in
April 2013 and August 2015. We emphasize that all the
parties should work to achieve a genuinely constructive
atmosphere in order to restart the political dialogue,
facilitated by the European Union, whose efforts
culminated in the August 2015 agreement. In our View,
the agreement must be implemented if stability is to be
achieved through a plan of action. All the provisions
of the package, with its four agreements, should be
implemented in full, without exceptions, in order to
avoid the possibility that the agreement could become a
focus of discord. Every effort should be made to arrive
at a definitive settlement that can help bring prosperity

to the peoples of the region.

The positive developments discussed in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2016/99) should also
form the foundation for greater progress, particularly
those in the areas of communications, cooperation
between the Chambers of Commerce in Belgrade and
Pristina and the reintegration of former Serbian civil
protection personnel into Kosovo institutions, as well
as the interchanges between the mayors of North
and South Mitrovica. We commend the Government
of the Netherlands for hosting the specialist court
for prosecuting war crimes committed during the
conflict. We hope the court will be able to establish the
principles of the rule of law, of judicial accountability
and, based on that, of reconciliation generally. We wish
it every success.

We also hope to see progress on the voluntary
returns of displaced persons to Kosovo, the protection
of cultural and religious heritage sites, and strengthened
efforts to achieve reconciliation and equality,
non-discrimination among all the parties concerned,
the protection of minority rights and the rule of law,
while dealing with the challenges of migration and the
possible spread of extremism and terrorism.

Lastly, Egypt supports the work of UNMIK and the
Special Representative, as well as of all the regional and
inter-regional organizations, and the cooperation and
coordination between UNMIK, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe aimed at implementing
resolution 1244 (1999).

