Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Sweden for convening this debate. We value this
first opportunity for interaction with Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres, to whom we reiterate Chile's support
as he carries out his duties and whose proposals to
improve performance in terms of peace and security,
including through the establishment of an internal
review group, we are following with interest.

In addition to the traditional threats to international
peace and security, there are new threats that are
not always of a State or military nature. Indeed, an
important part of the Security Council's agenda relates
to conflicts that have arisen internally. For that reason,
one of the axes for action to prevent internal conflicts
that can threaten international peace and security is
the promotion of stable societies, where radicalization,
violence and extremism have no place. Prevention
should be promoted through a multidimensional and
integrated approach that addresses the underlying
causes of such threats, including socioeconomic, gender,
ethnic, tribal, religious or ideological tensions. Such an
approach should serve to reinforce the coherence of
political, security and development concerns, human
rights and the promotion of the rule of law.

When Chile presided over the Council two years
ago, it did so with a focus on conflict prevention, with
an emphasis on preventing countries in post-conflict
situations from relapsing into violence. During the
open debate chaired by President Michelle Bachelet on
19 January 2015 (see S/PV.7361), the point that security
and development are closely interrelated and mutually
reinforcing and that their presence is fundamental to
sustainable peace was underscored. The importance
of inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security was emphasized.

Many speakers have discussed ways to promote such
an approach. In that regard, in addition to reiterating
the importance of improving the Council's working
methods and the synergies and flows of information
between the Council and the rest of the system, we
would like to highlight five measures that we believe
could contribute to improving the functioning of the
Council's peace and security system.

First, we must empower women and increase their
participation in politics, including in peace processes,
and we must continue to examine gender issues in
conflict prevention and peacekeeping. That entails
working for the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and related resolutions, to which the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security,
known as Group 2242, can contribute.

Secondly, we must strengthen the Peacebuilding
Commission, while recognizing its important role
in the peacebuilding architecture as a whole. The
Council should strengthen its interaction with the
Commission, in particular by making greater use
of the Commission's advisory role. For its part, the
Commission should redouble its efforts to promote
greater coherence with national strategies and priorities
in the field of peacebuilding, and should highlight the
importance of its own coordination with regional and
subregional institutions.

Thirdly, we must address and prevent the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, which contributes
to igniting conflicts. The United Nations can help
concerned States, as appropriate and at their request
and with full respect for their sovereignty over their
natural resources, to prevent illegal access to those
natural resources and to help concerned States lay the
framework for the legal exploitation of natural resources
in a way that contributes to their development.

F ourthly, attention must be focused on the protection
of critical infrastructure and the prevention of attacks
on that infrastructure, including hospitals and schools.
That is essential for ensuring the well-being of citizens
and consolidating peace. In that regard, we reiterate our
support for the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration.

Fifthly, and finally, we must implement resolution
2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security, which is the
first resolution to recognize young people as actors in
peace processes and urges Governments to increase
the participation of youth and the representation of
youth in peacekeeping initiatives, bearing in mind that
600 million young people currently live in conflict
zones or fragile States.

