Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): Let me at
the outset welcome the High Representative,
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, to the Council table and thank
him for his important briefing to this open meeting of the
Council, although it could have been in an open debate.

As was emphasized by the Ambassador of
Bangladesh, this is a very important report and contains
elements that are applicable to more than just Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I am aware that the High Representative has
just come from Ottawa, where he had very detailed and
important discussions with our Minister for Foreign
Affairs and our Minister for International Cooperation, as
well as two Canadian parliamentary committees. In view
of yesterday's very heavy Canadian agenda and the
detailed talks that took place in Ottawa, I am not going to
reiterate today to him the Canadian position in detail. I
should simply like to assure him of the full support of
Canada in his efforts to bring about lasting peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I would also like to add that his focus on three
priorities - economic reform, return of refugees and
institutional consolidation, as presented today in his
briefing - seem to Canada to be the proper course of
action. We believe that these are the major challenges
before the international community, and that this is where
our resources must be directed.

Let me conclude my very brief statement by asking
Mr. Petritsch a question. In his briefing he described a
rather paradoxical political situation. On the one hand, the
municipal elections in April showed that the moderate
parties have increased their share of the electorate,
particularly in the Federation, and that the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina seem to be getting away from
ultra-nationalism. On the other hand, however, the
political leaders do not seem to be adopting the more
progressive, future-oriented and flexible approach taken
by the electorate.

I would like to know what the High Representative
and the international community can do to alleviate this
paradoxical situation and take advantage of the positive
trends that are emerging among the electorate, which is
moving away from ethnic issues and is focusing on issues

 

of reconciliation. How can those positive trends be used to
relaunch the political process at the State level?

