The President (interpretation from Spanish): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council to be held this
year, I should like to welcome the new members of the
Council: Botswana, Germany, Honduras, Indonesia and
Italy. We all look forward with confidence to their
participation in the work of the Council, which will be of
invaluable assistance in the discharge of the Council's
enormous responsibilities as it tackles so many challenges.

I should also like to express the Council's gratitude to
the outgoing members for their important contributions to
the Council's work. The representatives of Brazil, Djibouti,
New Zealand, Pakistan and Spain all, in an excellent
manner, contributed their talents to the conduct of the
business of the Council.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
also like to pay a tribute to my predecessor, Ambassador
Manzi Bakuramutsa of Rwanda, for the service he rendered
as President of the Council during the month of
December 1994. I express my deep appreciation to
Ambassador Bakuramutsa for the skilful manner in which
he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina


The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Muhamed Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
took a place at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have received photocopies
of a letter dated 6 January 1995 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1995/8.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/1994/ 1389, report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolution 959 (1994); and S/ 1994/ 1452,
letter dated 27 December 1994 from the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
agreements between the Bosnian parties on a cease-
fire and on a complete cessation of hostilities in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina concluded on
23 December 1994 and 31 December 1994
respectively (S/1995/8). It commends the efforts of
all who worked to achieve them.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
it attaches to immediate and full compliance with the
agreements. It attaches the highest priority at this
juncture to the timely completion of the various
steps envisaged in the agreement on a complete
cessation of hostilities. It looks to the parties and
others concerned to cooperate fully with the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in their
implementation. The Security Council calls upon all
forces to cease fighting around Bihac. It supports
efforts in train to strengthen UNPROFOR, and
encourages Member States to make available the
personnel and equipment needed for UNPROFOR to
supervise and monitor the agreements.
 

"The Security Council will continue its
consideration of all aspects of the crisis in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and of the Secretary-General's report of
1 December 1994 (8/1994/1389).

"The Security Council deems it imperative to
intensify efforts under the auspices of the Contact
Group to achieve an overall settlement on the basis of
the acceptance of the peace plan of the Contact Group
as a starting point. It will give its full support to such
efforts".

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/1.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 12.55 pm.

