Mr. Wali (Nigeria): Mr. President, my delegation
appreciates your initiative to convene this debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, especially
at a time when, in spite of the unwavering efforts of the
international community to douse conflicts in our
society, new cases are rapidly evolving while
expectations of dealing decisively with those already
ongoing are becoming disappointingly wishful. We
also thank Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his comprehensive briefing on this
subject.

We believe that the time has come for the
international community to re-examine when it is its
responsibility to protect civilians, without prejudice to
the sovereignty of Member States. The genocide in
Rwanda, the ethnic cleansing in Bosnia and the crimes
committed against unarmed civilians in areas of
conflict, especially in Africa, serve as a constant
reminder that we have to seek a generally acceptable
understanding when the international community
exercises its responsibility to protect.

We expect that Member States will use this
opportunity to reflect and exchange views on the
precarious situation of, and daunting challenges facing,
unarmed civilians in conflict situations. We
acknowledge the fact that non-combatant civilians are
increasingly the first fatalities of, and bear the burdens
imposed by, armed conflicts, whose causes are usually
not of their own making.

In that regard, not only do untimely deaths result
from deliberate armed attacks by contending parties
seeking to carry out reprisals, but the social, cultural
and economic lives of such non-combatant non-parties
to conflicts - which include the aged, women,
children and youths - are, unfortunately, adversely
affected. Civilians often become pawns in this deadly
game, which neither has rules nor respects the dignity
of persons.

It is inhuman, to state the obvious, that the heavy
burdens which conflicts impose on civilians include
denial of access to medical care. The situation is even
more precarious for people with disabilities, those
afflicted with age-related discomforts and others with
serious diseases, who, along with the healthy, must
endure the burdens associated with refugee status
within and outside their countries.

It is therefore the belief of my delegation that this
open debate will help the international community to
focus attention principally on the urgent task of
protecting and safeguarding civilians wherever
conflicts erupt.

In that regard, Nigeria welcomes the increased
capacity of the African Union to forestall and resolve
armed conflicts and protect civilians in war situations
through its Peace and Security Council. We also
welcome the valuable extension of logistical support
from the United States of America and the European
Union to the African Union Peacekeeping Operations
in the Darfur region of the Sudan.

We appreciate the renewed United Nations-
African Union partnership aimed at identifying specific
cases in which the United Nations could, as a matter of
improving the African capacity for peace operations,
assist the African Union with capacity-building
requirements, including in the area of monitoring the
conduct of parties to conflicts.

Condemnation by States Members of the United
Nations of rape and sexual assault against women, as
well as expressions of outrage by human rights
advocates as a whole directed at the enlistment of child
soldiers into combat, are a veritable and useful means
of protecting civilians in conflict situations.

My delegation believes that the expansion of the
scope and definition of war crimes and crimes against
humanity to include rape, enforced prostitution,
trafficking, enslavement and torture has resulted in an
increase in the number of persons brought before the
International Tribunals for acts committed against
civilians in the course of armed conflicts.

In order to strengthen those laudable initiatives,
in particular those already embarked upon by the
international community aimed at bringing succour to
hapless civilians caught up in the tragic consequences
of events they have hardly provoked or facilitated, my
delegation further wishes to urge those States that have
not done so to adopt, ratify or codify in their national
laws the various conventions and protocols on the law
of armed conflicts and to ensure the implementation of
their provisions. That calls for a more results-oriented
strengthening of legal frameworks and mechanisms for
monitoring and reporting attacks against civilians by
States and non-State actors.

My delegation wishes to re-emphasize that
another way of protecting civilians from the ravages of
armed conflict is through conflict prevention.
Experience has shown that it costs less to prevent
conflicts than to control them. Within the West African
subregion, for instance, in the context of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
Nigeria has been steadily coordinating initiatives with
other member States of the Community in bringing
about the peaceful resolution of conflicts within and
among the member States and other States contiguous
to Nigeria. It makes tremendous positive sense to
prevent the civilian casualties that would result were
the parties to resort to war.

Unfortunately, conflicts are the inevitable
consequence of the diversity of human behaviour. We
should therefore always expect them and continue to
mainstream civilian protection into United Nations
regional peacekeeping operations. More importantly,
we should tackle their root causes of conflicts with a
spirit of openness, mutual compromise and give and
take. By doing so, we can provide rest to the weary,
daylight to the discouraged and sunshine to the sad -
nature's best antidote for trouble.

