Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Francois Lounceny Fall and
Mr. Ahmad Allam-Mi for their excellent briefings and
assures them of C6te d'Ivoire's support.

We welcome the progress made in recent years in
several Central African countries. However, we remain
concerned about the serious multifaceted political
and security challenges, such as armed conflict,
terrorism, poaching, transnational organized crime and
maritime piracy.

In the Central African Republic, the renewed
violence, including clashes between ethnic and religious
communities and repeated attacks against the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, continues to
be a source of concern. The absence of State authority
over a large swath of national territory, mercenary
activities and illicit trafficking in natural resources and
weapons are all challenges that have a negative impact
on the security of the country and the entire region.
The situation demands a coordinated response by the
international community to address these challenges.

My delegation supports the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, conducted under the auspices of the African
Union, whose effective implementation of the road map
should enable significant progress to be made towards
achieving a lasting solution to the crisis in that country.
We also welcome the efforts undertaken by the President
of the Central African Republic, Mr. Touadera, to
promote constructive dialogue and consultation with
a view to ensuring inclusive national reconciliation,
which is essential to achieving lasting peace.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, my
delegation calls for the effective implementation of
the 31 December agreement in order to ensure the
holding of elections on 23 December. We welcome the
progress that has been accomplished in that area. We
further encourage the Congolese Government to do
more to address the remaining challenges, in particular
security issues, and to take the steps necessary to ease
the sociopolitical environment as a precondition for
peaceful elections.

With regard to the situation in Burundi, Cote
d'Ivoire takes note of the results of the referendum on
the constitutional review, held on 17 May. We call on all
parties to resume inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue,
under the auspices of the East African Community
and within the framework of the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, with a view to
definitively overcoming the crisis.

The security situation in the Lake Chad basin is also
a source of concern for my delegation in the light of the
ongoing threat posed by Boko Haram, whose criminal
activities extend to Cameroon, Chad and the Niger. My
country welcomes the upcoming implementation of the
stabilization strategy for the Lake Chad region, which
seeks to identify, prosecute, rehabilitate and reintegrate
persons associated with Boko Haram and the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant, in accordance with
resolution 2349 (2017). My delegation also supports
the strengthening of support for the Multinational Joint
Task Force against Boko Haram, in close collaboration
with the African Union and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, as recommended by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2018/521).

Cote d'Ivoire is also concerned about the actions
of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), which remains
a threat to the safety of civilians, despite the fact that
its operational capabilities have been reduced. Indeed,
the movement regularly carries out kidnappings,
looting, extrajudicial executions and sexual assaults,
in particular in the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My delegation
welcomes the extension of the mandate of the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the LRA
by the African Union until 22 August. We invite the
international community to support the military
component of the Regional Cooperation Initiative,
which remains a relevant mechanism for cooperation
and coordination in the fight against the LRA.

The difficulties I have just noted show the need for
the establishment of a regional cooperation strategy
in order to provide an appropriate response to the
challenges undermining Central Africa. In that regard,
my country supports the efforts of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) to
promote peace and security, and welcomes the recent
adoption by the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa (COPAX) of the strategy to prevent
and combat terrorism in the region, in accordance
with the recommendation of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa. Cote d'Ivoire also encourages the
implementation of the subregional strategy to combat
mercenary activities and transnational organized crime
in Central Africa, as well as the adoption of subregional
regulations on pastoralism, as decided by COPAX.

My delegation welcomes the good cooperation that
exists between the subregional organizations ECCAS
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), within the framework of shared experiences
and mutual support in order to face the challenge of
fighting instability. It attaches particular importance to
the joint ECCAS-ECOWAS summit on peace, security,
radicalization and violent extremism, to be held in
July. We hope that the conclusions of the summit will
foster interregional synergies in addressing challenges
related to conflict prevention and peacebuilding, while
strengthening the capacities of subregional institutions.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2018/521)
provides us with useful insight into the excellent
preventive diplomacy tool of UNOCA. Its activities over
the past three years have led to considerable progress
in the areas of security, peace and stability in Central
Africa, including crisis prevention and mitigation,
the promotion of dialogue and the implementation of
inclusive political reforms, particularly in Chad, Gabon
and Sao Tome and Principe.

Faced with the challenges of consolidating peace
and reviving sustainable development policies in
Central Africa, UNOCA plays a vital role in supporting
the efforts of the States and peoples of the subregion
in their quest for peace, stability and development,
especially through partnership strategies with other
institutions, with a view to achieving unity of action and
pooling working resources. In that context, we should
encourage concrete action, such as the cooperation
framework between ECCAS and UNOCA, signed on
14 June 2016 in New York. Furthermore, my delegation
welcomes the excellent collaboration between UNOCA
and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel in harmonizing the United Nations approach to
peace and security in their respective subregions.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire supports the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa. Its mission of good offices and
preventive diplomacy remains relevant to the quest for
peace, stability and socioeconomic development in the
Central African States.

