Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
afforded us to take the floor.

(spoke in English)

Canada supports the right of Israel, like any other
country, to defend itself against terror attacks. We stand
unequivocally with Israel in its efforts to protect the
lives of its citizens, which are once again under direct
threat.

The indiscriminate rocket attacks from Gaza
on Israel are terrorist acts, for which there can be
no justification. The Council must condemn these
reprehensible acts by Hamas and call for the restoration
of calm and an end to the current hostilities. This is
not a conflict between the Palestinian Authority or the
Palestinian people and the State ofIsrael. It is a conflict
between a terrorist organization and the Jewish State.

(spoke in French)

There is no moral equivalence between Hamas,
a terrorist organization with a blatant disregard for
human life, and the liberal democratic State of Israel,
which is fulfilling its obligation to defend its people.
Is there any Government represented in this Chamber
that would not defend itself vigorously if hundreds of
rockets were raining down on its people day after day?

The Israel Defense Forces have continued to
demonstrate a commitment to minimizing civilian
casualties in response to the relentless rocket attacks.
Hamas has sought to deliberately put civilians, from
both sides, in mortal danger. We mourn the resulting
deaths and deplore the suffering.

(spoke in English)

In early June, President Abbas announced a new
Government that would reassert his authority over
Gaza, until then firmly under the boot of Hamas. If
there is something positive that might be derived from
this tragedy, it should be the opportunity that it creates
for President Abbas to take on three big challenges.

The first challenge is to complete the disarmament
of Hamas and other Palestinian terrorist groups operating
in Gaza, including the Palestinian Islamic Jihad. This
means that he must follow through on his commitment to
demilitarization and the removal of existing stockpiles
of thousands and thousands of largely Iranian-supplied
missiles nestled and shielded amid the homes, grocery
stores and schools of Palestinians. It means that Hamas
fighters put down their arms and embrace the peace
process.

Secondly, there must be a complete cessation of the
production and smuggling of weapons and materials
that enable terrorist groups to both acquire and make
rockets.

Thirdly, the Palestinian Authority's security
apparatus must assume immediate and total control
of Gaza and the Rafah border crossing. There is no
place for militias, private armies or alternative security
forces. The principle of "one authority, one gun" must
be enforced, and security coordination between the
Palestinians and the Israelis should continue.

(spoke in French)

Canada supports the Secretary-General's efforts to
de-escalate the situation as well as the efforts of the
Governments of Egypt and the United States to attempt
to broker a ceasefire. Canada commends Israel for its
unconditional acceptance of the Egyptian ceasefire
proposal, which was rejected by Hamas.

(spoke in English)

Canada expresses profound concern regarding the
reports that rockets found in a Gaza school run by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East were returned to Hamas.
Canada unequivocally calls on the United Nations to
launch an immediate independent investigation to

determine the facts surrounding the report. Canada also
calls on the United Nations to ensure that no rockets are
returned to Hamas in any way, shape or form.

Canada calls on Hamas and other terrorist groups
to end the violence and suffering. It is in Hamas's
power to end this conflict, and we call on it to do so
immediately.

