Mrs. Lalic Smajevic (Serbia): First of all, I would
like to thank the presidency of the Republic of Korea for
convening this important open debate on the occasion
of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1540 (2004).

My country has aligned itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union; nonetheless,
I would like to make a few additional remarks.

Serbia shares the conviction that the risks from
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery, including the growing danger
that non-State actors, especially terrorist groups and
individuals, might acquire such weapons, present the
greatest challenge to international peace and security
today. Resolution 1540 (2004) continues to be one of
the most important international documents related
to combating the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery. The fact that it
presents some 200 new obligations and recommendations
to Member States is telling evidence of its relevance
and importance, as well as of the need to take concrete
and effective measures for its implementation. Since
its adoption, in 2004, a very small number of countries
have adopted their own national action plans, which
proves that we still face considerable difficulties and
challenges in the implementation of the resolution.

My country continues to attach great importance
to the fulfilment of its obligations under resolution
1540 (2004) and has pursued numerous activities
with the aim of improving its legislation, standards
and practices in that regard. In April 2012, the
Government of Serbia adopted a national action plan
for the implementation of the resolution covering the
period 2012 to 2016, becoming the first country in the
wider region to do so. The document was drafted in
cooperation with the experts of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). Representatives of all relevant ministries and
Government agencies took part in its preparation. Our
experience throughout the process was very positive.

On the basis of our national action plan, also in
2012, the Government of Serbia decided to set up a
working group to oversee the plan's implementation
and appointed its members and chair. The working
group has completed the first stage of its tasks related
to the preparation, adoption and initial work on the
implementation of the provisions of the plan.

Notwithstanding the relatively short period of time
that Serbia has had at its disposal for the establishment
of implementation instruments, it has achieved several
significant results. On 30 April 2013, my country
regulated its status within the Nuclear Suppliers
Group, thereby becoming the forty-ninth member of
that prestigious international control regime. Also
in 2013, we adopted a new law on the export control
of dual-use goods and completed the drafting of two
new laws, on the export control of arms and military
equipment and on the implementation of international
restrictive measures. In addition, significant progress
has been made in the preparations for ratification of
the Additional Protocol and the amendments to the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material. They are expected to be ratified soon.
Furthermore, my country has completed its work on the
elaboration of the matrix to resolution 1540 (2004), and
will presently deliver it to the 1540 Committee. Finally,
Serbia took an active part in the latest OSCE meeting
held in Vienna, on 10 April 2013, which was organized
in close cooperation with the 1540 Committee. At the
meeting, we presented our experience, as well as the
lessons learned in the process of the adoption of the
national action plan and the activities embarked upon
in the process of its implementation.

The regional approach is another important
contributive factor in the coordination and
harmonization of these activities. From 9 to 10 May
2013, Serbia hosted the first regional workshop on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). It was the
first such event in that part of Europe. The workshop
adopted informal recommendations, with a focus on
topics considered to be the priorities for the countries
of the region.

In conclusion, let me assure you, Madam President,
that my country will continue to closely cooperate
with the 1540 Committee and to further improve its
administrative and regulatory frameworks for the
comprehensive and effective implementation of the
resolution and the relevant physical and technical
safeguard standards. I would also like to point out that,
based on its own experience, Serbia believes that all
countries should make every effort to adopt their own
national action plans. Encouraging them to do so is one
of our priorities. For its part, Serbia is willing to share
the lessons it has learned and the experience gained in
that regard.

