Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to welcome Charles Nqakula,
Minister of Safety and Security of South Africa. We
thank him for his briefing on the peace talks in
Burundi, where South Africa is playing a very
important role as Facilitator.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi (BINUB), which is monitoring the
situation there.

The time has come to end the 14-year civil war in
Burundi. Throughout that time, the United Nations has
played an important role in keeping peace and stability
in that country and in preventing the conflict from
spreading to the broader Great Lakes region of Africa.
We should therefore support the role played by BINUB
and the peacekeeping mission. We also commend the
role being played by the Tripartite Commission -
composed of Tanzania, Uganda and South Africa -
which is mediating between the Government and the
Palipehutu-Forces nationales de liberation. South
Africa is acting as Facilitator to those efforts.

Internal stability can be established in Burundi
only through reconciliation between the Government
and all the opposition parties. It is encouraging to note
the establishment in the middle of this month of the
current Government and its all-inclusive character.
That will help the Government to extend its authority
throughout the country and to ensure the precedence of
its sovereignty, in accordance with international law.
National dialogue cannot be understood to infringe on
that principle; otherwise, it will send the wrong
message to saboteurs and opposition factions that
violence is acceptable, which in turn will encourage
them to prevaricate, procrastinate and flout the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement.

Here, we would like to ask the Minister about the
methods used in facilitating dialogue between the
parties in Burundi while bolstering the Government's
authority above all. That is particularly important now
that we have heard that the rebels may have received
funds that could enable them to take up arms against
the Government. The Government needs to comply
with international law, and specifically to respect the
rights of women and children and human rights in
general. The security sector must also be reformed in
the framework of private ownership in the country.

Burundi's needs must be addressed if it is to
rebuild itself. To that end, Burundi will require
financial assistance from the international community
and from donors, particularly following the conclusion
of their most recent meeting, so that its people will not
succumb to despair and frustration. The Bretton Woods
institutions need clearly to understand the difficult
economic situation in that country. The Peacebuilding
Commission had set aside $35 million to meet
Burundi's needs in its programmed budget. We stress
that those funds must be made available to meet the
basic needs of the people of Burundi - again, in the
context of respect for private ownership in the country.

Burundi has consented to the cooperation
agreement reached in Nairobi in December 2006
among countries of the Great Lakes region, which will
have an important role in the post-conflict period.

In conclusion, we endorse the Secretariat's
recommendation to extend the mandate of BINUB so
that the peace process may be brought to completion.

