Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain
would like to express appreciation and gratitude to
Mr. Holkeri for his comprehensive briefing to the
Security Council. Spain fully endorses the statement to
be made later by the Permanent Representative of Italy
on behalf of the European Union.

We believe that the priorities established by the
Secretary-General for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
reaffirmed with the appointment of the Special
Representative remain fully in force. The restoration of
the rule of law, the improvement of the security
situation, respect for minorities - terrorist acts against
minorities being particularly reprehensible - and
economic development are all objectives that must
remain on the agenda, since the success of the Mission
will depend upon their fulfilment.

We believe that three fundamental elements must
be taken into account if those objectives are to be
achieved.

First, the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government and UNMIK must work together with a
view to attaining those goals. In this regard, we should
reiterate to the Albanian side that it cannot be an
interlocutor at the negotiating table and an opponent on
the ground - giving rise to suspicions of corruption on
the part of UNMIK and issuing warnings to the Special
Representative about the policies that he should pursue.

Secondly, Spain fully supports the "standards
before status" policy. The establishment of objective
benchmarks is essential, and their fulfilment will be
required if that policy is to become fully operational
through the work plan. Transfers must be carried out in
an orderly manner in all areas, not only in relation to
issues of internal justice, but also as regards
privatization and the management of financial and
customs issues.

Thirdly, we believe that dialogue must be
maintained between Pristina and Belgrade, and both
sides need to redouble their efforts to that end. The
absence of key interlocutors in the process is highly
regrettable, but we must not forget that it is the basic
principle of all negotiations that preconditions not be
established that are unacceptable to the other side. For
that reason, we call for technical working groups to be
set up without delay so that the population can see
tangible results on the ground as soon as possible.

Finally, I would like to ask Mr. Holkeri about the
parallel institutions and the return of refugees. We
would be grateful if he would tell us why the parallel
institutions remain in place and whether measures have
been taken for their eradication. Secondly, I would like
to ask the Special Representative to explain why it is
that the rate of return of refugees is still so low and
what impact the local authorities and the security
situation have in this respect.

In conclusion, I would like once again to thank
Mr. Holkeri for his very commendable work.

