Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened today's important debate.

Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union, and
I would like to make the following comments in its
national capacity.
Trafficking in human beings attacks the very
core of the societies it affects. It constitutes a serious
violation of human rights; it undermines the rule of
law; it denies the very principle of human dignity.
Aggravating circumstances and situations of conflict or
humanitarian crisis - due to their inherent instability
and precariousness - are breeding grounds for this
most abject trade, the effects of which are devastating.
Belgium will therefore continue to make a commitment
to combat this phenomenon.

At the international level, my country will continue
to insist on the importance and the coherence and
continuity of action of the multilateral system and
Member States in the face of this scourge. Strong
action is needed at all levels, from the prevention of
the phenomenon to the effective identification and
interception of existing networks and the prosecution of
individuals and organizations guilty of this crime. My
country's participation in international initiatives like
the Alliance 8.7 - the Global Alliance to Eradicate
Forced Labour, Modern Slavery, Human Trafficking
and Child Labour - illustrates our commitment to
this issue.

We join calls for increased stakeholder awareness.
Trafficking should not be fought only in the countries
of destination, but at every possible stage of the
ordeal of victims, whether in the country of origin
or in transit countries. That consciousness-raising
requires the training of the various actors involved
in the phenomenon. I am thinking in particular of
the international and national personnel deployed in
the field of conflicts and in humanitarian crises or
their surroundings. We must also ensure the training
and awareness of local authorities. We would support
any United Nations initiative to ensure the structural
mainstreaming of measures to deal withtrafficking in
persons within mission mandates.

In our view, it is essential to integrate actions to
combat human trafficking in an active and systematic
way in our response to emergent or protracted
humanitarian situations. Belgium has, in the past,
organized training for its military personnel deployed
in humanitarian contexts and is planning further
training in the future.

Whether in times ofpeace, conflict or humanitarian
crisis, different agencies and institutions have valuable
expertise to share. The scale of the phenomenon of
human trafficking makes it necessary for us to make
every effort to ensure the unreserved collaboration and
coordination between agencies and organizations, in
respect for the skills and expertise ofeach ,especially by
making greater use of mechanism of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons.

Many studies confirm the nexus between terrorist
organizations and trafficking networks. In the face of the
military defeat of Da'esh, we must double our vigilance
to dismantle the networks that continue to fund that
organization and others like it. We must also adapt our
approach to new developments, particularly the plight
of minors, children and families of combatants, who are
all particularly vulnerable to human trafficking.

As a destination country, Belgium assumes its
responsibility to fight impunity in the area of human
trafficking. Our experience has shown us that it is
valuable to have specialized magistrates designated to
handle cases involving the investigation and prosecution
of human trafficking. We note that the appointment
of specific magistrates for human trafficking in each
judicial district has proved particularly effective and
has resulted in a significant number of convictions for
both sexual and economic exploitation. We would be
delighted to share our experience with other countries
that so desire.

I would like to end my statement by reaffirming our
support for the victim-centred approach. The reception
and protection of victims of human trafficking is an
essential element of the debate. I would therefore like
to stress the importance of ensuring that the principle
of non-punishment of victims of trafficking is properly
applied. In our view, punishing victims is a violation
of human rights and helps traffickers who can in turn
bring more pressure to bear on the victim. The issuing
of residence permits to enable victims to recover and to
take part in the legal proceedings against their abusers
is, in that regard, a key element. Here too we would also
be happy to share our experience on that matter.

