Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
welcome the new Permanent Representative of Yemen
to the Security Council and to wish him success in
his new function. We thank Martin Griffiths and
Mark Lowcock for their informative briefings. They
presented us with a message of hope but also one of
continued extreme human suffering on the ground.
That human suffering should strengthen our resolve to
take action in the Council.
The agreement between the parties, particularly
on a cessation of hostilities across Al-Hudaydah
governorate, is an important spark of hope for the
people of Yemen. Yet the threat of famine in Yemen
remains unchanged, as Mr. Lowcock just mentioned.
That means that the need for urgent action from all of
us persists in order not only to support what has been
achieved in Sweden but also to address urgent concerns
on the ground. In that context, I will focus on three
issues: first, the consultations between the parties;
secondly, the threat of famine; and, thirdly, the urgent
need for the Council to follow up.

On my first point, we welcome the constructive
participation of the parties involved in the consultations
in Sweden. Like other speakers, we commend the
efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths in bringing
that about, as well as the unwavering support and
involvement of the Secretary-General. We thank
our Swedish colleagues for successfully hosting and
facilitating those consultations, as well as the many
other countries that contributed to making those talks
happen, particularly Yemen.

The cessation of hostilities throughout
Al-Hudaydah governorate is a much-needed concrete
result. Once implemented, that will greatly benefit
the ongoing humanitarian efforts. We also welcome
the progress regarding the exchange of prisoners and
the humanitarian corridors into Taiz. However, the
lack of women in the delegations in Sweden is deeply
regrettable, particularly after the clear calls made by
the international community to address that ahead of
the consultations.

The parties now need to capitalize on what they
have achieved, put their words into action and create a
conducive environment for talks to resume in January.
More work needs to be done with regard to the reopening
of Sana'a airport, measures to address the economy and,
above all else, a framework for a sustainable, peaceful
political solution with the involvement of women.

That brings me to my second point - the persistent
threat of famine in Yemen. Regardless of the positive
developments in Sweden, the humanitarian crisis
remains as alarming as it was two weeks ago. The five
asks of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) to the parties and the international
community remain as pertinent as ever. Already, tens of
thousands of innocent Yemenis have died of completely
avoidable causes, and those staggering numbers will
increase exponentially if the cessation of hostilities in
Al-Hudaydah does not hold. We have reached a point
at which any delay is inexcusable. We need concrete
follow-up by the international community.

First of all, we support the further involvement of
the United Nations system in the implementation of
the agreements. We commend the tasking of Patrick
Cammaert with monitoring the implementation of the
agreement, as Mr. Martin Griffiths just mentioned, and
we express our full confidence in him. He is the right
person for the job.

The Security Council should also take action. We
therefore welcome and strongly support the United
Kingdom's initiative to back up what has been achieved
in Sweden with a draft resolution, which should back
up the agreement on a cessation of hostilities across
Al-Hudaydah governorate, put humanitarian access
front and centre and include OCHA's five asks. Let us
adopt a draft resolution as soon as possible next week.
As Mark Lowcock said, humanitarian funding is crucial,
so we thank Switzerland and Sweden for organizing a
pledging conference to be held in February 2019.

In conclusion, despite those positive developments,
we remain extremely concerned about the millions
of Yemeni people on the brink of starvation. It is the
responsibility of the Council to support the Special
Envoy's efforts, as well as to urgently address
the humanitarian crisis. The Council has a huge
responsibility to help end the suffering of the people
of Yemen as soon as possible. Let me end my statement
by quoting Mark Lowcock: "This war has to stop now".

