Mr. Oshima (Japan): I too thank Assistant
Secretary-General Kalomoh for his comprehensive
briefing on the latest developments in the Middle East
situation.

Peace and the peace process in the Middle East
now face a new and truly challenging phase with the
latest political developments in both Palestine and
Israel. In this new situation, the possibilities for
promoting peace are just as great if political wisdom,
courage and restraint prevail, as is the danger for more
peril and troubles if the contrary prevails. In this
delicate situation in which the region now finds itself,
the international community must do all it can to help
promote the chances of better understanding, of
cooperation and of peace.
Following the Palestinian Legislative Council
election in January, the Japanese Government
expressed its hope and expectations that Hamas, having
been elected through the democratic process to the
position of the leading party, would be ready to take
the commensurate governing responsibility, and that it
would adopt a policy of peace and peaceful coexistence
and mutual prosperity with Israel. With the swearing-in
of the new Government of the Palestinian Authority,
led by Hamas, Japan strongly expects that the new
Government will unequivocally repudiate violence and
make efforts to advance the peace process in
accordance with the existing agreements, including the
road map.

On the Israeli side, Japan expects that its new
Government, which will be formed following the
Knesset elections held on 28 March, will continue its
efforts to realize peace with the Palestinians by placing
the advancement of harmony and peace as a top
priority in its foreign policy agenda.

Japan strongly hopes that the new Governments
of the Palestinian Authority and Israel will engage in
direct discussion at the highest levels, under the
concept of dialogue and cooperation, as early as
possible in order to make renewed progress towards
peace. In this regard, we take note of the remarks by
acting Prime Minister Olmert, calling upon President
Abbas to resume the negotiations for peace. We hope
that President Abbas, for his part, will persevere in his
own efforts in the peace process. We continue to
extend our full support to him in that regard.

It is important for the international community to
continue to send a positive and strong message to the
new Government of the Palestinian Authority, led by
Hamas, so that it will be encouraged to get on to the
peace process, out of its own conviction and on its own
initiative. At the same time, the international
community should continue to encourage Israel to
make greater efforts to realize peace through dialogue
with the Palestinian side.

We also believe it is necessary for the
international community to focus its attention on
elaborating effective and appropriate measures to
prevent any further deterioration in the living
conditions of Palestinians.

On the occasion of the visit of President Abbas to
Japan in May 2005, our Prime Minister announced his
intention to provide approximately $100 million for the
immediate future to meet the needs of the Palestinian
population. Up to this point, more than 70 per cent of
that pledge has already been implemented. Most
recently, out of concern over the deterioration of the
living conditions of the Palestinian people and to help
meet the humanitarian needs of affected people, Japan
decided on 17 March to extend additional food aid in
the amount of approximately $6 million for Palestinian
refugees, through the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and
for Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
who are facing food shortages, through the World Food
Programme. We hope that the humanitarian aid from us
and from others will help to alleviate the hardships
being experienced by the Palestinian people and will
thereby contribute to advancing the peace process.

With regard to the issue of Palestinian assistance
in general, Japan, as a long-standing donor, will
carefully monitor the situation and formulate an
appropriate response, taking into consideration the
developments under the new Government of the
Palestinian Authority and the position it takes on issues
such as the advancement of the peace process, the
renunciation of violence and terrorism and the policy
towards its relationship with Israel.

In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm our
commitment to continuing to play an active role in the
efforts to promote peace in the Middle East.

