The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

We thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou
Keita and the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Mauro Vieira, for
the information they shared.

We welcome the positive dynamic of developments
in Guinea-Bissau. We are pleased to see that, early this
year, the authorities and main political forces of the
country were able to overcome their differences and
successfully hold parliamentary elections in March.
We also note the role played by the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau in
preparing for the elections.

It is no secret that the post-election period, when the
new Parliament and Government were being formed,
was marked by several challenges. The portfolio
distribution process took a long time. However, we
believe that there is nothing surprising or extraordinary
about that, as it is part of the normal democratic process
we have seen in many other countries. Furthermore, all
those problems have now been resolved.
As has been noted today, the country is approaching
a new important milestone. Presidential elections are
scheduled to take place on 24 November. As we see it, if
the elections are successful, it could be a turning point
in the history of modern Guinea-Bissau. The country
will finally turn the page of lasting political turbulence
and create the conditions for making steady progress
towards socioeconomic development. At this pivotal
moment, we call on all public and political forces to
behave responsibly, uphold national interests and seek
to settle their disputes as soon as possible.

We are convinced that, at some stage, the issue of
lifting Guinea-Bissau sanctions should come up for
discussion in the Security Council, as they have been
obsolete for some time now. The current situation bears
no resemblance to the events of 2012. We respect the
decision of the military to stay out of politics.

We continue to believe that the issue of restructuring
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau should be addressed in as judicious a
manner as possible. We support the gradual drawdown
of its work, but not before the end of 2020, in line
with resolution 2458 (2019). By that time, the United
Nations country team will have all the tools it needs
not only to promote development in Guinea-Bissau,
but also to help the country address challenges, such
as drug trafficking, corruption and ensuring the proper
functioning of State institutions.

In conclusion, let me welcome the newly appointed
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Guinea-Bissau, Ms. Sori-Coulibaly, and assure her that
we stand ready to work constructively with the entire
United Nations team to resolve the outstanding issues
in this West African State.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Guinea-
Bissau.

