Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me at the outset to thank you, Sir, and
the other delegations for the warm words addressed to
Ambassador Lavrov in connection with the Russian
presidency of the Security Council last month and to
wish you, Sir, and the entire Spanish delegation success
in guiding the Council's work in July.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
head of the Mission, Mr. Steiner, for his substantive
briefing on the situation in the region. Its assessments
largely correspond to our view of the processes under
way in the region, which we stated in considerable
detail during the comprehensive consideration of the
situation in Kosovo at the Security Council meeting on
10 June.

We noted at that time, and are ready to reaffirm
today, that, in the four years since the adoption of
resolution 1244 (1999), enormous efforts and
considerable progress have been made towards a
settlement. We note the significant contribution to this
process of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Steiner.

At the same time, we fully share the concern -
expressed in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2003/675) and in Mr. Steiner's briefing - that,
despite the progress made in ensuring substantive
autonomy and self-government for Kosovo, as
provided for by Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), many important issues remain unresolved.
Those include serious problems related to ensuring
adequate representation for minorities - first and
foremost the Serb minority - in the structures of the
region's Provisional Institutions of Self-Government.

Despite a general decline in the crime rate,
serious incidents continue to take place that involve the
use of violence, including ethnically motivated
incidents. There has still been a failure to identify, and
hence bring to justice, the individuals responsible for
the brutal 4 June murder of a Serb family in Obilic. It
should be noted that even the limited progress achieved
with regard to the situation of minorities and to support
for the process of returning non-Albanian refugees to
the region - which was noted in the report and in
Mr. Steiner's briefing - was achieved largely as a
result of the international community's unceasing
pressure on the regional Institutions of Self-
Government.

The Albanian political leaders have yet to
demonstrate the initiative that all of us have every right
to expect from them. Indeed, we continue to see that,
despite a declared commitment to multi-ethnicity, the
regional Institutions of Self-Government in fact very
often ignore the interests of minorities. Like other
Security Council members, we are convinced that,
without a radical improvement in the situation
involving these issues, the dream of building a multi-
ethnic society in Kosovo will continue to be deferred,
giving rise to unfounded aspirations on the part of the
extremist forces remaining in the region and creating
fertile ground for continued violence.

We are grateful to Mr. Steiner for his assessment
of the Russian military contingent's activities among
the forces in Kosovo. At the same time, we must
regretfully take note of the destructive role of
individual Kosovo mass media outlets in the
establishment in the region of an atmosphere of
intolerance and slanderous hostility towards, inter alia,
those who in fact have promoted the restoration of
normal life in the region. A number of Albanian-
language newspapers recently attempted to unleash an
anti-Russian campaign coinciding with the withdrawal
of our military contingent from Kosovo's territory.

In that connection, we support the establishment
in the region of the independent Temporary Media
Commission to regulate mass media activities. Indeed,
we believe that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General could play an active role in that
sphere. Here, of course, we are not speaking of
censorship, but only of an ability to affect the political
processes in society in order to ensure the fuller
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and the
establishment of favourable conditions for achieving
the objectives of the Kosovo settlement.

We call on UNMIK to take a more active and
consistent stand in order to counteract the growth of
radical tendencies in the region and to assert the rule of
law there. Because of a lack of progress in those areas,
there have also been serious delays in establishing a
substantive dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.

In addition, we take note of a positive
achievement: the recently reported readiness of the
Serb and Kosovo representatives to begin a dialogue on
specific practical issues. We reaffirm our support for
the "standards before status" concept, which
Mr. Steiner actively supports. The process of
transferring non-reserved competencies to the region's
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government must be
carried out in strict compliance with resolution 1244
(1999), and its pace must be dictated by the
effectiveness of the work of the Provisional Institutions
in the areas in which they have already received the
competencies they need. Here, we believe that UNMIK
must continue to take a consistent stand, excluding
attempts by Albanian extremists to use the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government to achieve their own
political goals and to transform Kosovo into an
independent quasi-State entity.

In conclusion, Mr. President, I should like to
associate myself with the gratitude expressed in the
report of the Secretary-General, and in your own
assessment at the beginning of today's meeting, and to
express our gratitude to Mr. Steiner for his contribution
to United Nations efforts aimed at a settlement of the
situation in Kosovo.

