Mr. Prosor (Israel): At the outset, allow me
to express my appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate as testimony to the
importance that the Republic of Korea places on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, a subject of
great significance to the international community.

Eight months have passed since our most recent
debate in this Chamber on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (see S/PV.6790). Since then, the death
toll in Syria has quadrupled, from 14,000 in June to
over 60,000 now. The civilians caught as targets of the
Al-Assad regime continue to cry out for protection.
Every one ofthose cries that goes unanswered highlights
our failures.

Today, my thoughts are with the students of Aleppo
University, who were indiscriminately slaughtered by
the Syrian military last month because of the school's
reputation as the university of the revolution. They are
with Sayyad Ali, who fled Syria in December and now
lives with his family in a tent in an abandoned part
of northern Lebanon. He is just one of over 800,000
Syrians who have fled the Al-Assad regime since 2011.
Across the Middle East, they are being forced to bear
the harsh storms of winter with the most meagre of
shelter and provisions. For those refugees, the only thing
more painful than the cold weather they experience is
the cold shoulder they receive from the international
community.

The clock is ticking. Every day that passes before
the Council takes firm and decisive action in Syria
is another day during which countless civilians lose
their lives and countless more lose hope. Those of us
sitting here today must begin speaking loudly, clearly
and unequivocally against the horrors of the Al-Assad
Government. The ophthalmologist from Damascus
cannot continue to blind us to his crimes.

Al-Assad is not alone. On his advisory board sits
Hizbullah chief Hassan Nasrallah, who gives him
guidance on how to slaughter civilians more effectively.
With the blessings of Iran, its patron, Hizbullah has
provided arms, training and logistical support for tens
of thousands of Al-Assad's men. It has assisted the
Syrian military in cracking down on dissidents so that
Al-Assad can cling to power.

Iran's arm extends from Syria into Lebanon, where
it has helped Hizbullah amass 50,000 missiles - more
than many NATO members possess - and transform
the Lebanese State into an outpost for terror. Hizbullah

intentionally places its arms in civilian areas, using
the entire population of Lebanon as a human shield. Its
idea of investing in the next generation is to stockpile
its weaponry in the immediate vicinity of schools and
playgrounds.

Hizbullah's reign of terror extends far beyond the
Middle East. Its fingerprints have been identified on
attacks on all five continents, from Kenya to Argentina
to Thailand. Last week, Bulgarian authorities also
identified Hizbullah as the culprit behind the July bus
bombing in Burgas, Bulgaria, that killed five Israelis
and one Bulgarian citizen. That was the deadliest attack
on European soil since 2005.

Despite such activities, however, Hizbullah remains
conspicuously absent from the European Union (EU)
list of recognized terrorist organizations. In fact, many
States, including some represented in this Chamber,
continue to classify Hizbullah as a charity. Not since
Napoleon invaded Russia has the European continent
seen such an astonishing lack of foresight. Let us make
no mistake - Hizbullah's sole purpose, its raison d'etre,
is to commit terrorist acts, both inside and outside the
Middle East. Calling Hizbullah a charity is like calling
Al-Qaida an urban planning organization because ofits
desire to level tall buildings.

Some European lawmakers continue to bend
over backwards attempting to differentiate between
Hizbullah's military and political wings. That is an
exercise in futility. The only difference between those
two wings is that the political wing negotiates the sum
of drug cartel money that the military wing later uses
to purchase weaponry. It does not take a Nobel Peace
Prize laureate to realize that we are not exactly dealing
with a selfless humanitarian organization here.

One does not need the fortitude ofWilliam Wallace,
of Braveheart fame, to understand that one should
do the right thing here. The EU must find the moral
and political courage to place Hizbullah on its list of
terrorist organizations. It must send a clear message
that Hizbullah can no longer target its civilians with
impunity. The voices of the victims of Hizbullah terror
call on us to take collective action and work together to
bankrupt the world's most dangerous charity.

We have held many debates in these halls on the
protection of civilians. It is now our responsibility to
transform those words into direct and concrete action.
The numbers ofcivilian casualties across the globe grow
on a daily basis. We cannot allow our indifference to
those numbers to grow and grow alongside them. Today,
I urge the Council to heed the simple yet immortal
words of Edmund Burke: "The only thing necessary for
evil to triumph is for good men to do nothing."
