Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We would like to express our strong
denunciation of Mr. Nikolay Mladenov's insistence on
ignoring the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan
and refusing to explain the United Nations position
on the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan in
accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolution 497 (1981). That is not to mention
his disregard 4 for perhaps the tenth time 4 of
illegal Israeli practices that continue in the occupied
Golan and the ongoing Israeli violations of the 1974
Disengagement Agreement by virtue of its cooperation
as an occupying Power with the armed terrorist groups
that have occupied positions of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force on the separation line.
That is all in spite of the fact that those issues lie at the
heart of this item and represent an important parcel of
Mr. Mladenov's mandate as Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process.

Our meeting today coincides with the passage
of almost 50 years of the Israeli occupation of Arab
territories and the adoption of resolution 242 (1967), and
of 70 years since the adoption of resolution 181 (II). In
spite of the adoption by the United Nations of hundreds
of resolutions over those long decades demanding
that Israel end its occupation of Arab territories and
end its crimes, successive Israeli Governments have
rejected their implementation and have systematically
committed documented crimes against international
humanitarian law and human rights law that are
tantamount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
It has been around half a century of settlement
campaigns, the expulsion of Palestinian inhabitants
from their homes, the destruction of those homes, the
confiscation oflands and properties - more than halfa
century of total Israeli disregard of the United Nations
resolutions on ending the Israeli occupation.

Today the Council has heard the statement of the
representative of Israel indicating that all of the United
Nations resolutions will not help the Palestinians in the
least. For more than half a century, certain influential
members of the Council have blindly supported the
continued Israeli policy of occupying Arab territories
by using the privilege of veto more than 44 times
since the inception of the United Nations against draft
resolutions on the Arab-Israeli conflict. I say the
"privilege" of veto, not the "right" to veto, because I
consider it a privilege, as stipulated in the Charter of
the United Nations.

Syrian inhabitants under Israeli occupation in the
occupied Syrian Golan for more than half a century
endure the worst policies of oppression, discrimination,
racial discrimination, detention, torture and kangaroo
courts; as well as the deprivation of their natural
resources, their right to education based on a Syrian
national curriculum, and their right to carry the identity
cards of their own country, Syria, and to build their own
national hospitals in their own territories and villages
in the occupied Golan. The Israeli occupation force has
also continued its settler expansionist policies with the
aim of Judaizing the occupied Syrian Golan, in total
disregard of international resolutions.

The Israeli occupation Government has recently
granted priority to settlements in the Golan in its
budgetary disbursements. In its latest provocative
meeting, held in April in the Golan 4 a meeting that
did not attract the attention of anyone in the Secretariat
or in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
and was not noticed by Mr. Mladenov either - Israel
provided new settlers with great incentives, such as tax
exemptions and assistance in establishing agricultural
projects, and endorsed the construction of thousands of
housing units in the occupied Syrian Golan, just as it
does in occupied Jerusalem and occupied Palestinian
territories, in flagrant violation of United Nations
resolutions.

I note that the chairman of the municipality of
the Katzrin settlement in the occupied Syrian Golan
recently announced the construction of 4,000 new
housing units, indicating that the expansion falls on
the fortieth anniversary of the beginning of the Israeli
settlement in Katzrin, which was built on the remains
of the razed Syrian villages of Qisrin, Al-Shoukif
and Aldoura.

Since the beginning ofthe events in Syria, Israel, the
occupyingPower, has openedanewchapterofaggression
and of violation of the Disengagement Agreement and
of Security Council resolutions, particularly those
relating to fighting terrorism. It has provided armed
terrorist groups - including the Al-Nusra Front, which
is registered on the Security Council's list of terrorist
entities - with all sorts of assistance and support along
the ceasefire line in the occupied Syrian Golan. It has
continued to communicate with those terrorist groups
across the ceasefire line, facilitating their movement
from south to north. It has supported them logistically
and medically, in public and on Israeli TV screens, by
transferring the injured terrorists across the ceasefire
line to treat them in Israeli hospitals at the expense
of the Qatari regime, then returning them to Syria to
pursue their terrorist activities, as documented by all
United Nations reports. Nonetheless, they were not
noted by Mr. Mladenov.

We note that Israeli support to terrorists not only is a
flagrant violation of the disengagement agreement, the
mandate of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (UNDOF) and international law, but also exposes
the lives of United Nations workers to great danger and
undermines their mission, as has already happened
several times with regard to those terrorist groups
that have kidnapped UNDOF peacekeepers or fired
at them and targeted their positions. We have reported
all those details to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), including the collusion by Qatari
intelligence in the kidnapping of UNDOF peacekeepers
of the Philippine regiment. We have requested an
investigation, but we are still waiting for Godot - that
is, for DPKO 4 to come and conduct the investigation.

The Israeli occupation forces have sought recently
to spread their influence in the Yarmouk and Raqqa
valleys near the Dera'a region, adjacent to the occupied
Syrian Golan and the Syrian-Jordanian borders, in
collusion with the Al-Nusra Front and all related groups.
They are attempting to force the inhabitants to leave
the area by depriving them of their basic daily needs
and confiscating their homes if they are away for more
than two days, and preventing them from returning to
these homes. The Syrian Arab army does all it can to
prevent Israel and those terrorists who collude with it
from implementing their aggressive design. In scores
of letters we have reported documented information
on those Israeli aggressions and violations. We are still
waiting for the Security Council to take immediate
measures against Israel to force it to put an end to its
aggression and its violations and to force it to withdraw
from the entire Syrian Golan to the line of4 June 1967,
in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 497 (1981).

