Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome your participation, Mr. President, in this
meeting and the fact that you are presiding over it.

At the outset, we thank the Special Envoy, Mr. Geir
Pedersen, for his valuable briefing on the Syrian political
process. I also take this opportunity to reaffirm to him
the full support of the State of Kuwait for his efforts
to revitalize the political process in Syria. We call on
all the parties to provide support to and work with the
Special Envoy in order to enable him to fully carry out
the mandate entrusted to him.

We welcome the announcement by the Secretary-

General of the agreement reached between the Syrian
Government and the Syrian Negotiations Commission
on the formation of the Constitutional Committee,
which is scheduled to start its work in Geneva on
30 October under the supervision of the United Nations
in order to facilitate a balanced Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned Constitutional Committee (see S/2019/775).

We express our appreciation for the efforts made
by the guarantors of the Astana agreement, which
contributed to reaching this very pivotal stage in the
Syrian political process, as well as our support to the
small group. We also commend the tireless efforts
made by the Special Envoy, Mr. Pedersen, to reach this
agreement. We endorse his call for the Security Council
to be publicly united and to be supportive of his efforts
and of the important steps taken in order to implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We hope
that this step will represent the beginning of a long-
awaited Syrian political process and will be important
in enabling the fraternal Syrian people to realize their
legitimate aspirations through a political settlement that
is agreed by all constituents and that maintains the unity,
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria, in keeping with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

We stress that this political process should be
accompanied by confidence-building measures.
Perhaps the most prominent measure, as noted earlier
by Mr. Pedersen in his briefing, is to ensure that real
and tangible progress is achieved as concerns detainees
and missing persons, and that specialized international
organizations are given access to detention centres
and prisons.

We are concerned about the situation in Idlib
province, which since April has witnessed a military
escalation, and about the possibility that developments
in Idlib could be reflected in the political process.
Military operations in the north-western part of Syria
have led to the displacement of more than halfa million
people and the deaths of more than 1,000 civilians, not
to mention the significant damage inflicted on health-
care, educational and civilian facilities.

We reiterate our condemnation of the targeting
of innocent civilians by any party, and we condemn
all attacks carried out by terrorist groups included
on the Council's lists. At the same time, we would
recall once again that counter-terrorism operations
in no way exempt any party to the conflict from its
commitments under international humanitarian law,
including compliance with the principles of distinction,
proportionality, precaution and the protection of
civilians and civilian targets.

We reiterate that no lasting and comprehensive
peace can be achieved in Syria in the absence ofjustice
or of guarantees that there will be no impunity. The
perpetrators of the crimes committed during the Syrian
crisis since 2011 must be held accountable. We also fully
support the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for Syria.

In conclusion, we stress once again that a solution
to the conflict will be achieved only through a political
settlement in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
which sets out a road map for a multi-stage transitional
political process, including the drafting ofa constitution
and the holding of free and fair elections according to
the Constitution, under the supervision of the United
Nations and with the participation of all Syrians,
including those abroad.

