Mr. Gonzalez Serafini (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank the Republic
of Cote d'Ivoire for convening this debate and welcome
the presence this morning of Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of C6te
d'Ivoire. We also thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States for their briefings.

Argentina reaffirms its firm commitment and
support for the system for maintaining international
peace and security within the framework of the United
Nations, based on the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, which includes international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We believe
that the United Nations is the only international
organization of which the primary responsibility is
the maintenance of international peace and security
through a number of tools that must come together to
form a comprehensive strategy that includes conflict
prevention, conflict resolution through peaceful means,
peacekeeping and building sustainable peace. Such a
strategy should incorporate a sustainable development
and human rights perspective and address the root
causes of conflict. Prevention efforts, the promotion
of sustainable development, the protection of human
rights, the promotion of the rule of law, access to
justice and accountability, peacekeeping operations,
special political missions, peacebuilding efforts and
other initiatives of the Organization constitute political
tools that must be shaped and implemented as part
of a comprehensive and multidimensional strategy in
support of viable political processes and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

That is why we are convinced of the value of
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security, while acknowledging
the primary responsibility of the Security Council and
the United Nations in that regard, as well as in terms
of building and consolidating sustainable peace. The
development of multilateralism and cooperation among
States at the regional level and regional and subregional
structures and United Nations agencies have proven
to be highly effective in the prevention and peaceful
resolution ofconflicts through the promotion ofpolitical
dialogue and mediation. In addition to these, greater
in-depth knowledge of the specific characteristics and
unique features of each incidence of conflict or dispute
has also helped generate a greater sense of ownership
within each peace process.

Such cooperation must be consolidated through the
Security Council, in line with the provisions of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard,
the Council should focus its efforts in a coordinated
manner and in cooperation with other United Nations
organs and regional and subregional organizations,
as well as with other entities focused on conflict
prevention, sustainable development, human rights and
rule of law. The effectiveness of both the role played by
the Secretary-General through his good offices and his
Special Envoys and Representatives, as well as that of
United Nations regional offices, to promote processes
of political dialogue for the resolution of conflicts has
also been demonstrated.

Through the Declaration of Shared Commitments
issued within the framework of the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, sponsoring States
reaffirm the primacy of politics in the resolution of
conflicts. We also committed ourselves to strengthening
regional and subregional arrangements through
international cooperation and support measures with
the aim of improving the strategic partnership between
those organizations and the United Nations in the areas
of capacity-building and financing.

Finally, in context ofmy region - the Americas - I
musttohighlighttherolethattheOrganizationofAmerican
States (OAS) and other subregional organizations
can play. The United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti and the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti, as well as the United Nations Mission
in Colombia and the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, are examples of how the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations - such as the OAS, the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States and other
specialized regional agencies - and the United Nations
system can generate invaluable comparative advantages
in efforts to achieve sustainable peace. That is achieved
through processes of prevention, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, the peaceful settlement of disputes,
reconciliation, transitional justice, the promotion of
the rule of law and the strengthening of institutions,
the promotion and protection of human rights and
sustainable development.

