Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to convey my gratitude to Ambassador Momen and
Ambassador Vilovie for their briefings.

During the past year, the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) has continued to very actively implement the
tasks entrusted to it under the relevant mandates of
the General Assembly and the Security Council to
attempt to assist post-conflict States in rebuilding
themselves, and it continues to play an important role
in that respect. Bangladesh, during its chairmanship
of the PBC, undertook the initiative in September of
organizing a high-level meeting of the PBC, thereby
lending renewed momentum to the work in the field of
peacebuilding. China wishes to express admiration for
that sterling work.

It is also necessary to recognize that peacebuilding
is a long-term, complex, difficult and comprehensive
task. In the current context, it is facing a great many
new obstacles and challenges. This state of affairs
requires serious consideration that could result in an
appropriate response on the part of the international
community.

The Chinese delegation would like to make the
following comments.

First, respect for the ownership of relevant
States should be one of the principles underlying all
peacebuilding. Post-conflict countries bear the main
burden for peace and security in their own territories,
and the international community should fully respect
their sovereignty and the will and provide constructive
assistance pursuant to the priorities determined by
those States themselves. We advocate working on
an equal footing with less arrogance, more friendly
consultations and fewer attempts to force recipes on the
affected countries.

Secondly, we want to help post-conflict countries
to devise comprehensive strategies for post-conflict
reconstruction in accordance with their own
specificities. All our histories are different; all our
specific circumstances are different. There is no single
model for peacebuilding. The international community
should fully abide by and respect the cultural traditions
of the countries concerned, listen attentively to their
views and notjust mechanically copy existing templates.
The international community should give this in-depth
consideration.

Thirdly, socioeconomic development should be the
main way to build peace. In its peacebuilding efforts
in post-conflict States, the international community
has longtended to focus on human rights, the rule
of law and security sector reform, perhaps without
granting sufficient attention to economic and social
development. Real investment is often lacking. We
urge the international community to grant heightened
attention to the socioeconomic development of States
by providing them with more genuine assistance.
Assistance should not come with preconditions.
We hope that the PBC will look at where it can add
value, assist countries in mobilizing the necessary
resources, and coordinate the efforts undertaken by the
international community as a whole.

Fourthly, there is a need to pursue efforts aimed
at improving the working methods and effectiveness of
the PBC. We support the PBC in its desire to improve its
internal working methods, learn lessons, identify best
practices, and improve coordination and cooperation
with the main United Nations bodies, including the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, among others; to involve the
international financial institutions, such as the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund; and to fully
listen to relevant regional organizations. It is important
for all of us to work together to achieve progress in
peacebuilding in post-conflict countries.

