Mr. Lancry (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to express my profound gratitude for the presence of
His Excellency Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
highly significant contribution to the proceedings of
the Security Council in its recent discussions.

Today's draft resolution comes after this
morning's important statement by President Bush, in
which he announced that Secretary of State Powell
would be travelling to the region to work for the
implementation of resolution 1402 (2002). For its part,
Israel is willing, in full cooperation with General Zinni
and now with Secretary Powell, to engage in steps,
together with reciprocal Palestinian actions, to achieve
an immediate and meaningful ceasefire, the withdrawal
of the Israeli troops, the implementation of Tenet and
Mitchell and an end to all acts of terrorism and
incitement, in accordance with resolutions 1397 (2002)
and 1402 (2002).

In President Bush's highly valuable statement
today, he again articulated his vision for peace in the
Middle East, including the end of terrorism and
incitement, the withdrawal of Israeli forces and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
living side by side in peace and security, with Israel.
The President indicated to both sides what steps should
be taken to bring about meaningful and peaceful
coexistence, including dignity and hope for all.

Israel is giving President Bush's statement the
careful attention it is due. We will reassess the situation
in the light of its major operative parts, concerning

"an immediate and meaningful ceasefire; an
end to terror and violence and incitement;
withdrawal of Israeli troops from Palestinian
cities, including Ramallah; implementation of the
already agreed upon Tenet and Mitchell plans".

We further support the forthcoming mission of
Secretary Powell to the region. The presence of
Secretary Powell is a powerful demonstration of the
American commitment to ending the violence and
bringing peace to the region. Israel pledges to spare no
effort to cooperate fully with Secretary Powell to make
his mission a success, and to bring about a genuine and
meaningful ceasefire that will pave the way for a return
to the negotiating process.

I do not believe that anything must be added to
the President's statement with regard to the Palestinian
terrorism and to the Palestinian leader, Chairman
Arafat. I do wish, however, to add to President Bush's
expressed concern regarding the continuing assaults by
Hizbullah along Israel's northern border. Hizbullah's
actions are a clear and unambiguous violation of the
Blue Line, international law and the will of the
Security Council. That fact has been brought to the
Council's attention repeatedly in letters I have
addressed to the Secretary-General, in numerous
reports of the Secretary-General and in his most recent
briefing to the Council just a few days ago.

In this regard, I would like to refer briefly to the
statement delivered yesterday by the Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. Although
we do not always agree with the statements of the
Syrian representative, either in their form or in their
essence, we were, of course, attentive to the message
he delivered yesterday.

I will not respond here to those aspects of his
statement that were filled with hatred and distortions.
But one aspect of the statement deserves to be
addressed at this time of rising tensions along the Blue
Line. That is the Syrian representative's allegation of
Israeli contempt for United Nations resolutions. I feel
obligated to recall that despite Israel's full and
confirmed implementation of Security Council
resolution 425 (1978), in full accordance with the will
of the Council, Syria continues to exhibit total
disregard for that resolution. Through its overwhelming
control of Lebanon and its continued support for
Hizbullah, violations of the Blue Line now occur on a
regular basis in direct violation of resolution 425
(1978) and subsequent resolutions.

Today, these dangerous and illegitimate attacks
continued for the sixth consecutive day, with the firing
of anti-tank, anti-aircraft and Katyusha rockets at
civilian and military targets in northern Israel. In
addition, three unarmed United Nations observers and
two peacekeepers were injured by Hizbullah forces in
southern Lebanon. The observers, citizens of Ireland,
Norway and France, were beaten up by Hizbullah
gunmen and had to be evacuated to hospitals in
northern Israel.

Ironically, it is a member of the Security Council
that is defying the consensus reflected in resolution
425 (1978) with impunity and is enabling such
reprehensible attacks to occur. In this respect, we are
obliged to deplore not only the violations of the Blue
Line and of resolution 425 (1978), which continue even
as we speak, but even more the fact that a State
Member of the United Nations that is also a member of
the Security Council is deliberately thwarting the
implementation of a resolution of a body of which it
itself is a member. Yes, Israel realizes that Member
States should respect Security Council resolutions, but
I do not believe it is superfluous to remind the Syrian
representative that this applies to Syria as well.

The situation along the Blue Line poses the threat
of regional stability being undermined, owing to
Hizbullah's clear intent to escalate current hostilities
into a broader confrontation. It is imperative that the
Council act immediately to force the Governments of
Iran, Syria and Lebanon to halt the illegal terrorist
activities of Hizbullah.

We are at a crucial moment for our region, but
once again, because of the resolve and the leadership of
the President of the United States and the contribution
of the international community, we again have cause
for hope.

