Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour to deliver
a statement in my capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In my briefing this morning, it is my intention
to provide an overview of the work of the Committee
since my last statement to this Chamber on the topic, on
26 July 2018 (see S/PV.8318).

Since my last briefing to the Council, the Committee
has held a total of seven meetings. In 2018, during
the briefing to Member States held on 26 July, the
Committee heard a briefing via video-teleconference
by the Coordinator of the Group of Experts on the
Group's final report (S/2018/531). During the informal
consultations held on 31 August, the Committee was
briefed by and exchanged views with the Group of
Experts in connection with the Group's programme
of work pursuant to the new mandate set forth for
it in resolution 2424 (2018). During the informal
consultations held on 6 December, the Committee was
briefed by the Coordinator of the Group of Experts
on the Group's midterm report and discussed the
recommendations contained therein.

To date, in 2019, the Committee has met on four
occasions. A briefing for all Member States was
convened on 1 February, in which the Committee
heard a presentation by the Coordinator of the Group
of Experts on the Group's midterm report. During the
informal consultations held on 25 March, the Committee
was briefed by the former Coordinator of the Group of
Experts on the illegal exploitation of natural resources
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

During the informal consultations held on 24 May,
the Committee was briefed by the Acting Coordinator
of the Group of Experts on the Group's final report
and discussed the recommendations contained therein.
During the informal consultations held recently, on
8 July, I provided the Committee with a brief overview
of my visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Uganda and the United Arab Emirates, which took
place from 27 April to 6 May, in which I presented the
report of the visit.

Since my last briefing to the Security Council,
my delegation also hosted six "informal informal"
meetings at the Permanent Mission of Kuwait with
the senior official of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo follow-on mechanism, Mr. Robert Petit, in
the course of his periodic visits to New York. The
Committee continues to support Mr. Petit and his team
of technical experts as they provide assistance to the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in its investigations into the March 2017 murders of two
former members ofthe Group of Experts, Zaida Catalan
and Michael Sharp. Prior to my visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Uganda and the United Arab
Emirates, I also convened two "informal informal"
meetings in April.
Allow me to provide the Council with several brief
remarks on my recent visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Uganda and the United Arab Emirates,
including some personal comments and observations.
As previously mentioned, the report of my visit was
discussed with the Committee on 8 July.

At the outset, I wish to reiterate the Committee's
appreciation to the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Uganda and the United Arab
Emirates for having made notable efforts as hosts of the
visit. In this regard, it is unfortunate that my delegation
was unable to hold meetings in Dar es Salaam, as
originally envisaged.

With regard to the visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, several interlocutors expressed the
view that the sanctions list should be updated and
reorganized in a way that clearly identifies current
spoilers of the political transition and those currently
committing grave human rights violations. To this end,
in its adoption of resolution 2478 (2019) on 26 June, the
Security Council requested that the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo provide
updated information on the sanctioned individuals and
entities. Additionally, during the visit, I noted that there
was interest among some Committee members and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO) to
list individuals based on the designation criteria listed
in sub-paragraph (e) of paragraph 7 of resolution 2293
(2016). However, there were some Committee members
who did not deem it necessary. During my visit, there
was also a clear difference between the rhetoric that
the Chair's delegation encountered during the meeting
with the Congolese Government, which primarily
featured the outgoing Democratic Republic of the
Congo authorities, on the one hand, and the incoming
President's positive public statements on the work of
MONUSCO and the international community in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, on the other.

I intend to capitalize on the momentum of the visit
back here in New York. Ibelieve that this mission served
as an excellent forum to follow up with the relevant
States, continue to build channels of communication
and promote better understanding of the Sanctions
Committee's work. To this end, on 25 June, I sent letters
to the Permanent Representatives of Uganda and the
United Republic of Tanzania on the visit, and, on 5 July,
letters were sent to the Permanent Representatives of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Arab Emirates. On 9 August, the Committee plans to
hold a briefing for all Member States in connection with
the final report ofthe Group of Experts (S/20l9/469), as
well as my recent visit.

