Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
for his briefing on the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
and wish him every success at his new post. I welcome
the presence of Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime

Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and thank him for his statement. China also listened
attentively to the statement made by Ms. Vlora Citaku.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia, and understands the legitimate
concerns of Serbia on the question of Kosovo. Resolution
1244 (1999) is an important legal basis for a solution to
that issue. Efforts should be made, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and within the framework of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, to find an appropriate
solution acceptable to all the parties concerned through
dialogue and negotiation.

China appreciates Serbia's positive efforts to
identify a political solution to the question of Kosovo,
as well as the fact that the high-level political dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina has produced positive
results in the energy and communication spheres. We
encourage both sides to pursue their practical and
constructive dialogue in search of a lasting solution to
the Kosovo question and to maintain peace and stability
in the Balkans and Europe as a whole.

The current security situation in Kosovo is generally
stable, but complicated and uncertain factors prevail.
The parties concerned should effectively protect the
legitimate rights of all communities in Kosovo, actively
promote national reconciliation, seek to resolve their
differences through dialogue, and refrain from taking
actions that could complicate or escalate the situation.

China appreciates the work done by UNMIK under
the leadership of Special Representative Tanin, and
supports UNMIK's ongoing efforts to implement its
Security Council mandate. We hope that UNMIK, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and
the Kosovo Force will strengthen their coordination
and form synergies in order to play a positive and
constructive role in seeking an appropriate solution to
the Kosovo question.

