Mr. Petritsch: It is with great pleasure that I am here
once again to address the Council and to present the
sixteenth report on developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This report - the second since I was
endorsed as the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina by the Security Council on 3 August 1999 -
covers a six-month period from last November. As in
November, I think it best not to dwell in any detail on the
substance of the report. Members can refer to the report
itself for this.

Broadly speaking, progress in Dayton
implementation is as slow and painful as ever, but it is
working. I believe that it is more important than ever that
the international community stick to the task. It is vital
that our successes be consolidated.

I will give an assessment of the more significant
recent successes and failures of Dayton implementation a
little later on. But I would like, first of all, to give an
indication of how I see our work developing in the future
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

My office, as members are perhaps aware, is now
deep in preparation for the Brussels Peace Implementation
Council (PIC) on 23 May. This will be the first full PIC
since Madrid in December 1998. The PIC Steering Board
met in Lisbon at the end of last week. There was broad
consensus on the strategy I outlined to them at that time.
I would like to hear what members have to say about this
strategy, too.

In the past, Peace Implementation Council meetings
have tended to take something of a scatter-shot approach
to the problems of Bosnia and Herzegovina. There have
been so many problems and the international community
has striven to tackle all of them head on. This year's PIC,
however, will be different. It has to be, because the
international community no longer has the resources for
the approach adopted in the past. It is therefore
imperative that diminishing resources be concentrated to
maximum effect.

Time is running out for international engagement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Donor fatigue has set in. The
$5.1 billion, four-year reconstruction aid package pledged
after Dayton is now all spoken for. This spring, the
Stabilization Force has reduced its troop numbers by
nearly a third. That is why I focus on just three key areas
of peace implementation. If we succeed in these areas, I
firmly believe, reform in others will follow.

There are three areas: first, economic reform;
secondly, the acceleration of the return of refugees and
displaced persons; and thirdly, the consolidation of
institutions, especially those at the state level.

The economy first. As I am sure members know,
Bosnia is still far too dependent on international aid,

 

which in turn is steadily diminishing. If Bosnia is to have
any hope of a secure future, the economy must become
self-sustaining - and fast. This is still a poor country and,
without growth, it is likely to become poorer still. Last year
in the Republika Srpska - still by far the poorer entity of
the two - the average monthly salary still languished at
$100 a month.

Jobs and a secure economic future are increasingly
important issues for the ordinary citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That is of far more concern to them than the
diet of ethnic separatism that is still being fed to them by
the nationalist parties. That is why economic aspiration
must be nurtured and cherished. Economic reform is one of
the most potent weapons in our armoury in the fight to
reverse the evil effects of the 1992-1995 war.

What is needed is investment, both domestic and
foreign. The trouble is that the system governing the
country's economy is to a large extent the same as it was
in the days of communism, despite international pressure.
Investors, unsurprisingly, are discouraged. Bosnia and
Herzegovina's industry is still geared to the old command
economy model. It largely comprises giant, state-run
concerns - mines, steelworks and the like. They are
completely out of step with the market requirements of the
new millennium.

The Government's urgent task is to create an enabling
environment so that investors can invest without going
through a maze of bureaucracy. Most of all, we need to
encourage small and medium-sized enterprises, to which the
workforce in that country, most economic observers agree,
is well-suited.

But the present system simply stifles enterprise.
Perhaps the worst example of communist-era bureaucracy
are the so-called "payment bureaux", through which all
commercial and public bank transfers have to pass and
which levy a substantial sum along the way. The payment
bureaux are totally non-transparent and have a stifling
effect on business of all sizes. They are also a cash cow for
the nationalist parties, which exploit the system
remorselessly. Consequently, we have agreed that the
payment bureaux will be abolished in the course of this
year.

The lack of a reliable banking system is another
important obstacle to private investment, closely connected
to the payment bureaux system. There are currently over 50
banks in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but not one of them can
play the intermediary role necessary in a market economy.
Many of the public-sector banks may be on the verge of
bankruptcy due to their loans to loss-making
publicly-owned enterprises. The numerous private banks
are too small to provide the working capital necessary to
kick-start enterprise. Overhauling the banking sector
should encourage the participation of foreign banks and
thus the necessary injection of capital.

Another key to modernizing the Bosnian economy is
privatization. The process is already well under way,
although the first stage - the opening up of the books of
the big state-sector companies to independent audit prior
to evaluation - has met with fierce political resistance.
Perhaps this was inevitable, since the state companies are
yet another source of funding for the established
nationalistic parties. Such arrangements must not be
tolerated. We have to start protecting the economic sphere
from this kind of old-style intrusion.

I wish to turn now to the second of my strategic
priorities: the acceleration of the refugee return process.
Before I go any further, I should like to take this
opportunity to extend a warm thank you to the United
Nations and its agencies for their continued sterling work
in this sector, in particular through the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR).

The contribution of these agencies should not be
underestimated. In this reporting period, I have had a
chance to get out into the field more and see for myself
the often unsung work that the United Nations agencies
are doing there. I can assure the Council that I am
thoroughly impressed. In the course of these trips to the
field I have had a chance to speak to many refugees and
displaced persons and I am more convinced than ever that
return remains the number one concern among the public
at large.

The issue is highly emotive. Four and a half years
after the war, some 800,000 people are still internally
displaced throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. A further
300,000 are still refugees abroad. Facilitating their return
is the number one means of normalizing life in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Last fall I took two important measures designed to
accelerate the return process.

First, I imposed a package of reforms to the
legislation governing property return in the two entities.
This removes the bureaucratic hurdles to property return,

 

which were being mercilessly exploited by politicians on all
sides whose agenda was to obstruct the implementation of
Dayton.

Secondly, I dismissed 22 public officials from across
the country who had a proven track record of
obstructionism, particularly of annex 7 of Dayton, the annex
governing refugee return.

N ow that spring is here and the refugee return season
is properly under way, these two measures are beginning to
bear fruit. So far this year there have been more than twice
as many returns as there were in the same period in 1999.
All the indications are that this welcome trend will
continue. Granted, there is still a long way to go. Granted
also that obstruction of the returns process continues in
some areas.

But in general we have every reason to be encouraged.
We are making headway in a task that was once thought
impossible by naysayers. The ultimate goal, refugee return,
which has become self-sustaining, is no longer merely gold
at the end of the rainbow; it has become an achievable
reality.

I reiterate: these successes would not have been
possible without the tremendous support and expertise of
the UNHCR, nor without the security provided in many,
many instances by the United Nations International Police
Task Force (IPTF).

I will turn now to the third of my strategic priorities:
the consolidation of the common institutions.

This is really about state-building. If Bosnia and
Herzegovina is ever to join the European family of
nations - a family in which I firmly believe Bosnia truly
belongs - then it must become a cohesive State, with
central State structures that exercise real power. This
includes a fully independent judiciary, without which
long-term economic development and effective protection
of individual liberties will be impossible. We are actively
promoting the rule of law at the State and entity levels. For
instance, we currently have a major public affairs campaign
to promote respect for property rights as part of our efforts
to accelerate returns.

I would like to commend the efforts of the United
Nations Judicial System Assessment Programme (JSAP),
which has worked tirelessly at its task of monitoring and
assessing the existing judicial system and has participated
in the developments of reforms to date. Just a few days
ago, on 5 May, the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board met with Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jacques Paul Klein of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH)
in Lisbon to discuss the crucial role of JSAP for the
reform of this essential pillar of civil society.

Far too often in the past, inter-ethnic cooperation at
the State level has been blocked by the nationalist
bickering that, as we know all too well, has become a
byword for Balkan political discourse.

Last November, as you may recall, the Members of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina made a
declaration before the Security Council, pledging
themselves, inter alia, to the establishment of a State
Border Service. The arguments for such an agency are
very clear. The citizens of any modern state have the
right to expect their borders to be protected. When
borders are as porous as those of Bosnia and Herzegovina
have been in the past, the state treasury loses millions,
because porous borders are an open invitation to graft and
corruption in the sphere of customs and excise.

The State Border Service was seen at the time as an
acid test of the Members of the Presidency's commitment
to the concept of a functioning state - a concept to
which they have all too often paid mere lip service.

Sad to say, the Presidency failed the test. The
bickering began the moment they got home. In the end,
I was forced to exercise my powers and impose the State
Border Service. Not even a solemn declaration before the
Security Council, it seems, could hold them to it.

Such disregard for the international norms and
standards of State leadership was shown also with regard
to other commitments the Presidency has entered into
with the Security Council in the New York Declaration.
The much-fought-over draft election law experienced the
same fate as the State Border Service law. The Presidency
did pass the draft election law to the Parliament as
promised. But when it came to the vote, the Presidency
Members were not prepared to influence their respective
party members. They just stood by and watched as the
draft law was voted down.

The New York Declaration committed the
Presidency to also resolve another central institutional
crisis, although one of a different kind, concerning the
State Council of Ministers. Their efforts at resolving this
crisis have been only slightly more encouraging.

 

Since 1997, the chairmanship of the Council of
Ministers, which equates to the post of prime minister, has
rotated. This compromise was probably necessary in order
to get the institution formally working in the first place.
Last year, however, the Constitutional Court ruled that the
rotational and ethnically defined arrangement was
unconstitutional and would have to be changed. The
deadline for agreement on a new arrangement came and
went. The result? This common institution, central to the
workings of democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina, fell
into abeyance in February this year.

Almost unbelievably, the issue is still far from being
satisfactorily resolved. The new law on the Council of
Ministers, based on a proposal by the Presidency, follows
the old patterns of ethnic parity and rotation. It remains to
be seen whether the law will stand the test of the
Constitutional Court.

The Members of the Presidency have given us yet
another unedifying display of the kind of politics that they
practice best. The ethnic agenda has once again taken
precedence over what is best for the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. For example, the primary principle guiding
reorganization of the ministries was the ease with which
they could be divided up among the three ethnicities.

All this merely confirms that the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina are still far from ready to take the
responsibility that they should for their country.

Last November, I outlined to the Council my concept
of "ownership". In the affair of the Council of Ministers, I
have deliberately kept out of the fray, stressing the strong
desirability of a solution arrived at purely by domestic
consensus. The results are, I freely admit, a little depressing
at first sight, although I believe that the policy of insisting
on ownership is still the right one. Bosnia and Herzegovina
is, and must always remain, their country.

But we will continue to press - by whatever means,
including my powers to impose, if necessary - for the
strengthening of the common institutions and an extension
of their role in the life of the country. They are too
important for the future to be left entirely to their own
devices.

There are, I am pleased to say, signs that my central
message, the establishment of the concept of ownership, is
starting to take root in the hearts and minds of the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The result of the municipal
elections, held across the country on 8 April, was one
important sign.

Given the understandable scepticism expressed by
some parts of the international community before the
elections, two important points need to be made. First, the
elections were peaceful and routine. They were run
skilfully by the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, while both the IPTF and the Stabilization
Force played important roles in providing security at the
polls. Secondly, the political landscape in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is now more pluralistic than it was before.

I am much encouraged by this development: political
pluralism is a sure sign that democracy in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is maturing. It is also a sign that the voters
are beginning to think for themselves, and to think about
how politicians who seek to represent them will represent
their interests. This does not mean the narrow, sectarian
interests of the old ethnic ways of thinking, but the
everyday interests of the ordinary public - issues like
housing, employment, education and infrastructure.

The most significant shift of power was in the
Bosniac areas, where the Social Democratic Party (SDP)
made substantial ground at the expense of the Party of
Democratic Action (SDA). This is important, because
parties like the SDP - a modern, relatively multi-ethnic
party - hold the keys to the country's future.

Only with leadership from modern, civic-orientated,
tolerant political parties can Bosnia and Herzegovina hope
to integrate with Europe. Based on the results of the
municipal elections, the SDP is now the strongest party in
the Federation. We expect it to do even better in future
elections.

It is true that in the Bosnian Croat areas the Croatian
Democratic Union (HDZ) still dominates, but it is worth
noting that voter turnout in those areas was down to
around 40 per cent - far lower than in previous
elections, and also much lower than the national average.

This indicates that Bosnian Croat voters are growing
weary of the HDZ, but have not yet found an attractive
alternative. The HDZ, already shaken by the defeat of its
parent party in Croatia earlier this year, seems to have
taken this message to heart. It is now in the midst of a
major restructuring, which we hope will lead to more
cooperative officials at the municipal and cantonal levels
in the future.

 

In the Republika Srpska, the exclusion of the Serbian
Radical Party, the SRS, was completely successful. Its
threats of physical violence and voter boycott proved to be
a bluff. Even the arrest by the Stabilization Force of
Momcilo Krajisnik, the one-time Serb member of the
Presidency, only a few days before the elections, had little
impact on voter behaviour.

Interestingly enough, although the Serbian Democratic
Party (SDS) did well, it did not pick up as many SRS votes
as it might have expected. In 1997, the SDS and SRS
together won 44 per cent of the vote. Yet in this election,
the SDS only won 37 per cent.

So pluralism is also growing in the Republika Srpska.
The rise of a new party - the Party of Democratic
Progress (PDP), led by a respected economist from Banja
Luka, Mladen Ivanic - is significant, although we will
have to see the PDP in action before blowing a trumpet.

Overall, I would say that while the nationalist parties
are still strong, their grip is weakening. Our reform of the
media, the professionalization of the police, our insistence
on economic reform - all of these things are steadily
eroding their sources of power.

Let us not lose sight of what this means. The defeat of
the nationalist agenda in the political discourse of Bosnia
and Herzegovina will have ramifications not just for that
country, but for the entire Balkan region.

Bosnia and Herzegovina, we should always remember,
is in the heart of the Balkans. If - by reforming the
economy, by accelerating refugee return and by
strengthening the common institutions - we can help the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina live peacefully with one
other again, we can achieve that noble goal elsewhere in
the Balkans, too.

I sense that the tide has already turned against the
forces of nationalism in the Balkans. The defeat of the
HDZ in Croatia earlier this year was convincing proof.
Slobodan Milosevic is increasingly isolated in Belgrade.
The tide is turning in Bosnia and Herzegovina, too,
although less dramatically. It must continue to be pushed.

It must continue to be pushed because the price of
failure is too high. If we fail in our project in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, then ethnically pure mini-States are likely to
dominate South-East Europe in the twenty-first century. It
is imperative that we persevere.

Dayton is working in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
remedy we are administering - our adherence to the
principle of multi-ethnicity and the reversal of wartime
ethnic cleansing, together with our insistence on real
political and economic reform - is the right one.

The remedy can work elsewhere too - in Kosovo,
for instance. The international community's patience has
been sorely tried in that province, but Bernard Kouchner
should not be discouraged. Success in establishing peace,
as we have learned the hard way in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, takes a great deal of time.

Believe me when I say that in Bosnia and
Herzegovina there is light at the end of the tunnel.

