Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): It is
deeply gratifying that Council members,
representatives of Northern and Southern Sudan,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Mr. Mbeki are
today together discussing the question of the Sudan.

Maintaining peace, stability and development in
the Sudan is in the interest of the Sudanese people and
beneficial to the peace and development of the region
and the African continent as a whole. The signing of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) has put an
end to decades of conflict between the Northern and
Southern parts of the Sudan. The comprehensive
implementation of the Agreement is the precondition
for - and guarantee of - long-term peace and
stability in the Sudan.

The South Sudan referendum is a key step in the
implementation of the CPA, but it is not an end in itself.
We hope that the referendum will be held in a peaceful,
free, transparent and fair manner, in accordance with
the CPA, that it will reflect the will of the Sudanese
people and that its outcome will be respected by all
parties. We hope that Northern and Southern Sudan will
try their utmost to expedite the preparations for the
referendum. We call on the international community to
create favourable conditions for the referendum, but not
to prejudge its outcome.

Neither party must take unilateral action.
Whatever the outcome of the referendum, the overall
peace and stability of the Sudan, and of the entire
region, must be ensured. China hopes that Northern
and Southern Sudan will cherish the hard-won results
of peace and continue to engage in dialogue and
consultations on an equal footing, so as to reach
agreement at an early date on pending issues such as
border demarcation, Abyei and the distribution of
wealth. This is important for the maintenance of long-
term peace and stability in the Sudan and the region.

China welcomes the important role played by the
African Union (AU) in the settlement of the question
of the Sudan. We appreciate the good offices of
Mr. Mbeki and the AU High-Level Implementation
Panel for Sudan, as well those of regional
organizations such as the Inter-Governmental Authority
on Development.

China welcomes the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan and the Secretary-General's panel on the
South Sudan referendum and their continuing support
for the implementation of the CPA.

China supports the comprehensive and peaceful
settlement of the question of Darfur, especially the
resolution of its root causes. To achieve lasting peace
and stability in Darfur, it is necessary to continue to
uphold the dual-track strategy of promoting the
political process and deploying peacekeeping
operations, as well as to give full play to the role of the
Tripartite Mechanism, which includes the AU, the
United Nations and the Sudanese Government as the
main channel.

The serious delays in the political process are the
most prominent challenge facing the settlement of the
question of Darfur. China urges those Darfur parties
that have yet to do so to join the political process
immediately and without conditions. We appreciate the
new strategy presented by the Sudanese Government.

China supports the efforts of the United Nations in
seeking an appropriate solution to the question of
Darfur, as well as the work of Mr. Bassole, Mr. Gambari
and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. We hope that the international community
will continue to push forward the political solution to
the question of Darfur while making greater
contributions to the early recovery, reconstruction and
development of Darfur.

I would like to announce here that, in order to

support the political process in Darfur, the Chinese

Government has decided to make an additional

contribution of $500,000 to the United Nations trust
fund for the political process in Darfur.

China supports the presidential statement that has
been adopted by the Council (S/PRST/2010/24). We
hope that the contents of the statement will be
implemented comprehensively. China will continue to
work with the international community to contribute to
the peace, stability and development of the Sudan.

