Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Let me
join my colleagues as they wish Ambassador Merimee
Godspeed and tell him how much we are going to miss his
presence here.

The war and devastation of Liberia is a tragedy which
has for too long plagued the people of that poor country
and their neighbours in the subregion. But in recent weeks
agreement of the warring factions has renewed the hope for
peace.

The United States warmly welcomes these positive
developments in Liberia. If we recall the situation the last
time the Council considered this topic, we can see
substantial progress. We commend the efforts of the
countries of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), in particular Ghana and Nigeria, as well
as those of the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and the Organization of African Unity, all
of whom have advanced the peace process to this point.

The adoption of this resolution renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) signals the Council's recognition that the
warring factions in Liberia have taken the important steps
necessary to put their peace process back on the track.
Without that, the United States could not have endorsed
further support of the United Nations Observer Mission at
this time. But there is still a long way to go.

We urge the new Liberian Transitional Government to
build on the steps already taken so that the peace thus far
achieved will be lasting. This will require a commitment by
all sides to find negotiated solutions to the problems that
will inevitably arise during implementation of the peace
accord. The arms embargo on Liberia declared by the
Security Council must be strictly enforced. The Liberian
factions and people must keep in mind, as today's
resolution reiterates, that continuing international support,
including the participation of UNOMIL, is contingent on
their demonstrating through actions their commitment to
peacefully resolve their differences. Above all, the current
cease-fire must be strictly observed by all sides.

The resolution which we have adopted today not
only supports the Secretary-General's immediate
recommendations, but also lays the groundwork for
further changes and improvements in UNOMIL and its
relationship with the Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) of
ECOWAS. We look forward to the report of the
Secretary-General at the end of October and intend to
review carefully his specific recommendations at that
time. We believe that it would be premature to make
further changes, particularly in the number of United
Nations observers, until the Council has the opportunity
to review those recommendations.

Liberia will need the continued assistance of the
international community to re-establish the social and
institutional fabric of its society. The United States has
already contributed millions of dollars in humanitarian
assistance. ECOMOG, the regional peace-keeping force,
is also in need of assistance to better carry out its
mandate. The United States has already contributed $20
million for its support. We encourage others in the
international community to provide the needed help to the
people of Liberia and their neighbours to ensure that the
fragile shoot of peace in Liberia grows into full flower.

