Mr. Thambwe Mwamba (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As your presidency is
drawing to a close, Sir, I should like to congratulate
you on the very significant work that you have
accomplished during the month of December. I thank
you very much for allowing me to participate in this
important meeting of the Security Council on the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
Congo (MONUC).
I would like to take this opportunity to praise
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of

Costa Rica, for the skill he showed last month in
handling the very complex range of issues that come
before the Council. I would like to thank in particular
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, who has
devoted himself personally to seeking viable ways and
means to restore peace to my country, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. He has been doing so since he
came to head this universal Organization. I also
welcome the presence here today of my counterpart
from the Kingdom of Belgium, Mr. Karel de Gucht.

The Security Council has just adopted the
resolution that extends the mandate of MONUC and
requalifies its missions. The adoption of this resolution
comes after that of resolution 1843 (2008) on
20 November 2008, whereby the Council authorized,
as recommended by the Secretary-General, a temporary
increase in MONUC military and police personnel, as
well as their immediate deployment, in order to allow
the mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to strengthen its capacity to protect civilian populations
in the provinces of North and South Kivu.

Through me, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo welcomes this new resolution.
We are especially pleased that MONUC missions, in
close cooperation with the Government, are being
strengthened and consolidated in the protection of the
civilian population through disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration
programmes for national armed groups; disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation, reintegration and
repatriation programmes for foreign armed groups;
monitoring of the financing of those armed groups; and
support for security sector reform and for the territorial
integrity and political independence of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Congolese Government
and people therefore expect these new United Nations
forces to be deployed rapidly in order to put an end to
the unspeakable suffering of the populations of the
provinces of North and South Kivu and of the Ituri
district in Eastern Province.

At the very moment I address this Council, the
situation that prevails in my country, in the heart of
Africa, is nothing short of a major and unqualified
disaster. In fact, for almost ten years, the two Kivu
provinces have seen one of the deadliest conflicts since
the Second World War. There have been approximately
five million deaths, and more than 1,700,000 women,
children, elderly people and men have been displaced
and left to wander. This is more than in Darfur. A new

humanitarian catastrophe with massive violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law, in
particular violence against women and children, is
taking place at this very moment with the complete
indifference of the international Powers and cartels
who are not, however, unaware of what is at stake in
the upheaval unfairly imposed on our country.

Thus we wish for a rapid United Nations
deployment. If, however, for technical and logistical
reasons, such deployment is delayed, my Government
would also welcome the deployment of a transitional
force, which would be placed under the Security
Council mandate or would act with the Council's
support.

Similarly, the recommendation of the Secretary-
General to reconfigure MONUC in order to strengthen
its effectiveness and to refocus its action on the Kivu
provinces is something that we fully support. That is
why my Government believes that, in this context, the
massive and visible presence of a United Nations
military contingent in Goma would reassure
populations and persuade them of the merit of United
Nations action, seeking to ease their suffering and to
re-establish peace, as is the case today in other
provinces in the Republic. It is for these reasons that
my Government insists that MONUC's military
command should be set up in Goma and not in
Kinshasa.

Two years ago, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo established new legitimate institutions as a
result of successful free and democratic elections -
the first in more than 40 years of a crisis of legitimacy.
Following those elections - which were organized and
successfully carried out with the help of the
international community - we believed that a lasting
peace would be put in place, and we rightly made
reconstruction and development our priority, along
with efforts to eradicate insecurity in the eastern part of
the country and to strengthen the rule of law,
democracy and good governance.

Today, unfortunately, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is a country that, while in a post-conflict
situation, remains in a situation of conflict: a
particularly deadly conflict that is destroying all of our
country's economic recovery efforts.
At its next meeting, the Security Council will
take a decision on the sanctions regime in my country.
In that connection, the final report of the Group of

Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2008/773, enclosure), which my Government
accepts, provides eloquent information on the foreign
connections in the illegal exploitation of our natural
resources, which are fuelling the surge of violence in
the two Kivus. The report clearly shows that the true
underlying reasons why the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is being torn apart are, first and foremost,
economic in nature. Also, it confirms the accusations
that my delegations has consistently made for years. If
the international community had listened to us, and if
the Security Council had reached a consensus that
would have enabled it to act in partnership with the
Congolese Government, we would have saved millions
of human lives and prevented the massive civilian
displacements that we now regret to see in the Kivus.

The soil and subsoil of the Kivus are overflowing
with vast natural resources. As members know, some of
our neighbouring countries are members of the
exclusive group of the world's main exporters of
coltan, cassiterite and other equally important minerals
of which their own subsoils do not contain even traces.

The Congres national pour la defense du peuple
(CNDP) is a part of that structure. Thus, it is beyond
our borders that one must look for that structure's
underlying nature. Led by individuals who are marked
by massive violations of human rights and some of
whom are indeed sought by the international justice
system, this armed group, with its fallacious and
incoherent claims, operates more like a mercenary
group than a pseudo-political movement.

In addition to the report of the Group of Experts,
incisive testimony on this matter has also come from
international institutions and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). Reports by Global Witness,
Human Rights Watch and Rights and Accountability in
Development are eloquent on the subject. The report of
Southern Africa Resource Watch differs from the
others in that it identifies, names and lists multinational
corporations and other predatory enterprises that have
made their fortune on the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the blood of its people. All
of those criminals have been clearly identified, and
Council members know who they are. That was the
purely commercial start of the destabilization of the
Kivus.
Here, I welcome the commitment of the Belgian
Government and the determination of my colleague
Karel de Gucht to punish all businesses and individuals
who make use of Belgian territory to engage in these
illegal activities.

I should also note that the report of the Group of
Experts sets out serious grievances against my
Government. I affirm that those acts, when proven,
have been carried out by unauthorized persons and in
no case constitute a deliberate Government policy.
Whenever the Government has been informed of such
acts, appropriate measures have been taken; that will
continue to be the case in the fresh context of
cooperation between my Government and MONUC.

Despite the lack of security within and beyond
our borders, despite the constant violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, despite the
large number of refugees and displaced persons and
despite the continuing illegal exploitation of our
natural resources, my Government is firmly committed
to attaining peace in the subregion through the
restoration of normal diplomatic relations with all
neighbouring countries and intensification of economic
and trade cooperation through reactivating the
Economic Community of the Great Lake Countries
(CEPGL). In that connection, we have decided, in
agreement with our neighbours, to exchange
ambassadors during the first quarter of 2009.

Moreover, the reactivation of the CEPGL will
provide an opportunity for us to discuss our bilateral
problems and to broaden and deepen this new
momentum and this new spirit of cooperation and
understanding, including in the economic and security
spheres. I wish to inform the Council that the process
of assigning Congolese officials to staff this structure
is under way; it too will be finalized during the first
quarter of 2009.

In addition to my Government's efforts to restore
peace and peaceful coexistence with all our
neighbours, let me reaffirm that within our country the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is taking the same
measures to make it possible to coexist peacefully with
all elements of our national community. That is the
context of the cooperation process now under way in
Nairobi with United Nations facilitation.

This is taking place strictly within the framework
of the AMANI programme agreed upon in Goma by all
parties. For my Government the AMANI programme
remains the sole framework for discussions. The
programme, which resulted from the Goma act of

engagement adopted at the Conference on Peace,
Security and Development for the Provinces of North
and South Kivu, calls for the disengagement of armed
troops, offering each the option of either being
integrated into the regular army of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo or being demobilized and
reintegrated into society. No other framework for
discussion should be opened lest other armed troops
claim the same right.

Finally, with respect to foreign combatants on
Congolese soil, it must be noted that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is the main victim of that
presence. It is a victim of theft, rape and massacre. It is
paying for a crime it did not commit, and it is paying
because at the time the international community was
unable to correctly handle the extremely grave
situation in Rwanda. Along with that country, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has developed an
operational plan to resolve the problem, with the
assistance of MONUC.

Elsewhere, in Orientale province, joint military
operations by Uganda, the Sudan and my country are
under way with a view to putting an end to the
destructive activities of the Lord's Resistance Army.

We hope that the confluence of all these
manifestations of regional cooperation will eliminate
any pretext preventing us - as our head of State, His
Excellency the President of the Republic, Mr. Joseph
Kabila Kabange, said in his most recent state of the
nation address - from

"eliminating real or imagined disagreements that
are poisoning our relations with some of our
neighbours. In that way we will tangibly reduce
the scope for violence and pillage in the region,
which has long been facilitated by the lack of
communications among our States".

Thanks to the geographic and economically
strategic situation and to our natural resources -
which should naturally provide us with an engine for
development both regionally and subregionally in
peace, security and freely accepted democracy -
sustainable development in my country, integrated and
unified regionally and subregionally, will absolutely
provide major and ongoing opportunities for our
neighbours in particular and Africa in general. That can
never be replaced by individual and ephemeral
criminal proceeds from smuggling, nor by organized
looting of State terrorism.
The wish of my country, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, is that 2009 will be the year of the end of
the suffering of its people, the year of the return to
peace in the hearts and minds of all, not only for
Congolese but also for all peoples in the countries of
the Great Lakes region.

It is on this hopeful note that I would like to
conclude by wishing members of the Council and their
families my most sincere wishes for happiness and
prosperity in the upcoming year. May 2009 bring to the
world more understanding, more tolerance, more peace
and more solidarity.

