At the outset, I would like to thank today's briefers for their informative presentations. I would also like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic to our video-teleconference. Despite a number of challenges, the parties to the conflict in the Central African Republic managed to achieve tangible progress in advancing the political process launched in February 2019. We see a gradual improvement in the security and human rights situation and a decrease in the level of armed violence. National armed forces and internal security forces are expanding throughout the territory of the Central African Republic. Considerable progress was also made in the training and deployment of special mixed security units. We encourage the authorities of the Central African Republic to resume the implementation of the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme for combatants as soon as the restrictions related to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) are lifted. Given the current challenging circumstances, all parties should strictly comply with the provisions of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and refrain from undermining the political situation in the country. Russia, for its part, will continue to use its influence to encourage the signatories to refrain from all forms of violence in the interests of restoring peace and security to the country. We commend the steps by the Central African Republic authorities to curb the spread of COVID-19 and would like to echo the Secretary-General's call for all political actors to resist any temptation to politicize the pandemic. We strongly believe that it is in the interest of the Central African Republic to fulfil the critical task of organizing and conducting peaceful, free and transparent presidential and legislative elections as an important milestone in the further stabilization and normalization of the country. We are pleased to note that a revised electoral calendar, published on 29 April, adheres to constitutional timelines. We welcome President Touadera's efforts to de-escalate political tensions, including his decision to launch a frank dialogue with the country's political actors and partners in order to best prepare for the elections. We are encouraged by the fact that the National Assembly adopted several important laws that conform with the Agreement. The Russian Federation is ready to continue to provide comprehensive assistance to the Central African Republic with a view to resolving the crisis, including by facilitating security sector reform. We are convinced that increasing the combat readiness and professional training of the national army and law enforcement agencies will effectively counter the activities of illegal armed groups, ensure the protection of civilians and help restore State authority in all parts of the country. We will continue to follow closely the process of national reconciliation, acting in coordination with the Central African Republic authorities, the African Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic and the country's international partners. It is high time to render our collective support to Bangui to overcome the current challenges.
