Mr. Rhuggenaath (Netherlands): I would like to
thank Minister Wallstrom of Sweden for organizing
today's debate on climate-related security risks. I
also wholeheartedly thank Deputy Secretary-General
Mohammed, Minister Janabi and Ms. Ibrahim for their
excellent and valuable testimonies and briefings. In
addition, it is great to see fellow small island developing
States at this table.

I am particularly pleased to be here today, because
we are discussing a topic that directly affects my
country. As the Prime Minister of Curacao, a small
island developing State in the Caribbean, I can attest
to the fact that the link between climate change and
security is clear and undeniable to our people and to
those of other countries of the Kingdom, particularly
Aruba and Sint Maarten. Increased climate variability
threatens social stability. It can ultimately lead to
displacement and regional tensions. Where climate
change threatens international stability and security,
the Council has a responsibility to act.

What if we had known 15 years ago that in 2018,
millions of people in the Lake Chad region would need
relief assistance to survive, with water stress as one
of the threat multipliers? What if we had known that
millions ofpeople from Somalia would still be displaced
against the backdrop of severe droughts? What if we
had known that climate change would constitute an
existential threat to small island development States
like my own?

Those questions may seem irrelevant, since we
cannot change the course of history. But what we can
change is how we apply the lessons we have learned so
far. By responding in a timely manner to warning signs,
also when it comes to climate-related security risks, we
can adequately address root causes, prevent instability
and conflict and sustain peace in the future.

Recently, the Council has taken significant steps
towards recognizing climate-related security risks,
as you, Madam President, just mentioned. The first
was the adoption of resolution 2349 (2017), on the
Lake Chad basin, followed by presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/3 on the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel and resolution 2408 (2018) on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia. There
was also the request that the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq assist the Government of Iraq in
facilitating regional dialogue and cooperation on water
and most recently the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. I also recall the briefing on the Lake Chad basin
under our Kingdom's presidency (see S/PV.8212) in
which the majority of us agreed that climate change is
a threat multiplier in the region. The Council is starting
to prove that it is responsive to the security impact of
climate change where and when it matters.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly believes
that the Security Council must ensure appropriate
action by the United Nations, in New York, but
especially on the ground in affected countries. That
requires the United Nations to have the capabilities that
match the extent of the challenge. By that I mean, first,
an increased analytical capability, which is needed
for joint risk assessments, conflict analysis and early
warning, and I truly hope we can agree on the need for
better analytical information. Secondly, it requires the
capability to manage risks by encouraging more and
better programming, notably prevention, stabilization
and development efforts that are conflict and climate
sensitive. Thirdly, it requires monitoring and assessing
progress and modifying our programming when
necessary. We will continue to encourage the Secretary-
General to include climate-related risks in his reports
to the Council when and where that applies.

To advance that agenda, we also believe that the
United Nations needs an institutional home on climate
and security. Therefore, we applaud the initiative to
launch a knowledge hub on that subject. The United
Nations needs institutionalized cooperation that
is properly coordinated and embedded across the
Organization and that will enhance and accelerate how
existing United Nations agencies tackle this challenge.
As a current member of the Council, we are ready
to shoulder our responsibility and contribute to that
end. On many occasions, the necessary actions will
need to be taken on the ground by entities other than
the Security Council. Both the Secretariat and other
United Nations bodies have a role in assessing and
managing climate-related security risks. In addition,
the international community at large should also play
its part.

Assuming our responsibility, the Kingdom of
the Netherlands continues to offer a platform for
the climate and security debate through our annual
Planetary Security Conference, in which Curacao will
also participate. We hope all interested parties make
optimal use of that platform to explore solutions to
the climate-related security risks in Mali, Iraq, Lake
Chad and, of course, the Caribbean small island
developing States.

Climate-related insecurity can affect us all. As
the Prime Minister of Fiji put it, we are all in the same
canoe. I also would like to cite Thomas Friedman, who
concluded that "the only way to steer is to paddle as
fast as or faster than the rate of change", in this case
climate change.

In conclusion, we believe the Council has an
important role to play. It is up to the Security Council
to prevent instability, insecurity and the displacement
and suffering of people everywhere. The Council
therefore has to fulfil its responsibility to call for
appropriate action when stability is at risk and in the
case of climate-related threats to ensure peace for
future generations.

We heard that climate change changes everything
for everyone everywhere. This is our call and this is
our moment.

