Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on convening this
open debate and on encouraging reflection on this
important matter. Brazil welcomes the concept note
(S/2014/30, annex) circulated by your delegation and
welcomes the recommendations contained therein. 1
am also grateful to Under-Secretary-General Feltman
for his briefing.

Humanity has learned that war means death,
destruction, misery and long-term suffering. However,
history has demonstrated that laws and moral
exhortations alone are not enough to eliminate the
scourge of war. The elusiveness of permanent peace
should lead us to identify some crucial lessons from the
past that should be part of our collective engagement
towards fulfilling our role in that most pressing matter.

First and foremost is the imperative of upholding
diplomacy, cooperation and multilateralism as the
pillars that will negate the inevitability of wars. The
multilateral collective security system, and the Council
in particular, still represent the best hope for putting
the lessons of the past at the service of a future of
sustainable peace. To that end, universality and
legitimacy must be seen as the greatest strengths of the
system. There should be no room for exceptionalismn
or self-exemption from the universally applicable rules
and commitments. In its quest to demonstrate that it
has learned from previous wars, the international
community is correct in reminding itself of its failure
in preventing genocide in Rwanda and the massacre in
Srebrenica. But the record is also tainted by situations
such as the use of force without Security Council
authorization in Iraq and the decades-long inability
to effectively address the challenge of peace between
Israelis and Palestinians.

As we look for lessons in the search for a permanent
peace, we cannot overemphasize the importance of
international law and multilateralism. The United
Nations Charter, with its key provisions on the use of
force, represents the single most important conquest
of the international community in preventing the
repetition of two World Wars that stand out as the
bloodiest chapters in the history of humankind. The
Security Council, as the principal organ responsible
for upholding those provisions, remains the central
authority in that regard. Its effectiveness requires that
it be viewed as legitimate and representative.

In a multipolar world where geopolitical influence
is undergoing rapid reconfiguration, the call for reform
of the Security Council is one that must be addressed
with a sense of urgency if we do not want to risk the
erosion of the system, which, in spite of its failings, has
limited the damage of conflict and ensured a significant
measure of international cooperation for peace.

Another inescapable lesson is that greater priority
must be attributed to conflict prevention. If the Council
could better anticipate potential threats to peace and
security, several wars would have been avoided. I am
convinced that the Security Council can do more in that
regard. The protection of civilians will be better served
inasmuch as brewing crises do not escalate into open
conflicts. The most effective way to protect civilians is
to prevent armed conflict and, should it arise, display
a true commitment to its resolution by peaceful means.

As we revisit the horrors of the First World
War 100 years after it broke out, we should keep in
mind the fact that the most threatening situations to
international peace and security arise from tensions
between and among the most heavily armed world
Powers. While an examination of the current agenda
of the Security Council might lead some to imagine a
correlation between poverty and war, the truth is that
historically it is the militarily most advanced that have
wrought destruction on the widest scale. Today, threats
to global peace and security continue to derive from
the proliferation and possession of weapons of mass
destruction - in particular nuclear weapons - and
the notion that the most powerful may selectively place
themselves above international law.

In considering the importance of history for
reconciliation, the Security Council would be wise to
heed the ideas put forward by the Special Rapporteur
in the field of cultural rights in her latest report
(A/68/296). Ms. Shaheed focuses on the issue of the
writing and teaching of history. Let me refer to her
discussion of the question of historical narratives, in
particular the challenge of distinguishing between, on
the one hand, the legitimate continuous reinterpretation
of the past and, on the other, manipulations of history
for narrow political ends. In post-conflict nations,
oftentimes cultural narratives stressing adversarial
identities become embedded in historical accounts,
thereby entrenching enmities among groups that could
lead to a future relapse into conflict.

In post-conflict situations, especially when forging
the foundations of stable societies, the importance of
understanding the other, as opposed to perpetuating
adversarial attitudes, cannot be overstated. That is an
exercise that will inevitably be required in the peace
processes in the Middle East and beyond.

In the same spirit, I wish to recall the appeal for
pluralism in the context of building peace by Nobel
Prize winner Amartya Sen. In examining the question
of identity and violence, he touches on a subject
particularly relevant to today's debate - the importance
of allowing for the coexistence of multiple identities
in an individual. Categorization along a single trait or
identity, he argues, exacerbates mistrust and generates
violence. In Mr. Sen's words,

"The prospects of peace in the contemporary
world may well lie in the recognition ofthe plurality
of our affiliations and in the use of reasoning as
common inhabitants of a wide world, rather than
making us into inmates rigidly incarcerated in little
containers."

Cultural plurality can thus be considered an
essential element in preventing the consolidation of
hegemonic or parochial ideologies that fuel hatred
instead of promoting understanding. At the same time
a shared representation of the past - not as a result
of imposed interpretations, but as mutually acceptable
narratives - can be equally important to break patterns
of dissemination of distortions and falsifications placed
at the service of prejudice and delegitimization of the
other.

It may seem unusual to speak of culture and
education in the Security Council, but few authors have
promoted a more eloquent picture of where we stand
today in the search for peace than the Franco-Lebanese
writer Amin Maalouf in his inspired blueprint for
setting a course for the twenty-first century, entitled
Disordered World. As he reminds us,

"In one way or another, all the people on Earth
are in the same storm. Rich or poor, arrogant or
downtrodden, occupiers or occupied".

And for that reason, he argues, our scale of values
today can be based only on the primacy of culture
and education. The ink of the sage is worth more than
the blood of the martyr, said the prophet of Islam. In
the Talmud, there is a moving idea that the world is
supported by the breath of children studying.

