Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway. I will
make six brief points.

First, no country is immune to terrorism. Norway
experienced it in July 2011. Preventing terrorism
requires a comprehensive approach, including political,
economic, legal and military means. It is also necessary
to take a long-term perspective, while still addressing
urgent issues without delay. That is the essence of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as
pointed out in the background document for today's
meeting (see S/2013/3, annex).

Secondly, respect for human rights and the rule
of law is the starting point for all our efforts against
terrorism, at both the domestic and the international
levels. In that respect, the strengthening of correctional
capacities, such as the judiciary, police and border
control, remains important to be able to combat
transnational organized crime and terrorism.

Thirdly, we are pleased to note that the mandate of
the Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida sanctions system
was extended for 30 months in resolution 2083 (2012).
We commend Judge Prost for her impressive work, and
encourage all Member States to give their full support
to her Office and to provide her with all relevant
information.

Fourthly, it is the responsibility of Member States
to take all necessary steps to counter terrorism. The
Nordic countries have provided voluntary contributions
through the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
other United Nations entities to assist Member States in
their counter-terrorism efforts and in implementing the
Strategy. The United Nations plays a vital coordinating
role. Important steps have been taken by the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, in
particular, but there is a continued need to increase
efficiency and avoid overlap or gaps. It is also important
to improve coordination with initiatives, such as
the Global Initiative to Counter Nuclear Terrorism.
Therefore, we welcome the proposal to appoint a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator.

Fifthly, a key element in the Strategy is to prevent
the financing of terrorism. We support the close and
constructive cooperation that has been developed
between the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Executive Directorate and the Financial Action
Task Force. The Task Force has developed practical
recommendations to prevent the financing of terrorism,
and we urge all Member States to implement them.
The recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force are also useful in the fight against international
organized crime, which again plays a role in funding
terrorism. Furthermore, United Nations organizations
must strengthen their financial and other control
mechanisms, especially in complex emergencies, in
accordance with international standards in order to
prevent terrorist financing or other illegal practices.

My sixth and final point is that, in certain
situations, counter-terrorism measures and strategies
constrain humanitarian action and can even criminalize
humanitarian activities. As set out in the 2010 report
of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2010/579) and reiterated by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the restrictions imposed by State and non-State actors
on personnel and humanitarian supplies are indeed a
major concern. Such restrictions include those imposed
by donor Governments in relation to certain armed
actors in armed conflict. We need to ensure clarity on
the part of States regarding the scope and applicability
of counter-terrorism laws and measures so that they do
not undermine humanitarian commitments and in order
to fully ensure complete and unimpeded humanitarian
access.

