Mr. Angelo: Thank you for the opportunity to
brief the Council on the Secretary-General's report of
4December 2008 on Chad and the Central African
Republic, contained in document S/2008/760. I regret
the late submission of this report, which was a result of
the need to ensure that the Governments of both Chad
and the Central African Republic were fully consulted
on the proposed United Nations force. The report
contains a refined plan and concept of operations for
the proposed force and reflects an extensive process of
consultation with the relevant parties.

Following my last briefing on 19 September, the
Council, in resolution 1834 (2008), stated its intention
to authorize the deployment of a United Nations
military force to succeed the European Union-led
military force (EUFOR) in Chad and the Central
African Republic and requested an update on the
planning and preparations for such a transfer of
authority. For this purpose, a Technical Assessment
Mission visited Chad and the Central African Republic
in October and, subsequently, the United Nations held
extensive discussions with both Governments, troop-
contributing countries and EUFOR.

The Chadian government initially expressed
reluctance to accept a United Nations force of 6,000
troops, stating that the security situation had improved
in recent months and that such a force would place an
excessive burden on the environment. High-level
consultations were held in New York and in the field.
On 29 November, during a meeting with the Secretary-
General in Doha, President Deby gave his consent to
the deployment of a force of 4,900 troops in eastern
Chad. To provide for a force of 4,900, feasible
reductions were identified, including helicopter support
troops, signal units, special forces, reconnaissance
units and logistical elements. This will reduce the
logistical support and enablers to a minimum. Any
further adjustments in the force would seriously impact
its ability to implement the mandate.

In relation to the specific request by the Council
that the United Nations establish a military presence in
the northeastern region of the Central African
Republic, the report presents three options. Should the
08-6445]

Security Council desire to establish a permanent
military presence in northeastern Central African
Republic, the force would need to have a more visible
and wider ranging presence than that of EUFOR and it
would also have to possess the capability to undertake
regular patrols to Sam Oundja, 200 km south of Birao,
where an important refugee camp is located.

In the meantime, the Secretariat has been actively
engaged in the force generation process to ensure that
there is no security vacuum at the end of EUFOR's
mandate. So far, 16 nations have indicated their
willingness to positively consider contributing to a
force under the auspices of the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT), but their firm commitment is
contingent on assurances that other troop-contributing
countries would provide enablers, such as the medical
level II hospital. In order to ensure the smoothest
possible transition, commitments from EUFOR
contributors to re-hat, even for a transitional period,
need to be confirmed in the coming days.

Beyond the re-hatting of troops already on the
ground, MINURCAT will require strong support from
Member States with regard to force generation,
including equipment and enablers. Given the fluid
security situation, challenging geography and climate,
the United Nations force must be highly mobile. I
encourage all Member States to provide the necessary
troops and support elements as soon as possible.

To succeed in the implementation of its mandate,
the United Nations force must also have full freedom
of movement. Prior to its deployment, the status-of-
forces agreement between the United Nations and the
Governments of Chad and the Central African Republic
should be concluded, in addition to a memorandum of
understanding in relation to infrastructure and the
transfer and use of EUFOR sites.

Following the meeting between the Secretary-
General and President Deby in Doha, a team of senior
technical experts will travel to the region next week to
further the consultations with national authorities on
legal and administrative arrangements. In the meantime,
MINURCAT has already engaged the appropriate
authorities on the substance of those arrangements.

The situation in Chad remains fragile. The
domestic political process, within the agreement of
13 August, has known some progress with the
submission to the National Assembly of the draft bills
08-64451

on electoral reform. Progress in the implementation of
the Sirte Agreement of 25 October 2007 between the
Government of Chad and the main rebel groups has
been limited. Both Chadian armed forces and rebel
groups have reportedly strengthened their positions on
either side of the border in recent months.

The regular meetings of the Contact Group
established under the Dakar Agreement of March 2008
and the recent resumption of diplomatic relations
between Chad and the Sudan are encouraging.
MINURCAT will continue to support the Contact
Group, as the normalization of relations between the
two countries is critical for improved security in that
situation.

I wish to add that today my colleagues in the
Sudan - the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan - have been contacted
by senior Government officials, and they were told that
the Government of the Sudan has identified a column
of members of the Justice and Equality Movement with
a large number of vehicles. We do not have
confirmation of that information from the Sudanese
Government, but we will certainly be very worried if
that information is confirmed, because we really
believe that the relations between Chad and the Sudan
should normalize as part of the security and
stabilization in the region.

On the humanitarian front, Chad continues to face
a serious humanitarian crisis. Furthermore, reports of
militant activity in the camps, including the
recruitment of child soldiers, are very disturbing. So
too is the ongoing prevalence of attacks and security
incidents against humanitarian workers and the civilian
populations.

The Mission has continued to work with Chadian
authorities to facilitate the training and deployment of
the Detachement Integre de Securite (DIS), following
its official establishment in late September. The target
of training 850 DIS officers should be achieved in
January 2009. The deployment of the DIS is ongoing
despite significant logistical constraints.

As of today, the MINURCAT managed trust fund
has received a little bit more than $19 million in donor
contributions, of the estimated $23 million required to
support the DIS in its first year of operations. The trust
3
fund is being depleted faster than expected and we are
working very closely with the Government and with
Headquarters to make sure that the trust fund can be
replenished as soon as possible. We may have some
time at the beginning of next year to call an
international donors conference. In the meantime, it is
important that donors continue to provide support to
the trust fund.

I am also pleased to report the excellent
cooperation with the Governments of Chad and the
Central African Republic, with EUFOR, the United
Nations country team and also the humanitarian
community. MINURCAT will continue to collaborate
and consult extensively with all relevant partners in the
implementation of its mandate.

Let me conclude by saying that MINURCAT is
committed to help create the security conditions
conducive to a voluntary, secure and sustainable return
of refugees and displaced persons. It is nevertheless
important to stress that stability in Chad is also
dependent on the serious engagement of everyone in
Chad - the Government and opposition leaders - in a
democratic dialogue towards political inclusiveness
and good governance. Working in collaboration with
the international community, the United Nations stands
ready to assist the parties in the peaceful settlement of
their differences.

