Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jan Kubis for his briefing and for his outstanding
work in the field. France reiterates its support for the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
and thanks the Mission and the Secretary-General for
the most recent report (S/2017/357), which was issued a
few weeks ago.

Like previous speakers, I would like to address
three points: the security situation, the humanitarian
situation and the political situation.

First, on the military front, France commends the
courage and the determination of the Iraqi forces. With
support from the coalition, they have won decisive
victories against Da'esh, which has lost almost two-
thirds of the territories that it controlled at the height
of its expansion. In Mosul, in particular, Iraqi forces
have made a significant breakthrough since the start of
the offensive in the western districts. We also welcome
the launch of the operation by the Iraqi army against
Da'esh in the so-called 160-kilometre area aimed at
securing Rutba.

Those successes further reinforce the importance of
being demanding and vigilant in the humanitarian field
at all times, in particular with regard to the protection of
civilians. France reiterates its commitment to ensuring

that all forces operate under the strict control of the
Iraqi authorities and welcomes the steps taken by the
Iraqi Government to make the protection of civilians
a priority when planning operations, in accordance
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. The most recent advances by the
Iraqi security forces to retake control of Mosul have
sparked a large wave of displaced people. Every effort
should be made to assist those people. France is very
concerned about the plight of civilians trapped in
Mosul and stands with the Iraqi authorities to continue
to mobilize the international community.

I wish to reiterate in the strongest terms our
condemnation of the violence and abuses committed by
Da'esh, including the use of civilians as human shields.
Every effort should be made to facilitate the sustainable
and voluntary return of civilian populations, including
persons belonging to ethnic and religious minorities,
where security and development conditions permit.
The dignity of these people and, beyond that, the
maintenance of diversity and ethnic and religious
pluralism in the region, are at stake. Council members
are aware that France is committed to the Paris action
plan. That plan was submitted by France and Jordan at
the International Conference on the Victims of Ethnic
and Religious Violence in the Middle East, which
was held in Paris on 8 September 2015, and for which
the first follow-up conference thereto will be held in
Madrid on Wednesday, 24 May.

We support humanitarian and stabilization actions
on the ground in order to provide the displaced
populations with satisfactory living conditions and,
where possible, to encourage their return to their
towns and villages of origin. The return-assistance
projects currently being implemented focus mainly on
demining, socioeconomic recovery and the resumption
of basic public services, based on an integrated and
geographically targeted logic.

I would also like to refer to the fight against
impunity, which is an essential component of the
mandate of UNAMI. It is now urgent to gather and
preserve evidence as soon as possible so that the
authenticity of the objects is protected and subsequently
that those objects be transferred and examined by the
competent court when the time comes. France will
support efforts in that vein, in support of the Iraqi
Government. The Prime Minister, Mr. Haider A1
Abadi, has called on the Security Council to act. We
must shoulder our responsibilities. There can be no
lasting peace without justice.

Given the magnitude of these challenges, the work
of the United Nations and its partners, in conjunction
with the Iraqi Government, must be commended. They
organize and provide humanitarian assistance under
these difficult conditions, and make it possible to host
civilians fleeing the fighting in emergency facilities.
Priority should also be given to strengthening the
already considerable stabilization efforts undertaken
by the Iraqi authorities and the United Nations
Development Programme in areas freed from the yoke
of Da'esh.
Alongside those efforts, cultural heritage, as the
representative of Italy recalled, must also be protected.
That cannot be neglected in view of the extent of the
destruction observed in Iraq. We must exercise utmost
vigilance to combat all trafficking and to make use of
all the tools at our disposal, in particular resolution
2347 (2017), which we submitted jointly with Italy, and
which the Secretary-General references in his report
(S/2017/357).

Beyond the emergency, we must also and above all
now prepare for the future in order to avoid any security
or governance vacuum. That includes an inclusive
governance policy plan for Mosul and its region. Indeed,
winning the war is not enough. Sustainable peace must
be established.

The total and lasting defeat of Da'esh relies on a
comprehensive, political and inclusive solution that
speaks to the aspirations of all segments of the Iraqi
population, with respect for both its diversity and the
unity of Iraq. There is an urgent need for the political,
institutional, economic and social reintegration of
all segments of society, especially Sunni Muslims,
without which chaos will only return. We welcome
the progress that has already been made and call on
the Iraqi Government to accelerate the adoption and
implementation of reforms that encourage national
reconciliation. We also call on that Government to
establish inclusive governance at the national and
local levels and to put in place local security forces
that are accepted by the population. Our support for
Prime Minister Al Abadi is essential to his ability
to overcome these immense challenges in a tense
pre-electoral atmosphere.

Lastly, we encourage Erbil and Baghdad to
continue their dialogue, which, at the political level,
has made it possible to define the modalities of an
agreement for operation in Mosul operations; to resolve
differences between them; and to take the first steps
toward a sustainable solution, with full respect for the
unity of Iraq. Given the breadth of these challenges,
our collective and continuous support to the Iraqi
authorities is indispensable.

