The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity as Minister of State.

I would like to thank Special Coordinator Robert
Serry for his excellent briefing.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the European Union.

We are at a crucial moment in the Middle East
process. People across the region are rising up for
freedom, democracy and a better life. At the same time,
we face a continuing stalemate in the Israeli-
Palestinian peace process. Within the volatile regional
context, it is more urgent than ever to reach lasting
peace between Israelis and Palestinians. For the people
in the region, progress in the peace process would send
a strong signal of stability and would be testimony to
the merits of politics and diplomacy.

We all share the same vision. We want to see the
State of Israel and a sovereign, independent,
democratic, contiguous and viable State of Palestine
living side by side in peace and security. It is time to
make decisive progress. Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas must assume their responsibility and
take bold steps towards the resumption of direct and
substantive talks.

We remain convinced that clear parameters are a
prerequisite for successful negotiations. President
Obama set out a balanced approach in his speech on
19 May. The European Union, for its part, has
articulated what it considers to be the key parameters.
Germany, France and the United Kingdom stated their
view on this matter in a joint explanation of vote in this
Council (see S/PV.6484). We continue to believe that
an international endorsement of parameters is needed
in order to create a basis for genuine negotiations.

The Quartet continues to play a central role in
this process and has been in permanent contact with the
parties. Germany strongly supports the efforts by the
European Union High Representative, Baroness
Ashton, in the Quartet for a credible and balanced
perspective to relaunch and facilitate the peace process.
We call on the Quartet to continue and intensify its
efforts to set out a fair and balanced framework for
negotiations in order to trigger progress prior to the
September deadline that it has itself endorsed.

Palestinian leaders have announced that they may
turn to the United Nations in their quest for statehood.
At the same time, Palestinians have made it very clear
that a resumption of negotiations is their preferred
option. Palestinians expect from their leaders headway
in establishing a Palestinian State. Germany
acknowledges the remarkable progress by the
Palestinian Authority in building the institutions of the
future State of Palestine. In their reports, the World
Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the United
Nations have clearly stated that the Palestinian
Authority has crossed the threshold towards a
functioning State in key sectors. Now, the political
process needs to catch up urgently with the substantial
progress made on the ground. At the same time, we
must do everything to preserve the achievements on the
way to Palestinian statehood.

Let me be very clear on this: Germany supports
the establishment of a Palestinian State. As a matter of
course, such a State will become a Member of the
United Nations. Progress in this direction is a matter of
urgency. Palestinians and Israelis have been waiting for
too long to see the conflict end. But there is no viable
or acceptable alternative to negotiations. Only
negotiations will end the occupation, and only
negotiations can provide a possible solution to the core
issues. Any action that is not conducive to a
comprehensive solution and that could undermine trust
between the parties should therefore be avoided.

We are deeply concerned that failure to provide a
credible political horizon for real progress towards a
two-State solution could lead to serious consequences.
Germany remains deeply concerned about continued
settlement construction in the Palestinian territories
and in East Jerusalem and about new construction
plans and recent land confiscation in the West Bank,
the first since 2008.

In this Council, Germany, together with Britain
and France, has made its position on settlements very
clear: they are illegal under international law and are
an obstacle to peace, and they constitute a threat to a
two-State solution. All settlement activity, including in
East Jerusalem, should therefore cease immediately.
All members of the Council are in agreement that
continued settlement activity constitutes a major
obstacle to the achievement of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace. It is most unfortunate that
settlement construction has continued despite so many
appeals.

Gaza remains a serious concern. We strongly
condemn the recent resumption of rocket and mortar
attacks on Israeli territory after the ceasefire following
the Cairo Agreement. That type of action is utterly
unacceptable. Germany recognizes Israel's right to
protect its citizens against attacks. At the same time,
we look to Israel to exercise this right judiciously, in
order to forestall further escalation. We continue to call
for the immediate and unconditional release of Staff
Sergeant Gilad Shalit, who has been held hostage for
more than five years now.

Let me turn to one of the challenges that lie
ahead. There is a need to sustain the positive
developments initiated by the Palestinian Authority.
The current financial situation is critical. It is not clear
if salaries can be paid any longer. We call on all donors
to honour their existing commitments. It may also
become necessary to mobilize an additional
international donor effort, and we would welcome any
such initiative.

We need to help create and maintain the
conditions for self-sustained economic growth,
including in Gaza. The appropriate way ahead is the
full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009), calling

for the immediate, sustained and unconditional opening
of crossings for goods and people to and from Gaza,
and for the prevention of the illicit trafficking of arms
and ammunition. At the same time, we expect any
Palestinian Government to commit itself unequivocally
to the principle of non-violence, to a two-State solution
and to a negotiated peaceful settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, accepting the previous agreements
and obligations, including Israel's legitimate right to
exist. By the same token, we expect those bearing
Government responsibility in Israel to unequivocally
accept the two-State solution and to do their utmost to
set the course for it.

People in the Middle East have suffered too long
from conflict and confrontation. Our shared goal is a
just and lasting peace that ends the conflict and
resolves all claims. In our time, many attempts to reach
this goal have been frustrated. We understand the
growing impatience, but we should be clear about what
will bring us closer to peace, and what may result in
further frustrations.

I should just like to say a word on Syria. We are
deeply shocked by the current events in that country.
Despite promises of reforms and dialogue with the
opposition, military actions, killings, arrests and
repression continue. We are concerned about acts of
violence between followers of different creeds. We
urge the Syrian Government to stop playing the
sectarian card. The Syrian regime must put a halt
immediately to all violence against and repression of
the Syrian people. Only if the violence stops is there a
chance for initiating a sustainable political process.
The transition towards a new Syria must be based on
the full political participation of all its citizens and on
commitment to the protection and promotion of human
rights.

It is not for outsiders to decide the future of
Syria. This is an issue of the sovereignty of the people.
The people of Syria are speaking loudly and clearly,
just as the peoples of Egypt and Tunisia expressed their
views. The legitimate demands of the Syrian people
must be addressed. The Security Council cannot stand
aside. It is our firm belief that a strong signal from the
Council condemning the ongoing violence and
repression of the Syrian people is of the utmost
importance. The Security Council must assume its
responsibility.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Egypt.

