Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Peruvian presidency for holding this meeting. I
also thank Ambassador Llorentty Soliz and his team
for their briefing, as well as for the work done at the
healm of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). The adoption
today of its programme of work, which has been under
discussion for some time, and the content of which
needed to be commensurate with our expectations, is
an important and positive development. It allows us to
propose and define future activities by capitalizing on
the achievements of previous years.

With the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004)
and all subsequent resolutions, the Security Council
established the threat of the proliferation and use of
weapons of mass destruction, in particular by non-State
actors, as one of its priorities, thereby asserting its role
as guarantor of the non-proliferation regime. However,
that regime is now clearly threatened. It is being tested
across the board by the persistent risk of a nuclear
North Korea, the continuation of destabilizing ballistic
activities in the Middle East and by the re-emergence
of chemical weapons in Syria - where they are used
by the Al-Assad regime and by Da'esh, and in Salisbury
and elsewhere. Ultimately, proliferation is no longer
the monopoly of a single type of actor; the risk of
non-State actors getting hold of sensitive materials is a
dangerous reality. That is why the 1540 Committee is
more relevant than ever. In that context, to contain and
halt proliferation, we must, more than ever, increase
our mobilization. That is why the raison d'etre of the
1540 Committee and the related resolutions are more
relevant than ever.

The 1540 Committee is the architect of the action
taken by all States that contribute concretely to joint
efforts against proliferation. I would like to pay tribute
to the Group of Experts, whose analysis and efforts to
raise awareness are indispensable to the work of the

1540 Committee. The review they conducted in 2016
confirmed that. The progress in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent resolutions are
tangible at the national and regional levels. However,
despite the undeniable progress of recent years, much
remains to be done.

Each of us must strive to calibrate our efforts to
implement resolution 1540 (2004). We must all prevent
and suppress the financing of proliferation. We must
secure the most sensitive goods and materials in our
territories, and strengthen export controls, especially
against the risk of the instrumentalization of emerging
technologies, which we must address. France has
modernized its national counter-proliferation legal
system, which now criminalizes proliferation activities
and supress the funding of such activities. My country
is also particularly involved in preventing the risk of
the acquisition by terrorists of sensitive nuclear and
radioactive material, including radioactive sources, the
securing of which we would like to see strengthened.
We support the steps taken by the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and those of the Group
of Seven Global Partnership against the Spread of
Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, which we
will head in 2019.

Let me highlight the importance of cooperation,
assistance and interaction in all of our efforts. Because
we are more effective together, we must not deploy
our efforts to combat proliferation in an isolated way.
On cooperation and assistance, I can assure Council
members of the commitment of my delegation, which
is playing the role of coordinating the Working
Group on Assistance with a view to improving the
effectiveness of the assistance mechanism according to
the mentioned guidelines.

France attaches great importance to strengthening
the regional dimension of assistance and to ensuring
better alignment between the needs and the proposed
assistance. The holding of regional events, like those
organized by the African Union in 2016, is a recipe for
success, and we must draw from that experience. We
also welcome actions taken by other stakeholders that
were mentioned. I take note specifically ofthe European
Union, which, through its dynamic and ongoing
awareness efforts, is helping promote cooperation.

Finally, if we are to be effective, we must also
take stock of our challenges by enhancing synergies
with others that share the same challenges outside
of the United Nations, like the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, the World Customs Organization
or export control regimes and the various bodies
that comprise them. I am specifically thinking of
committees dealing with terrorism. These interactions
are to be encouraged.

Let me state the obvious: at a time when challenges
to our security are greater than ever, there is no
alternative to the non-proliferation regime. France has
never deviated from that position and will continue to
defend it by supporting and fully contributing to the
activities of the 1540 Committee.

