The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Colombia, Greece,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, Kazakhstan,
New Zealand, Norway, the Philippines, the Republic of
Korea, Tajikistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhddi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Giraldo (Colombia), Mr. Vassilakis (Greece),
Mr. Gopinathan (India), Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Haraguchi (Japan),
Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan), Mr. McIvor (New Zealand), Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Manalo
(Philippines), Mr. Chun (Republic of Korea),
Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan), Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine)
and Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa, Director General of the United Nations Office at
Vienna and Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Costa to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and by
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Director-General of the
United Nations Office in Vienna and Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime.

I call on Mr. Guehenno.


