Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): Let me
begin by thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
giving us his final briefing on various aspects involved
in the Palestinian question. Like other speakers before
me, I would like to pay tribute to him once again for his
commitment to this issue.

The briefing we just heard is full of lessons, but we
must also face the sad reality of the Palestinian people.
Despite multiple initiatives, the future of the peace
process continues to offer little hope: in fact, we might
say that it has reached an impassse. Unfortunately,
we see the two-State solution disappearing more
rapidly each day - at a time when we are witnessing
the continued acceleration of settlement activities,
especially new units in Gilo, East Jerusalem, whereas
in 2006 such demolitions of homes, premises and other
buildings affected only 2,500 citizens.

At the last Arria Formula meeting on settlement
activity, on 14 October, thanks to the initiative of five
members of the Security Council, we heard statements
made by experts, including Israeli citizens, that there
is clear progress in populating occupied Palestinian
territory based on the official policies of the Israeli
Government. We therefore solemnly called for the
Security Council at last to work towards ending the
occupation and settlement activities, which, I remind
the Council, affects both Palestinians and Israelis alike.

I would also like to highlight the ongoing impact
of this conflict on children, mostly Palestinian;. But
we must also not forget that Israeli children, too, are
suffering from this conflict. As far as these children are
concerned, they have known only war and occupation.
However, along with Israelis and Palestinians alike, we
share the same aspirations for peace and stability. The
Council must act to restart negotiations leading to a
solution to those disputes.

In accordance with resolution 1860 (2009), we
reiterate our call to lift the blockade on Gaza, which
has had devastating humanitarian and socioeconomic
consequences, affecting around 2 million people, half
of whom are children. We recall the urgent need to
rebuild Gaza, in particular through the pledges that
were made at the international donors conference held
in Cairo in 2014.

Without progress in the peace process, there will be
no end to the violence that affects both Palestinians and
Israelis. We reiterate our disapproval and condemnation
of violence and terrorism, as well as incitement to
hatred, regardless of the perpetrators or the motivation.
We moreover reaffirm our position in favour of holding
a follow-up conference to the conference held in Paris
in June in order to give every chance of success to the
French initiative, for which our delegation renews its
support. We also support diplomatic efforts undertaken
by Egypt and the Russian Federation, which, in our
View, require further coordination.

It is the responsibility of the international
community, of the Security Council first, as the
guarantor of international peace and security, to work
for the two-State solution - one Palestinian and the
other Israeli, living side by side in peace and security
within internationally recognized, secure borders.
That is the intention of all the relevant United Nations
resolutions and what is recommended in the Quartet's
report of 1 July. According to the report, the time
has come for this body, whose members agree on the
obstacles that stand in the way of a lasting solution to the
dispute, to take up this critical issue as soon as possible
and reaffirm the centrality of the two-State solution.

