Ms. Samar: It is a pleasure to brief the Security
Council again on Afghanistan. I would like to thank the
Council for supporting efforts towards peace, security
and human rights in Afghanistan. I also thank Germany
and the other members that facilitated the holding of
this briefing.

After 18 years of cooperation and support from
the international community, Afghanistan is entering a
very important point in its history. Hope and optimism
for promoting and protecting human rights and human
dignity has never been higher. At the same time, the
fear of going back to the time when Afghans, especially
women and minorities, were denied their rights and
freedoms has never been greater. The talks with the
Taliban have ignited a Widespread and nationwide
debate over lasting peace. The popular demand is that
the outcome of talks should conform with human rights
and democratic and free-society norms and values. The
talks have generated concerns about the commitment
of the parties to preserving Afghan progress on human
rights, freedom, democracy and economic development.

This year the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission launched a national inquiry on
women, peace and security to give voice to the views
of women and their expectations of the potential peace
deal. The inquiry, which covered 30 provinces and
included public hearings, focus groups and surveys
of over 3,400 women, was an honest effort to engage
women in peace and security. The results from the
inquiry displayed the strong and clear understanding
of Afghan women, who desire a lasting peace in which
they play a role and are able to express their views and
put their demands on the table.

Women from all over the country stressed the
importance of preserving the bill of rights in our
Constitution and demanded that women's rights,
human rights and democracy not be compromised or
put on the agenda as an item up for negotiation during
any political talks. Women also emphasized the need
for accountability, social justice and an end to the
culture of impunity. They have demanded that strong
will for peace be shown by all parties and that they
make commitments to democratic and human rights
norms and values. Afghan women were grateful for
the remarks made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in support of the role of women in
peace and security at joint events that took place in
Helmand, Kandahar and Kunduz.

I would like to use this forum today to call for a
comprehensive, sustained commitment and strong
political will to make it possible for women to continue
to make progress and succeed. Women need to overcome
the challenges of a traditional and conservative society,
in addition to systematic and historic discrimination.
I would like to ask the international community to
provide long-term support for the promotion of gender
equality for sustainable peace and development.

Afghanistan is in conflict. Over 41 years, the
people experienced the extreme-left Government of
the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan and the
extreme-right of the Taliban. The people witnessed the
disappearance and killing of their loved ones and the
destruction of their homes. They were forced to become
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees. And
their rights and freedoms were violated by the regimes,
without any accountability or justice for the victims.
Women and other vulnerable groups suffered the most.
The people had no role in choosing their Government.
After the fall of the Taliban regime, we witnessed some
progress on the promotion, protection and fulfilment
of human rights. That progress includes reform of
laws in accordance with international human rights
conventions, progress on the fight against torture, and
the realization of the political, civil, economic and
social rights of all the people.

Unfortunately, the continuation of conflict and
insecurity and the increased level of attacks on civilians,
civilian places, mosques and religious minority groups
have resulted in high numbers of civilian casualties and
IDPs. The number of civilian causalities last year stood
at 11,212, which was a 19 per cent increase. The Taliban
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
remain the main groups inflicting civilian causalities;
in some cases, the Afghan security forces and their
international partners are also involved.

There must be a mechanism in place to heal the
pain and wounds ofvictims. We need strong institutions
and measures in place to prevent the reoccurrence of
violence and gross human rights violations. Economic
development is key to facilitating and maintaining
long-term peace. Economic opportunities must be
created and must benefit women, youth and the poor
without discrimination. The prosperity and well-being
of women and the poor are requirements for lasting
peace and stability.
Progress in Afghanistan towards the holding of free
and fair elections is also key to stability and security. The
presidential election is set to be held in September. The
commitment and cooperation of all candidates, political
parties and civil society on monitoring, observing and
facilitating a free and fair election is very important to
the legitimacy of the election. I would also like to call
on the Government and the international community
to support free and fair elections by refraining from
interference, safeguarding voter safety and security
and providing financial support for a civic awareness
programme. I am happy to say that the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, with the
support of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, will monitor political rights through
the human rights framework. The Commission will
continue to verify rights to the freedoms of expression,
association and movement, as well as closely monitor
the four principles of impartiality, no interference, no
intimidation and no discrimination.

Torture is a serious human rights violation and
should not be allowed under any circumstance - against
anyone or by anyone. Afghan special forces recently
rescued several hundreds of prisoners held by the Taliban.
Reports show that the Taliban have systematically
tortured, mistreated or killed detainees and prisoners. I
condemn torture. The perpetrators of torture should be
held accountable. Despite the decrease in the number
of torture cases in the detention facilities run by the
Government, we still remain concerned about the
situation and a lack of accountability in that regard.

Civil society and human rights defenders play
important roles in the promotion and protection of
human rights, fostering democracy and holding the
State accountable. They face enormous challenges,
including with regard to security and shrinking space
for their activities and programmes. Support for civil
society and human rights defenders must be in place
and sustained.

I also would like to brief the Council on the
situation of justice, accountability, the rule of law and
anti-corruption efforts. Despite some improvements,
the situation still needs political will, investment,
capacity-building and public awareness. Holding the
perpetrators of human rights violations, war crimes and
crimes against humanity accountable has been proving
hard for our national judiciary mechanisms. The
decision of the International Criminal Court to initiate
an investigation of the situation in Afghanistan created
some hope last year, although that hope faded away
when the Pre-Trial Chamber rejected the Prosecutor's
request for an investigation. Ending the culture of
impunity is key for building confidence between people
and the State, which, in turn, is necessary to facilitate
the peace process. Access to justice is not a luxury; it is
a basic human right.

With regard to accountability for cases ofcorruption,
some progress has been made. Although many officials
were successfully prosecuted, the public perception
has remained sceptical regarding the progress; there
are concerns that prosecutions have been selective and
only against those who do not have a strong political
base. I hope further actions will be taken to improve the
administration ofjustice and change public perception.

Last year, the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission conducted research on racial
discrimination. More than 20 per cent of Afghans
felt they were discriminated against. It is important
to improve the sense of social justice and inclusion
so that everyone feels equal and no one is left
behind - politically, economically or socially.

The millions of children attending schools is a
critical sign of progress in the country. However, many
children continue to suffer from being forced out of
schools and from child labour and different kinds of
abuse. The Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission's national inquiry on child labour shows
that little has been done to protect children from
child labour and that they are exposed to violence
and harassment. The Taliban and ISIS continue to use
children in conflict and to target girls' schools.

Allow me to talk about the millions of people with
disabilities or addicted to drugs in Afghanistan. While
they constitute a large proportion of the population,
they suffer from neglect, a lack of support and social
security, and discrimination. We must work towards
the full realization of their rights. I would like to call
on the Government to allocate an adequate portion of
the budget to supporting people with disabilities and
addictions so as to rehabilitate and reintegrate them
into society.

Finally, while all parties should agree on a
ceasefire to end civilian suffering, and while the war
must end, healing the wounds and giving attention to
the victims of the conflict must be priorities for the
Afghan Government and the international community
in order to avoid the continuation of revenge and
violence. Accountability and justice include not only
criminal justice but also the establishment of a realistic
mechanism to promote lasting reconciliation.

I would like to call on the Security Council and the
United Nations to step up efforts to safeguard lasting
peace and democratic and human rights norms in the
country. It is necessary to engage all ethnic, religious
and civil society groups - in particular women, youth
and victims in a meaningful way - in the planning,
negotiation and implementation of a peace plan for
Afghanistan. No one should feel threatened or left
outside of the process, and all realistic and legitimate
expectations and concerns must be effectively
addressed. Transparency in the peace process is needed
to increase the support of the public for the process and
reduce suspicion among the different ethnic groups.

We should learn lessons from the Afghan conflict
and peace deals over the past 40 years, as well as from
other peace processes around the world, including
the refusal to sacrifice accountability and justice for
a short-term political deal. We need to have patience
and a comprehensive strategy for peacebuilding. the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
issued a report in 2004 entitled A Call for Justice,
based on the national consultation on transitional
justice. I would like to request that the United Nations
support the next stage of the transitional justice
process to address the people's desire for peace, justice
and reconciliation. Peace, security and sustainable
development are not possible without the promotion
and protection of and respect for human rights,
which are a shared responsibility of Afghans and the
international community.

