Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote D'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'Ivoire thanks Mr. De Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for
his briefing on the latest developments in the political
process and the situation in the country, and for his
work to find a solution to the ongoing crisis.

The Ivorian delegation remains concerned about
the upsurge in fighting, which with every passing
day further distances us from finding a peaceful
settlement through political negotiations. Despite the
efforts of the international community to establish
a ceasefire, we continue to witness indiscriminate
attacks and bombardments in eastern Ghouta and other
areas in Syria, thereby resulting in a large number
of casualties among civilians and the destruction of
important infrastructure.

My country therefore calls once again for an
immediate cessation of hostilities and urges the
international community to work together towards the
effective implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).
That resolution, which was unanimously adopted by the
Security Council, calls for establishing a humanitarian
cessation of hostilities of at least 30 days so as to
allow for the safe, lasting and unhindered access of
humanitarian convoys to deliver essential supplies to
the people of eastern Ghouta and other areas in Syria.
Should it be implemented, such a temporary cessation
of hostilities could not only alleviate the suffering of
millions of people living in distress and hopelessness,
but also allow for the resumption of political talks
among Syrian parties in a peaceful environment. In that
regard, Cote d'Ivoire hopes that the Astana meeting will
lead to a lasting ceasefire, improve the humanitarian
situation and establish the conditions for advancing the
political process.

My country welcomes all initiatives aimed at
reviving the inter-Syrian dialogue and encourages
Mr. De Mistura to continue undertaking, within the
framework of the Geneva process, the steps needed to
set up the committee responsible for drafting Syria's
new constitution, as agreed at the meeting in Sochi in
the Russian Federation.

In conclusion, my delegation urges the Syrian
parties to give priority to dialogue, which is the only
way to advance the political process with a view to a
definitive end to the crisis, in accordance with the road
map laid out by resolution 2254 (2015). That is cote
d'Ivoire's profound conviction and it is in the interests
of the Syrian people.

