Terrorism and transnational organized crimes have affected almost all States. The concerted efforts of affected States, under the auspices of the United Nations, play a decisive role in preventing and prosecuting such crimes. In that regard, we have an ongoing commitment to counter the scourges of terrorism and transnational organized crimes, whether domestic or transnational, and any possible links that may exist between them. At the national level, Iran has made considerable efforts to update its domestic legal frameworks to more effectively strengthen law enforcement authorities in countering and keeping pace with the new modus operandi of organized criminal, as well as terrorist, groups. For example, Iran's Countering Money Laundering Act and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act have both been recently updated, taking into account the relevant international standards and practices. Moreover, the capacity of judicial institutions to address those crimes has been strengthened. At the international level, the Islamic Republic of Iran has fully demonstrated its dedication and unwavering resolve in fighting those heinous crimes. Having fallen victim to numerous international terrorist acts, Iran has undertaken considerable measures to punish the perpetrators and prevent other acts of such a nature. Concurrently, Iran has assisted neighbouring countries, at their request, in combating terrorist groups designated by the Security Council. The sacrifices of the Iranian nation, including the tireless efforts of the martyr General Soleimani, who was assassinated in Iraq by the United States, to eradicate terrorism in the region, are well documented. Likewise, Iran has been at the forefront of fighting transnational organized crime, including human trafficking, migrant smuggling and trafficking in cultural property and illicit drugs, including their transit through our territory. According to the annual United Nations World Drug Report, as a country located next to an epicentre of the world drug problem, Iran has had the world's largest quantities of opiates seizures in several consecutive years. That and other achievements of Iran have cost the country dearly, including the lives of almost 4,000 Iranian law enforcement personnel over the past four decades. Iran is determined to continue its efforts to combat terrorists and drug traffickers. However, to ensure the continuity and effectiveness of our efforts, the international community should provide assistance without preconditions, discrimination or politicization. Furthermore, the excessive use of unlawful unilateral economic and financial sanctions by some countries, particularly the United States, should be confronted, as they generate hurdles to national efforts and provide breeding grounds for criminal networks. Understanding the underlying causes and the complex dynamics of terrorism and organized crimes, and their possible interactions, is a necessary prerequisite for evidence-based action by States. We share the view that the possible linkages between those two heinous crimes need to be further studied in order to guide our actions. In that regard, we agree with the Secretary-General that "States should continue to proactively exchange information to support additional research and collect empirical evidence" (S/2020/754, para. 108). The two plagues correspond to different motivations and have separate legal frameworks. On the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, by virtue of its purposes and nature, terrorism constitutes a threat to international peace and security. But transnational organized crimes, with a different nature and scope, remain within the realm of public security. At the same time, there is not enough data to support the existence of a universal or direct linkage between such criminal activities. Any possible links that may exist between terrorism and transnational organized crimes should be understood in their specific contexts and conditions. For instance, they may feed on each other when the conditions are right, as some terrorist circles in our neighbourhood have been nourished from the proceeds of drug trafficking. Even in such specific circumstances in which a relationship between those crimes may arise, different spheres of liability are involved and different sanctions and procedures should be applied. Such an argument proves a fortiori applicable with respect to a possible link between domestic organized crimes and terrorism as well. In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that the Islamic Republic of Iran, consistent with its international commitments, will continue its efforts to effectively prevent and counter organized crime and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
