Ms. Rasheed (Palestine): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency this month and thank you for convening this
important debate on children and armed conflict. This
matter continues to be ofthe highest priority and urgency
for the State of Palestine. I would also like tojoin others
in thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict Leila
Zerrougui and UNICEF Executive Director Anthony
Lake for their briefings this morning.
Without any doubt, the call to action made in Graca
Machel's 1996 report (see A/51/306) and the efforts
made thereafter by the international community have
contributed to notable successes and achievements
in the areas of children's rights and the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. However, today,
as validated by the speakers in this debate, the world
faces new and grave challenges in connection with
the protection of children affected by armed conflict.
As such, the devastating impact and the long-lasting
consequences for millions of children must warrant an
immediate and serious response by the international
communit - or rather, a renewed call to action - in
order to overcome the unprecedented and persisting
challenges facing children.

The report (S/2016/360) of the Secretary-General
before us today directly links the increased intensity
of grave violations in a number of situations of armed
conflict to the denigration of respect for international
humanitarian and human rights law. We could not agree
more with his assessment. For nearly half a century,
the Palestinian people and their children living under
Israeli occupation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, have endured appalling
levels of human suffering as their rights have been
violently denied and international humanitarian
law has continued to be trampled on by Israel, the
occupying Power.

Unprotected, despite the very clear provisions
of international law according protection to civilians
under foreign occupation, Palestinian children continue
to be killed, injured and terrorized by the occupying
Power with complete impunity. The Secretary-
General's report clearly reflects that. In fact, not
only did violations by Israel against Palestinian
children continue, but since October 2015 they have
intensified as the occupying forces have unleashed a
new wave of aggression, provocation and incitement
against the entire Palestinian civilian population,
including children. Tragically, since then, more than 40
Palestinian children have been killed, many of whom in
extrajudicial executions.

As noted by the report and verified by many
international human rights organizations, Israeli
occupying forces resorted to the excessive use of force
and unlawful killings despite the fact that there were no
indications that the children killed posed an imminent
or immediate threat to Israeli occupying forces. In
addition to the killing of those children, we would also
like to share that, since October 2015, more than 2,600
children have also been injured, many severely, owing
to Israel's use of live ammunition against unarmed and
defenceless Palestinian children.

The report before us also notes an increased number
of Palestinian children who were arrested and detained
by Israeli occupying forces during the reporting period,
including many who are currently being held under
administrative detention. In occupied East Jerusalem
alone, 860 Palestinian children were arrested, including
136 between 7 and 11 years of age, under the age of
criminal responsibility. It must be recalled that most,
if not all, children held in Israeli prisons or detention
centres are subjected to various forms of psychological
and physical torture.

Moreover, settler violence and terror against
Palestinians, including children, under the protection
and watch of the Israeli occupying forces, continue
unabated. The report notes that there were at least
20 cases of settler attacks that resulted in injury to
Palestinian children. This includes the terrorist attack
on 31 July 2015, when settler terrorists burned the
Dawabshe family home in the occupied West Bank
village of Duma, killing 18-month-old baby Ali and
fatally injuring his parents. Ali's 4-year-old brother
Ahmad, who suffered severe burns, is the only
survivor and was only released from the hospital to a
rehabilitation facility just last week.

Besides those violations, Israel, the occupying
Power, continues with its systematic collective
punishment of the entire Palestinian civilian population
in the occupied Palestinian territory, which has
gravely affected our children. One example of that is
the occupying Power's continued unlawful practice
of punitive home demolitions, which have rendered
hundreds of children and their families homeless. The
report also notes that attacks on schools and protected
personnel, and a pervasive environment of violence,
harassment and intimidation by the occupying Power,
continued to have an impact on Palestinian children's
access to education. Attacks by the occupying Power
on hospitals in the occupied State of Palestine also
continued, despite the fact that hospitals, as well
as schools, are afforded special protection under
international humanitarian law.

Palestinian children in the occupied Gaza Strip
also continue to be victims of persistent violations of
international law at the hands of the occupying Power.
Children who managed to escape death or physical
injury during the three wars on Gaza over a six-year
span live with psychological effects that are severe
and resounding. Many have lost one or two parents,
and some have even lost their entire extended families.
Moreover, more than 44,000 Palestinian children
are still displaced as a result of their homes being
destroyed by the occupying Power in its 2014 war on
Gaza, in which grave violations, including war crimes,
were committed before the eyes of the international
community, without consequences for the occupying
Power or justice served for the Palestinian people.

In addition, the 10-year illegal Israeli blockade - a
repugnant form of collective punishment amounting to
a war crime and the source of countless human rights
violations - has persisted, deepening poverty, food
insecurity, health problems and many other social and
economic ills among children, including the fact that
for the first time in five decades the infant mortality
rate in Gaza has risen, as hospitals continue to lack
adequate infrastructure, basic drugs and supplies due
to Israeli restrictions.

All of these violations must cease and Israel must
be compelled to respect international law, for these
crimes committed against our children are intolerable
and unacceptable. We reiterate that the Palestinian
people and their children cannot remain the exception
to the responsibility to protect civilians from atrocities
and flagrant breaches of the law, for they are not just
statistics but human beings whose lives are being
constantly shattered by a brutal occupier that proves
over and over again its total disregard for the lives and
rights of Palestinian children.

Therefore, we call on the international community,
including the Security Council, to uphold its
responsibilities and provide the necessary assistance and
protection to Palestinian children and hold accountable
the violators of international law, especially those laws
meant to protect children's rights. Palestinian children
deserve more than a life marked by the daily fear and
humiliation that comes with living under occupation.
They deserve to live in freedom, peace, dignity and
security, which can be realized only when they are free
from occupation and living in their own independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

