We appreciate the initiative to hold this open debate on the issue of youth, peace and security, including the role of young people in the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak response. This year we mark the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security, as well as celebrating the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. The appropriate observance of these milestones is now even more important than before due to the global pandemic. We consider that a united and targeted response to the coronavirus disease would be incomplete without the inclusion of representatives of young people in this process. The first report of the Secretary-General on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167) provides an analysis of the five pillars: participation, protection, prevention, disengagement and reintegration, and partnerships. We took note of that analysis and support the report's findings on the growing recognition of the role of young people in peace and security, as well as on the remaining core challenges for young people, including the violation of their human rights. In that regard, we see a further need to reinforce our actions to respond to the aspirations of young people for peace, justice and human rights. We would like to affirm that the Ukrainian Government is carefully studying the recommendations contained in this report and will consider them in the process of the further adjustment of its national youth policy. Ukraine is committed to strengthening the potential of young people, creating equal opportunities and guaranteeing equal rights. Returning to the Secretary-General's report, we note that there has been tangible progress in the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda with the crucial involvement of key actors in this process, in particular representatives of civil society organizations and young people themselves. At the same time, it is too early to celebrate our success. Unfortunately, the most serious challenges for young people continue to impede positive changes, even in the five pillars mentioned by the Secretary-General. All regions of the world deserve a more peaceful and sustainable environment for young people that enables them to realize their potential, creativity and aspirations for a more prosperous future. While witnessing some positive elements of the implementation of the agenda at the national level, we should not forget that the scale of problems and actions in response to different regions and States are incomparable. Africa's young people have the potential to be the driving force behind collective prosperity yet to be revealed. Africa has the world's youngest population, and it is growing rapidly, projected to account for over 40 per cent of the world's young people within three generations. Over recent decades, we have seen advances in terms of policy commitments to youth development in Africa at the national and regional levels alike. Africa's Agenda 2063 underscores the importance of promoting the rights of young people and meeting their needs, in all their diversity. At the same time, too many young people remain jobless and struggle to access public resources and quality social services. They remain excluded from policy formulation. Engaging young people is central to the successful implementation of the transformative agenda in Africa. In Asia, the largest generation of young people in history should ensure the region's dramatic socioeconomic growth is sustained and even improved. At the 116/123 same time, youth in Asia still face particular issues of engagement in education, employment and training. Ukraine understands the need to create and adopt an inclusive and integrated education policy that equitably supports and develops the diverse categories of young people in Africa and Asia. Given our well-developed higher education system, Ukraine provides broad opportunities for foreign students to receive quality education and become acquainted with European culture. During the 2019-2020 educational year, more than 63,000 foreign students, mostly from Asian and African countries, are receiving education in my country. Itis also worth noting that, in many countries affected by conflict or occupation, young people face permanent threats and danger. This situation is unacceptable, and the States concerned should end violations, ensure protection and ensure that perpetrators are held accountable. This call is especially relevant given the gravity of problems and challenges exposed by the current global pandemic. In this regard, we would like to call for continued efforts to fight the COVID-19 threat, while ensuring the best possible balance between the introduction of urgent exceptional measures to counter the threat and respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms, with a focus on attention to vulnerable populations, including youth. Youth have traditionally played an instrumental role in Ukraine's political and public life. Back in October 1990, Ukrainian students conducted non-violent public protests, which later forced the Soviet authorities to address the concerns of the Ukrainian youth, cemented the foundations of our emerging civil society and accelerated the disintegration of the Soviet Union. It was young people who initiated the peaceful demonstrations in Kyiv in November 2013, protesting against the decision of the political leadership to put on hold Ukraine's further integration with the European Union. After almost three months of the stand-off, a new Ukraine emerged. Following the Russian military aggression against my country in 2014 and the resulting temporary occupation of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, as well as certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, young people were among the first to face this threat and protect their motherland. Tens of thousands actively volunteered to provide support to our armed forces in the fight to protect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine. Youth and student organizations also became active in delivering aid and humanitarian assistance to the people affected by the ensuing hostilities. Six years have passed, but a multitude of threats and challenges for youth in Ukraine continue to grow in the temporarily occupied territories. The occupying authorities engaged in a massive campaign of human-rights violations, including against young representatives, activists and human-rights defenders. They seek to erase Ukrainian national and cultural identity and the identity of children and young people as citizens of Ukraine. Another flagrant violation of international humanitarian law - which prohibits Russia, as the occupying Power, from forcing protected persons to serve in its armed or auxiliary forces - is the plan to send almost 3,300 people from the territory of the Crimean Peninsula for so-called "military service". Most cynically, most of them are expected to serve outside the Crimean peninsula, primarily in the Southern Military District, whose military units and command are directly involved in carrying out armed aggression against Ukraine in Donbas. Unfortunately, the spread of COVID-19 has become an additional concern for the life and health of the population in the temporarily occupied territories. Therefore, we recall the obligation of the Russian Federation as an occupying Power under international humanitarian law to take all the necessary measures to protect the life and health of the population of those territories, to ensure and maintain in the occupied territories satisfactory health care and hygiene conditions, and to take the prophylactic and preventive measures necessary to combat the spread of contagious diseases and epidemics. Taking into account that the report I mentioned did not cover the negative impact of COVID-19 on youth in the long run in the same way that it considered the situations of women and children, we would be grateful for the preparation by the Secretary-General of a targeted policy brief with urgent measures to minimize the impact of this pandemic on youth. In our view, such a document should devote special attention to youth affected by conflict and occupation amid the worsening epidemiological situation as COVID-19 and its consequences spread. In conclusion, I would like to highlight that, by protecting youth and their rights, we are investing in our future, development and progress. The environment in which they live today, and the possibilities we create for them to realize their potential and put to use their energy and creativity, will define their role in ensuring peace and security tomorrow. In this regard, I call for the full and effective implementation of the youth and peace and security agenda.
