We are pleased, honourable Federal Minister, to see you presiding over our meeting today, and we thank Germany for having chosen this important topic for our discussion in the Security Council. I welcome the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for South Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and thank them for their briefings. I also thank the representative of civil society for his presentation. There is no doubt that human rights and international peace and security are intimately related. Discussing their interplay is not only relevant to the Council's work but is also crucial for its mandate. Unfortunately, history offers plenty of illustrations of how human rights violations lead to hostilities and how, in conflict situations, individuals become even more vulnerable and subject to systematic abuses and atrocities. Conscious of those dynamics, the Security Council has been keen to include the human rights dimension in the mandates of peace operations since the early 1990s, thereby enabling United Nations peacekeeping operations and special political missions to play a critical role in the protection of human rights through monitoring, reporting and even intervention where necessary. We believe that such a role is also crucial to advancing the peace processes in countries emerging from years of violence and turmoil. It is highly important that the Council consider how it can best support peace operations in this domain when discussing human rights aspects of individual missions' work during their periodic reviews. Among many options, Council members could reflect on how to mobilize more financial resources, as well as better trained and more skilled personnel, for peace operations in order to ensure higher performance on the human rights component. Cooperation with troop- and police-contributing countries is important in that regard. While it is true that peace operations are doing their best within their mandates to protect human rights, it is obvious that such a task would also require ownership and appropriation by the local players, including governmental authorities and civil society. Promoting local human rights defenders will ensure that human rights remain protected even after a mission's drawdown. Implementing capacity-building programmes in host countries and raising awareness about the human rights and peace nexus are crucial in that regard and should also be considered as priorities during mandate discussions. Close cooperation with regional and subregional organizations and with local non-governmental organizations would be highly useful to attune a mission's human rights component with local realities and cultural particularities in host countries. Moreover, we believe that women peacekeepers can more effectively access some segments of the population, such as women and children in conflict situations. They can be more instrumental in supporting victims of gender-based violence and violence against children, as well as in spreading the culture of human rights among local populations. To conclude, Tunisia would like to flag that human rights should be at the core of all phases of conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. When the parties to a conflict respect human rights, it is often much easier to end conflicts and build bridges for peace.
