Mr. Cooney (Ireland): I would like to start, if I
may, by thanking the Governments and the heads of
State who received us for their warm welcome to the
region, and for the long hours they devoted to our
mission during the time we were there. I would also
like to thank the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
and the United Nations representatives in the region for
the organization of the visit and, indeed, to pay tribute
to the courage and dedication of those people, who are
out in the field a long way from home, in a situation
that can often be dangerous. Like others, I must echo
the special tribute to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kamel Morjane, and to the
Representative of the Secretary-General in Burundi,
Mr. Jean Arnault, for the tremendous work they are
doing in the area.

I cannot let the occasion pass without offering
praise to the leader of the mission, Ambassador
Levitte, who led the mission with a combination of
delicacy and elan which perhaps only a Frenchman
could conjure up. Nevertheless, it was a very special
performance.

Having repeated what a lot of the others have
already said, let me say that one ofthe main features of
our mission was that, in the wide and varied
contributions we made, we managed rarely to repeat
ourselves. So I will not go through all the points that
many of my colleagues have raised. But I would like to
offer one or two reflections.

First of all, let me speak of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where I think the general
consensus is that we are seeing good progress. I think
the mission was impressed by the greater openness of
President Joseph Kabila and indeed by the positive and
warm chemistry amongst the members of the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Agreement, which, I think,
gives us hope and which I personally feel is a much
better gauge of the prospects for the future than the
hostile and sterile rhetoric that ricocheted around the
region while we were there and of which we heard
rather unfortunate echoes this morning. I think we were
particularly encouraged during our mission by the
growing consensus that long-term stability in the
region depends on the dismantling, through
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation, of the so-called negative forces operating
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I think it is important to realize that we are
reaching a delicate stage in this process. The violence
is more or less over, but at the moment the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is effectively divided into three
zones under three separate administrations, each with
its own foreign backers. The time is arriving when
those in control of those zones -the Government in
Kinshasa, the Front de liberation du Congo (FLC) and
the Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie (RCD (Goma)) - will be called upon to demonstrate their
courage and indeed their patriotism by engaging fully
and without reservation in the inter-Congolese
dialogue. It is important that all those parties subscribe
to our wish, which is to see the reintegration of the
national territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the assumption by the Congolese people, at
long last, of control over their own political and
economic destiny.

I took careful note of what was said this morning
by the Secretary-General on the need for a substantial
increase in economic and humanitarian support to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; I can only say that
we saw ample evidence of the need for that support
during our visit to the region.

On Burundi, again I share the general consensus
that the situation is indeed precarious. There is an
urgent need to address the differences between the
parties and to overcome what are in effect mutually
exclusive preconditions, which are blocking the road to
peace.
I would echo Ireland's full support for the
facilitator, Mr. Nelson Mandela, and would agree on
the usefulness of reinforcing the resources of the
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jean
Arnaud, in Bujumbura. I can only stress and repeat the
message which the mission conveyed to the Front pour
la defense de la democratie and the Forces nationales
pour la liberation that the opportunity exists now to
respond to the appeals of the Security Council mission
and to engage in dialogue in an atmosphere free from
violence. This is an opportunity which, frankly, it
would be foolish to spurn.

