Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first ofall thank both
the President and the Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their
work in general and for their insightful presentations
this morning.

The work ofthe Tribunals is based on the conviction
that there can be no peace without justice. Over the
past decades there have been remarkable achievements
in establishing accountability for the most serious
crimes and supporting peace and reconciliation. The
International Tribunals, complemented by national
law-enforcement efforts, played a key role in ensuring
this progress. The Mechanism completes the important
work of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) in an efficient way. Germany
deems it highly important that the pending cases at the
Mechanism are being completed and that war criminals
are being held accountable.

I should like to say a few words on the Mechanism's
work relating to the countries of the former Yugoslavia.

First, we should like to congratulate the President
on the fact that the remaining cases from the ICTY
appear to be on track. The Mechanism will keep its
promise to finish these cases in time and to further
downsize. This is yet another example ofthe impressive
work that the Mechanism has accomplished. We will
remain committed to cooperating with the Mechanism.
Germany leads as an example and has accepted four
convicted persons to serve their sentences in German
prisons. Germany encourages other Member States to
join us and accept the transfer of ICTY convicts into
their appeals system.

Despite the good work of the Mechanism, the
issue of war crimes remains an open wound in the
Western Balkans. We see with concern a rise in
incendiary rhetoric and historical revisionism with
regard to war crimes in the region, which is a major
hurdle for much-needed reconciliation and also an
impediment for strengthening good-neighbourly
relations, especially between Kosovo and Serbia. We
therefore urge political leaders in the region to actively
work on ensuring accountability for war crimes and in
promoting reconciliation.

On the Mechanism's work relating to Rwanda,
all States Members of the United Nations have the
legal obligation to cooperate with the Office of the
Prosecutor in its efforts to locate and apprehend the
remaining fugitives. Germany sincerely urges all States
specifically called upon by the Prosecutor to follow
requests by the Mechanism to assist in apprehending
fugitives for whom arrest warrants have been issued.
Every individual case counts, and, as members of this
Council, we have to lead by good example. It remains
critically important to ensure accountability and fight
impunity. Accordingly, we support the request made by
both the President and the Prosecutor ofthe Mechanism
in this context this morning.

Germany will continue to politically and financially
support the Mechanism. We consider it very important
for the legacy of the institution that the Court finish
its courtroom activities in good order as it has done in
previous years.

Before concluding, let me also take this opportunity
to thank our colleagues from Peru for their extremely
able and professional leadership in chairing the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals over the last
two years.

