Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). Turkey,
Croatia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia,
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Armenia align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union congratulates Timor-Leste
on the tenth anniversary of the 30 August referendum,
which gave the country its long-awaited independence.
The groundbreaking State-building effort that has
followed since then is a major achievement, even if
many challenges remain. The EU takes this opportunity
to remember the many Timorese who lost their lives
during the violence at the time of the referendum. We
would also like to pay tribute to those who have died
while serving in United Nations missions in Timor-
Leste.

As highlighted in the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2009/504), important steps have been taken
over the past year to address the security situation and
develop the State's structures, but the events of
February last year were a reminder that the long-term
stability and sustainable development of Timor-Leste
cannot be taken for granted. The United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) will
continue to play an important role in assisting Timor-
Leste in the period ahead.

The successful conclusion of the local elections
on 9 October was another milestone in Timor-Leste's
democratic process. The manner in which they were
held showed that important progress has been made in
institutional capacity-building and democratic
governance. We encourage the authorities to conduct
the district and municipal elections in 2010 in the same
spirit. It is also encouraging that the security situation
in Timor-Leste has remained calm in recent months.

Substantial progress has been made in addressing
the situation of internally displaced persons. The EU
commends the Timor-Leste Government for its
accomplishment in closing the camps for internally
displaced persons in Dili and Baucau.

The EU concurs with the Secretary-General's
view that, for the time being, UNMIT should maintain
its current strength, including the police units'
capability to assume interim law functions if requested
to do so. At the same time, the process of handing over
responsibilities to the national police force must
continue with a View to setting the stage for a future
transition and the drawdown of UNMIT.

There is a link between security sector reform
and the eventual scaling down of UNMIT. We welcome
the Government's efforts to further develop a national
security policy and to strengthen security sector legal
frameworks. The role of the national defence forces in
a peacetime setting must be defined, and their
relationship with the national police force clarified. A
comprehensive and coherent concept for the entire
security sector should be developed, including the
establishment of accountability and civilian oversight
mechanisms.

Another critical challenge in the coming period
will be to build a sustainable socio-economic system
that can create jobs and help fulfil the basic social
service functions of a State. The European Union
encourages Timor-Leste to make use of the Petroleum
Fund for future investment projects and to stimulate
the non-oil part of the economy, with a focus on job
creation and infrastructure.

For the period of 2008 to 2013, the European
Union is providing support of about €200 million, with
particular attention paid to key public sector areas. The
European Union aims to support labour-intensive work
programmes, mainly through the implementation of the
rural development programme.

We welcome the efforts to develop an integrated
strategic framework that outlines goals and activities in
support of State-building in Timor-Leste. Concrete
benchmarks will enable the international community to
further focus its assistance on priority areas and
facilitate UNMIT's eventual drawdown. We also look
forward to the revised national development plan
signalling Government ownership of the process,
which will give donors the longer-term orientation they
need.

Since 1999, the European Union has provided the
people of Timor-Leste with more than €800 million in
development and humanitarian assistance. Our
assistance will continue, and we look forward to an
active partnership with the Government and the people
of Timor-Leste in the period ahead.

