Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
for his briefing on the state of the political situation
in Syria.

On 18 December there was an important
breakthrough in that area in Geneva. It is a pity that
a number of members of the Security Council have
preferred not to notice it. After intense, painstaking
and difficult work based on the decisions of the Syrian
National Dialogue Congress and with the active
assistance of the Astana troika, the composition of the
constitutional committee was decided on and a very
important step taken on the path to a settlement of the
Syrian crisis on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015).
On the same day, the Foreign Ministers of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation and the
Republic of Turkey, as guarantors of the Astana format,
held a trilateral meeting, as well as consultations
with Mr. De Mistura, at which they handed over the
list of civil-society candidates to be included on the
constitutional committee. I want to emphasize that
the list has been approved by both Damascus and the
Syrian opposition. I should remind the Council that
the Government and opposition lists for the committee
were sent to Mr. De Mistura in May and July. These
efforts were greeted with great appreciation by the
Special Envoy, who noted the considerable contribution
that the Astana troika has made to getting the process
to this point, and we heard about that again today.

The Ministers adopted a joint statement that was
circulated yesterday as an official Security Council
document. It notes that at the meeting in Geneva, the
Foreign Ministers of the three countries affirmed their
commitment to assisting in launching the work of the
constitutional committee, including by working with the
Syrian parties and the Special Envoy to define its general
guiding principles. They particularly emphasized that
a spirit of compromise and constructive participation
on the part of its members is an essential condition
for ensuring that the committee's decisions enjoy the
greatest possible support from the Syrian people.

It was agreed that every effort would be made to
hold the constitutional committee's first meeting in
Geneva at the beginning of 2019, which would be an
important step in the preparations for constitutional
reform in Syria, which is the basis on which general
elections are to be conducted, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). We firmly believe that those
steps represent the beginning of a viable, long-term
political process, led and implemented by the Syrians
themselves, with assistance from the United Nations and
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the decisions of
the Syrian National Dialogue Congress held in Sochi.
We are grateful to Mr. De Mistura for his active efforts
to advance the political process in Syria and the help he
has given the Astana format, which made a considerable
contribution to the shift from armed confrontation to
the political arena. We are particularly grateful to our
partners from Kazakhstan for their contribution to the
launch and functioning of the Astana platform.

We are aware that there are some who may be
unhappy with the achievements of the cooperation
between Russia, Turkey and Iran. But they are always
dissatisfied. There is always something that they do
not like. First among them are those who deep down
still cherish hopes for so-called regime change based
on their plans for reshaping the Middle East according
to a design that suits them. At first, they said that not
having a constitutional committee was a bad thing.
Now that the list has been agreed on, they say it is
unbalanced and no good anyway. We do not see the
logic in that. We call on everyone who is not bent on
denying the genuine desires of the Syrian people by
promoting scenarios based on geopolitical engineering
to help the three guarantor countries of the Astana
format to get to work on the comprehensive political
process that Syria, the Middle East and the entire
international community needs, based on the decisions
of the Syrian National Dialogue Congress in Sochi
and the Security Council's resolutions on Syria. At the
same time, it will be important to make sure that the
results on the political front are supported by genuine
rather than hypothetical steps to resolve the Syrian
Arab Republic's humanitarian problems and its post-
conflict reconstruction. We have frequently heard,
and continue to hear, particularly from our Western
partners, that increased cooperation and the lifting of
unilateral sanctions will be possible only when real
progress has been made on the settlement process. That
moment has come, and we hope that our colleagues
will not go back on their word and come up with new
politicized conditions.

We are not trying to create the impression that all
is well in Syria. There are many problems that will
have to be resolved in the future, first and foremost in
Idlib, where our Turkish partners are making serious
efforts based on their existing commitments to separate
terrorist and moderate groups. We once again urge all
who have influence with those groups to counsel them.
But the fact is that the situation in Syria has indeed
changed, and for the better. Many Governments have
acknowledged those changes. We have seen positive
steps on the part of States in the region that want to
normalize their relations with Damascus. We hope that
the desire for the full-fledged restoration of relations
between the Arab countries and Syria and Syria's
speedy return to the Arab family will provide material
support to the settlement process in Syria, based on
the fundamental principles of international law and the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.

We, the three guarantor States, have succeeded in
doing what we were urged, persuaded, pressured and
even threatened to do. Tell me, could anyone else have
done it? Does anyone suppose that it could have been
done simply by compiling our own list and handing
it to Mr. De Mistura? I want to emphasize that the
legitimate list was not going to be one that the small
group had given its consent to but rather the list that the
representatives of the Syrian parties, both Damascus
and the opposition, agreed on, and that is exactly
what happened.

We firmly believe that we all have a chance to
launch a genuine political process for a reliable, lasting
settlement in Syria. Logically, it will be based on the
results of the work already done by the Astana troika.
The Astana troika, in close coordination with the
United Nations, stands ready to energetically work on
this issue. At the same time, it is our view that the last
word has to remain with the Syrians themselves.
