The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Burkina Faso in which he requests
that his delegation be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the Facilitator of the
Ouagadougou Agreement to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Djibrill Y. Bassole,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of C6te
d'Ivoire in which he requests that he be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Abou Moussa, Principal Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire.

It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/593, which contains the fourteenth
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in cote d'Ivoire.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Abou Moussa, Principal Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, to whom I
give the floor.

