Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Considering that it is 31 March and a rather late hour, I
would like to commend you, Sir, and your delegation for
the most comprehensive and appropriate manner in which
you have handled your presidency of the Security
Council, and in particular this debate.

The development of the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, both in spirit and substance, cannot help but
be impacted by the situation in Kosovo and our neighbour
in general, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). Many formulate that the disintegration
of the former Yugoslavia started with the unilateral
repudiation of Kosovo's autonomous status within the ex-
Yugoslavia and that the circle will be completed only
with the just and stable resolution of this situation. The
commitment of the Stabilization Force, the Office of the
High Representative and other international factors,
including the United Nations, have given the peace
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina a more stable
foundation, minimizing the risk of spill-over.

Nonetheless, the longer-term developments and
solutions for Kosovo can only have a substantial impact

 

on peace, stability and the development of democracy,
human rights and minority and national rights in the region
as a whole. In this context, my delegation believes that it is
imperative that the following fundamentals be incorporated
into any process designed to produce immediate and longer-
term solutions.

First, we welcome the Security Council's role, as well
as that of other relevant international factors, in this
process, and emphasize the determinative importance of the
Security Council's remaining seized of the matter. The
situation in Kosovo does have more than a passing impact
upon stability and peace in the region and international
security as a whole.

Second, in the same vein, the authority and active role
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia is unquestionable and necessary in this
situation, despite the prolonged attempt of certain parties to
negate its jurisdiction. Bosnia and Herzegovina itself cannot
morally, politically or legally remain silent; as our former
colleague, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, so
appropriately put it, the Belgrade authorities will not be
allowed to do in Kosovo with what they can no longer get
away with in Bosnia and Herzegovina. "Ethnic cleansing"
is intolerable for all, but those of us who have been victims
and overcome must be especially clear and add our voices
to the vigilant chorus of "Never Again". We are not dealing
with ethnic madness, but with the political manipulation of
differences for crude, selfish power.

Third, Bosnia and Herzegovina stresses the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of all the States in the region,
without any prejudice to the eventual solution.

Fourth, at the same time we must emphasize that the
basis for solution, not only in Kosovo, but in Sandjak and
Vojvodina, lies with full respect for the democratic, human,
national and minority rights of all the citizens of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).

Fifth, the role of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) in the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been frequently addressed before this
body. I do not need to remind the Council of the context of
those references. However, we must emphasize that the
health of our neighbour also reflects upon our own.

Sixth, let me draw the Council's attention to
paragraphs 8, 9, 10 and 15 of the resolution before us.
Paragraph 15 in particular addresses the neighbours of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).
Of course, that means us. Again, the role of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) reflected
a military relationship in its dealings with our country in
the past. We would like to stress the importance of the
arms-control arrangements negotiated under the authority
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, both within the region and in our country. Here,
the heightened vigilance of monitors can be helpful in
assuring that new abuses are not invented and old abuses
not repeated. Arms monitors ensuring compliance and
deterring cross-border transfers should receive our most
active support.

Seventh, we would like to underline the consistency
of the interpretation provided by the Permanent
Representative of Slovenia, Dr. Danilo Tiirk, today with
that of the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, as this relates to paragraph 18 of
the resolution before us.

Mr. President, thank you. I am confident that the
most responsible members of the United Nations, and in
particular the Security Council, have learned the painful
lessons of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the decisive
importance of the right response at the right time. We
soon will be able to judge as to whether today's action by
the Security Council will do the job.

