Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to welcome you, Madam Foreign
Minister, to New York to preside over this open debate.
I thank Secretary-General Guterres and the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Mr. Mauer, for their briefings. I also listened attentively
to the briefing delivered by Mr. Borello.

This year coincides with the seventieth anniversary
of the adoption of the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention
relative the protection of civilians in time of war, as well
as the twentieth anniversary of the Security Council's
adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), which put the
protection ofcivilians in armed conflict on the Council's
agenda. As one of the core items on the Council's
agenda, the protection of civilians in armed conflict
has been accorded great attention by the international
community, and the Council has made positive progress
in promoting the development of mechanisms and in
ensuring progress on its implementation to a certain
extent. Meanwhile, civilians still bear the brunt as
victims of war and armed conflicts, accounting for the
vast majority of casualties in conflicts.

The international security situation remains grave.
Armed conflicts persist in some regions, causing heavy
civilian casualties. Pragmatic and effective measures
should be taken to ensure the safety and security of
civilians in conflict. With that in mind, China offers
the following four proposals.

First, we should tackle both symptoms and root
causes, bolster prevention and address the protection
of civilians at its origin. Preventing, reducing and
resolving conflicts and settling disputes in a peaceful
manner are the most effective means to achieve the
protection of civilians.

As the core of the collective security mechanism,
the Security Council should earnestly fulfil its primary
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security and resolving conflicts by promoting dialogue,
consultation and political negotiations, so that civilians
can be safe from the suffering caused by war. We must
oppose the use the force or the threat of force at every
turn and reject power politics and bullying.

The international community should establish
a concept of common, comprehensive, cooperative
and sustainable security; build partnerships based
on dialogue, friendship, non-confrontation and
non-alignment; and create a world of lasting peace
and universal security. We should be aware of our
shared future for humankind; advocate for the global
governance concept of neutral consultation, joint
contribution and sharing; and strive to create a peaceful
and stable international environment.

Secondly, under international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, national Governments
and parties to the conflict in question must assume
their responsibility for the protection of civilians.
Without a doubt, all national Governments have
the primary responsibility of protecting their own
civilians, a role that is irreplaceable. The international
community should provide constructive assistance in
that regard, but must respect the sovereignty of the
country concerned.

The actions ofthe parties to a conflict are regulated
by international law and Security Council resolutions.
In situations where conflicts are unavoidable, the best
possible efforts must be made to avoid injuring innocent
civilians; prevent the abuse of force and actions taken in
disregard of humanitarian consequences; and avoid the
asymmetrical use of force and the use of high explosive
weapons in densely populated areas. Gaining military
advantages by attacking civilians must be strictly
forbidden. Violations of international humanitarian law
in armed conflict, such as threats or attacks against
civilians, should be investigated and punished in
accordance with law.

Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping operations
should effectively fulfil their responsibilities of
protecting civilians in strict accordance with the
mandates conferred upon them by the Council. The
Council should consider in an integrated manner
host countries' situations and needs in relation to
peacekeeping missions' capacities and conditions, in
order to establish clear, realistic and viable mandates.
All missions should develop clear plans based on a
limited number of conditions, strengthen their internal
coordination and ensure that they implement their
mandate effectively. We should bolster international
cooperation against terrorism and crack down
resolutely on terrorist acts that endanger civilians'
safety and security.

Humanitarian assistance to civilians affected by
armed conflict should be increased. Humanitarian
organizations should promote a spirit of humanity,
fraternity and dedication, uphold the fundamental
principles of neutrality, impartiality and independence,
enhance their humanitarian nature and professionalism
and avoid getting embroiled in conflicts. We should
strengthen the protection of humanitarian workers,
health workers and facilities, as well as specific
vulnerable groups such as women, children, refugees
and displaced persons.

Fourthly, all United Nations agencies and the
various humanitarian organizations should demonstrate
their expertise and strengths and fully leverage the
unique role of regional and subregional organizations
such as the African Union and the League of Arab
States. They should improve communication with
regard to information on policies and help host
countries strengthen their capacity to protect civilians.
Non-governmental organizations must respect the
Governments of host countries, consult the countries
concerned fully and play a constructive role. The
United Nations must maintain communication with
all the parties to a conflict, increase its guidance
on humanitarian relief operations and provide
comprehensive and dedicated protection for the
civilians affected.

