Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I wish to congratulate the
Chinese presidency for organizing this open debate. I
also want to thank the Secretary-General, the Prime
Minister of Somalia, and the Special Representative for
Somalia of the African Union Commission, Mr. Diarra,
for their statements. We welcome and strongly support
the elements contained in the presidential statement
(S/PRST/201l/6). I shall highlight a few important
points. The longer version of my statement will be
circulated.

Turkey is very concerned about the continuation
of the cycle of violence in Somalia. Likewise, we are
alarmed by the humanitarian crisis.

We commend the crucial role played by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We
thank all troop-contributing countries, especially
Uganda and Burundi, and convey our condolences for
their loss. We believe that AMISOM. should be
provided with adequate, predictable and sustainable
funding so that it can effectively implement its
mandate. To that end, we think that the Security
Council should consider authorizing an enhanced
support package, which would be drawn from United
Nations assessed contributions.

Turkey believes that military means should be
coupled with steps to be taken on the political front.
First and foremost, the Transitional Federal Institutions
should redouble their efforts to reach out to other
groups and try to engage them in the Djibouti political
process and strengthen their relations with local
authorities in the country. The pending tasks, especially
the drafting of the new constitution, should be
completed after August, when the transitional period
ends.

Turkey, in principle, supports the idea of the
extension of the transitional period as long as decisions
to that effect are taken in a coordinated and consensual
fashion. We welcome the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga,
and the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to
reach compromise solutions on the matter.

11-2583]
We appreciate that Prime Minister Mohamed and
his Government are truly committed to achieving the
targets for a functional State with all of its structures in
place. We believe that it is incumbent upon the
international partners of Somalia to empower the TF G,
especially by providing the necessary financial
resources and refraining from taking steps that could
undermine the authority of the central Government.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia, Ambassador Mahiga, has the full support
of Turkey. We praise the constructive efforts of the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development towards finding a durable solution to the
problem in Somalia.

On 21 March, Turkey will chair the eighth
plenary meeting of the international Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. With the recent
increase in hijackings and the escalation of Violence by
pirates, there is an urgent need for a strategic plan to
tackle and systematically combat piracy.

We believe that the upcoming plenary will
provide a good opportunity to discuss this issue in a
holistic manner. We also believe that today's meeting
will provide valuable inputs for our discussions within
the Contact Group. In that sense, we believe that the
two meetings are mutually reinforcing.

