Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, for
his very clear and powerful briefing on the latest
developments in Libya. I also want to thank the Swedish
Ambassador for his briefing on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya.

First, I echo the sentiments of previous speakers
in voicing France's alarm in the light of recent
developments in Tripoli. For 10 days, the security
situation in the Libyan capital has deteriorated sharply,
with grave humanitarian consequences that risk
jeopardizing the political process. The clashes are
unacceptable. France has expressed its condemnation of
the violence, both in its national capacity and alongside
its partners, and called for the actors to put an end to
them. We commend the efforts and commitment of the
Secretary-General and of his Special Representative,
which made it possible to reach a ceasefire yesterday.
We are resolutely committed at their side and within
the Council in order to ensure that the return to calm is
both effective and lasting.

Secondly, countering all elements that jeopardize
the fragile political balance and take advantage of the
situation to ransack Libya's economic resources must
remain our priority. The Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/780) is crystal clear in that regard. The Special
Representative has underscored that point on several
occasions before the Council. Economic predation
endangers the political, security and social balance in
Libya. Moreover, the latest clashes in Tripoli seem to
have been partially financially motivated.

The humanitarian situation is also a matter of
concern, particularly the plight of migrants and
refugees, who are victims of human rights violations.
France therefore calls upon the Libyan authorities to
do their utmost, in partnership with the international
community, to ensure that migrants and refugees are
treated with dignity. This is a priority for the protection
of human rights and the fight against organized crime,
which will be more successful once a political settlement
in Libya can strengthen Libya's national institutions. It
is important that the international community reiterate
that anyone who threatens Lybia's peace, security and
stability will be subject to international sanctions, in
line with the resolutions of the Council.

Thirdly, it is more important than ever to make
headway in the democratic transition in Libya. At this
sensitive time, it is all the more critical to unanimously
reaffirm our support for Mr. Salame's road map, as we
did on 16 July (see S/PV.8312). The Libyan stakeholders
must work with the Special Representative to advance
the political process without pushing back the deadlines
on the pretext that situation does not allow for it.

Let us not deceive ourselves. The enemy of Libya
and of Libyans is the status quo, for the status quo
means an economy of predation and a playground
for traffickers and organized crime, which are like a
disease seeking to destroy ourjoint efforts in Libya. We
cannot allow that, which is why it is essential to move
forward along the clear path outlined by Mr. Salame.
In order to do so, it is critical to organize elections
according to the timetable agreed on 29 May in Paris
by the four key players on the Libyan political stage,
who pledged before the international community to
adopt a constitutional basis for the country and to hold
presidential and legislative elections on 10 December.

Upholding those commitments is crucial if we
are to escape the current stagnation, which only fuels
instability. Libyans need progress and want elections.
The enthusiasm for being included on the voter registry,
as indicated in regular polls, is unambiguous. That is
also the Secretary-General's first observation in the
report under consideration today. Since the mandate of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
is soon to be renewed, France remains fully committed
to supporting the implementation of the Special
Representative's road map, particularly with regard to
the preparation for elections. France will therefore back
a one-year renewal of the UNSMIL mandate in order
to build upon the current political momentum and to
breathe new life into it. On behalf of France, I reiterate
our full confidence in Mr. Salame and pledge our full
support to him. We also underscore the need for the
Security Council to remain firmly united in backing
his efforts and the efforts of the United Nations.

