Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): I wish to congratulate you
most warmly, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month, during which
you have already displayed your diplomatic and
political acumen. May I also extend our gratitude to
your predecessor, Ambassador Wang Yingfan.

Let me, at the outset, state how deeply grateful
the Somali people - and, indeed, the Government of
Djibouti - are for your praiseworthy initiative to
schedule a public debate on Somalia during France's
presidency. Such a rare debate on Somalia is taking
place at the most opportune moment, when a crucial
Conference to restore lasting peace and government is
now under way in my country. No doubt, such a mark
of goodwill towards the people of Somalia will
immeasurably boost the morale of the Conference
participants and help them to reach a settlement
quickly.

The efforts of the Secretary-General in this
process have been exemplary. His constant
encouragement and support for the Conference and its
goals have been pivotal. His call for a unified Somalia
in which there exist peace, democracy and
development has instilled a realization among the
participants that high-level international support and
awareness of their efforts are there.

We must also mention the tireless work of the
Secretary-General's Representative for Somalia, Mr.
David Stephen, who has been in Djibouti since
February, continuously interacting with delegates,
elders and Djibouti officials to realize the Conference
and its successful conclusion.

It may be instructive for me to provide some
description to the Council of the actual Conference
settings. Any gathering of so many people for such an
extended period of time obviously entails strenuous
financial and logistical effort. Djibouti is now in the
third month of catering to the needs of some 2,000
Somali delegates, elders and observers. Many were
transported by air to Djibouti from locations around
Somalia at Djibouti's expense. To facilitate the focus
and concentration of participants and to isolate them
from the diversions and pressures of the capital city,
the Conference is being held 40 kilometres away at
Arta, a resort town on a hill with a spectacular view of
the Red Sea. All private homes have been claimed by
the Government to house delegates. In fact, local
residents are now a minority. All the requirements of
this large contingent of people for food, transport,
accommodation and amenities are being met by
Djibouti. We have also brought in over 40 Somali
singers, composers, poets and comedians to drive home
the culture of peace, accommodation and brotherhood.
The meeting itself is held in a giant tent. There are no
class or social distinctions evident among the
participants, who include over 100 women,
representatives of all minorities in Somalia, a number
of warlords and all clans.

A distinctive feature of this Conference has been
the extensive coverage of the proceedings by satellite
and on the Internet, allowing Somalis and other
interested observers to follow the Conference from
anywhere around the globe on a daily basis. The web
site "Somalia-rebirth", which we started, receives some
5,000 hits per day and is evidence of the widespread
interest in the Conference.

Clearly, the financial burdens and pressures of
this all-out effort have proved daunting for a country of
Djibouti's size and resources. Djibouti therefore
urgently calls on the international community, which
has an interest in the final achievement of Somalia's
rebirth, to contribute generously to this enormous
burden, almost exclusively borne by us thus far.

For over a decade Somalia has been an
international concern, as well as an embarrassment.
The very word "Somalia" has come to denote
international failure and futility in restoring peace,
security and order in a troubled country. Following the
widespread revolt against brutal oppression and
mismanagement, the country was plunged deeper into
chaos and sustained life without government,
administration, services or peace. The victorious
factions and clans simply turned their weapons upon
each other. This violent interfactional fighting resulting
in the deaths of tens of thousands of innocent Somalis
and spread an inevitable air of doom over the country's
very survival.

We are all aware of the international community's
reaction in the early part of the past decade and its
intervention to prevent total disaster and save the
country. However, with little to lose, certain faction
leaders chose to challenge the United Nations presence
in the country and, with the withdrawal of United
Nations peacekeeping forces, the situation once again
began a spiralling descent into chaos and insecurity.

Time and again, golden opportunities to bring this
self-destruction to a halt have been cynically ignored.
As we have pointed out in previous statements, it came
to be seen that the essential premise, rationale and
basis of this continuing conflict were all false and that
in the final analysis, the sum total of what was at stake
was little more than the excessive egos, personal
agendas and fantasies of grandeur of a self-anointed
few. The utter disregard for the state and condition of
unarmed civilians was stunning to the outside world
and became more so as the years rolled by with no
apparent resolution in sight.

Sadly, the problem of the warlords is not confined
to Somalia, but is found in all corners of the African
continent, if not throughout the world. The recent, if
not continuing histories of Liberia, Angola, Sierra
Leone, Congo and other countries provide a
widespread and disturbing regional tapestry of violence
and conflict. As has been said so often, correcting this
dreadful situation is largely the responsibility of
Africa, its people and regional organizations and their
sustained and demonstrated will. But it has often also
been recognized and stated that the continent cannot be
expected to do it alone, without outside help. Where
there is evidence of a determination of the people to
resolve their problems, the international community
should be relied upon to play a constructive role in
achieving a final resolution.

With regard to Somalia, such an occasion has
fortunately presented itself. Responding to the historic
statement of my President, Ismail Omar Guelleh, at the
fifty-fourth session of the General Assembly last year,
in which he called for the citizens of Somalia to make
themselves heard in order to see to it that their
interests, needs, well-being and future received
priority, the people of Somalia began to speak out in
near unison. Their action was overwhelming and
spontaneous, encouraging Djibouti to formalize its
proposals in an initiative which received successive
support from the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), the League of Arab States, the United
Nations Secretary-General and, of course, this Council.
The first phase of the Conference, which had been
preceded by a great deal of preparation over the
previous nine months, began in Djibouti on 2 May and
concluded in early June. This was the most difficult
phase of the process, since it was devoted exclusively
to healing, reconciliation and overcoming the past.

More than 200 elders and traditional leaders from
every part of the country conducted intensive intra- and
inter-clan dialogue, seeking to reconcile, forgive one
another, overcome a painful past and prepare the
ground for the second phase of the Conference, dealing
with political issues. This phase was the central pillar
of the whole process, and special recognition goes to
the tenacity, wisdom and sincerity of the elders. Over
900 official delegates and more than 1,000 others from
everywhere are participating in the second phase,
which started on 15 June.

Opening the second phase, President Ismail Omar
Guelleh warned the Somali people not to repeat past
mistakes that led to the collapse of the State. He was
blunt in his remarks, and said:

"If the disease is not properly diagnosed, if
people do not ask what went wrong, if they are
not careful to avoid falling into the trap again, all
those efforts will be in vain. Please keep that in
mind. You may want to discuss and analyse the
source of Somalia's demise as a State and how to
prevent it from ever occurring again. Learn from
history. Make sure that the new State that you are
about to reorganize does not carry within itself
the germ that may terminate it in the future. Try
to establish a new State that is different from the
failed one, based on healthy and strong pillars,
responsive to the real needs and true aspirations
of the masses and based on justice, fairness,
democracy and respect for the rights of the
individual."

He continued, saying:

"The State must be free from past ills,
including abuse of State authority, oppression and
dictatorship, clannism and neglect of the common
good, disrespect and disregard of the law,
misappropriating State property and treating it as
personal property, and disrespect for good Somali
values and Islamic teachings."

Even prior to the Conference, there was a flurry
of activity as Somalis continuously descended on
Djibouti, seeking more information and clarification, as
well as providing valuable input into the preparatory
phase. The President of Djibouti himself visited a
number of countries, both within and outside the
region, to advance the process and delegations were
sent to various regions of Somalia to consult with
traditional and political leaders. In March and April of
this year, a number of events took place, including a
symposium that brought together over 60 Somali
professionals, administrators, peace activists and
academics, about 20 elders to consult extensively with
the President and over 30 businessmen. All these
groups issued statements and recommendations.

We have undertaken all these efforts to broaden
the base of consultations in order to render the process
inclusive and transparent. We have clearly stated all
along that the current process is not designed to
undermine any of the existing administrative regions
that have achieved a measure of relative peace and
stability. On the contrary, these units will be key
components of any national framework. The ultimate
objective of the entire process will be peace,
government, legitimacy and reconstruction. It was
important, however, to guard the process against
divisive personal, clan or regional politics, preset
prescriptions and narrow agendas associated with a few
individuals or a specific clan or clans.

Many Somalis believe that a central Government
enjoying absolute, almost stifling power, accountable
to a single person alone, contributed largely to
clannism, corruption, waste and excessive violations of
human rights. A clear separation, therefore, between
central and regional powers, as well as the separation
of powers between the branches of government,
including a system of accountability, checks and
balances, are of paramount importance. The agenda
items before the Conference seek to instil a
decentralized system of governance, be it regional or
federal.

Our approach is holistic, as are those of IGAD,
the OAU and the United Nations, insofar as this
process embraces the whole of Somalia as one entity.
An approach which is not holistic is unrealistic and the
onus lies on those who diverge to demonstrate
otherwise. The Conference is the only forum for
tackling pernicious and divisive national issues.

There are, of course, some who derive
considerable benefit out of the current chaotic drift in
Somalia and who are in the business of continuously
issuing misleading, false and baseless statements
against the Conference because they are determined to
thwart any meaningful attempt to restore a sovereign
national framework in Somalia. In the war-ravaged and
politically fragmented Somalia, the situation
encourages individuals to pursue profit motives and the
accumulation of personal wealth at the expense of
national cohesion. So there is an economic dimension
to the refusal of some to come to terms with reality,
and certainly some of the current rancour is not internal
in character. As my President has stated:

"The majority should not remain captive
any longer to a few who would not care for the
future of the Somali people. Anyone who refuses
to be part of the Somali peace process will be left
behind. Then it will be up to the Somali people to
decide what to do about them."

The international community needs to be cautious
and to avoid showing an unwarranted tendency to
entertain ideas that impinge on the territorial integrity
of Somalia through spurious guises and approaches.

Djibouti, conscious of possible or contrived
allegations, has taken into full consideration all areas
of concern. Most important of all, we have made
certain that the Conference should be - and should be
seen to be - fully representative of the entire Somali
society: no sector, group, region or individual is
excluded, even those individuals with name recognition
who make headlines with their refusal to participate
and who speak only for themselves and not for the
people in their respective regions. Defying all odds, the
people have all come from every district and region of
the entire country, regardless of whether a certain
leader is for or against the Conference.

The second phase of the Somalia National Peace
Conference has made great progress, discussing a wide
range of issues. Prime among them are: causes and
consequences of the civil strife; human rights; healing
and reconciliation; overcoming the past; the national
capital; rebuilding the State; return of property
unlawfully confiscated; negative economic and social
consequences; disarmament and security; and
transitional mechanisms, including the constitution,
legislature, Government and judiciary. The list of tasks
is impressive. The Conference is expected to conclude
its work by 15 July and to culminate in the
establishment of a transitional assembly and in the
election of a president and a prime minister.

The Conference, and the entire process, can well
be seen as an innovative approach to the question of
conflict-resolution and nation-building. The standard
practice has been to concentrate indefinitely on the
adversaries and on repeated attempts to bring them
together in agreement. Djibouti, however, has reversed
that strategy because of repeated failures with the
warlords over the past decade, and has sought instead
to empower the disenfranchised and unarmed civilian
population: the vast majority; the ones who are really
suffering; the ones who were betrayed. The people saw
this as their last chance, given the level of pervasive
hopelessness. President Guelleh's call struck the right
chord. The people began challenging the armed groups
and other small dictators, to claim their legitimate
rights, demanding peace, government and their future.

So, Somalia appears to be on its way to getting
back on track towards genuine dialogue. A clear
consensus is emerging that holds that this may be the
last opportunity to salvage Somalia, and that it must be
seized. The process is open, as I have already said; it is
transparent and inclusive, and it has been beneficial to
all Somalis. They can never go back or relapse to the
era of the 19905. They have awakened and have the
will to continue until they attain their legitimate rights.

Let me emphasize once again that the Conference
truly represents the broadest, most participatory
assemblage ever in Somalia's history. Never before has
an important gathering been so representative
nationally across the country and so deeply
representative in terms of clan, class and economic
standing. It has been acknowledged by Somalis
everywhere as unique. There is no place for scepticism,
false pride or mutual jealousy. The Government of
Djibouti is fully aware that IGAD, OAU member States,
the European Union, the League of Arab States and the
United Nations have all welcomed, fully supported or
endorsed the initiative and the peace plan. It is to be hoped
that their support for the Conference, as well as for the
outcome of the Conference, will be readily available.

The draft presidential statement to be issued
following this debate goes a long way to recognizing
the current state of affairs in Somalia and the efforts
under way. I wish to express my deepest gratitude to all
members of the Council for their renewed tireless
efforts for the revival of that nation, which experienced
collapse some 10 years ago and which is now making
every effort to come back and take its rightful place in
the community of nations.

