Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing. Over the past two
years, Ambassador Quinlan and his team have worked
hard to promote the Committee's work. China wishes to
express its appreciation and thanks for all ofthat. China
has always attached great importance to the work of
the Committee, and we are ready to continue our
cooperation with the new Chair and work with all the
parties to implement the work plans of the Committee.

Not long ago, the five permanent members of the
Security Council plus Germany and Iran decided to
extend the negotiations on a comprehensive agreement,
thus allowing more time and space for diplomatic
efforts. Yesterday, the six countries and Iran began a
new round of negotiations in Geneva on a comprehensive
agreement. That positive momentum does not come by
easily and should be valued by all parties. The most
important task in the next stage is to take advantage of
the momentum, adhere to the consensus, focus on and
bridge the differences, on the basis of the principle ofa
step-by-step approach and of reciprocity so as to reach
a comprehensive win-win and mutually beneficial
agreement at an early date.

China is pleased to see that the cooperation between
the International Atomic Energy Agency and Iran has
continued to maintain its positive momentum. We hope
that the Agency will play a constructive role in placing
Iranian facilities under safeguards and promoting a
peaceful solution of the Iranian nuclear issue. China
encourages Iran to further strengthen its cooperation
with the Agency so as to continue to promote the
solution of the outstanding issues on the Iranian nuclear
file.

Over the recent period, all parties have maintained
close communication with regard to the relevant
work of the Committee. All Member States have the
obligation to implement the Council's resolutions on
sanctions against Iran seriously and precisely. But
sanctions themselves are not the end of the resolutions,
and the reinforced sanctions are not the criteria
whereby to judge the work of the Committee. Under
the current circumstances, both the Committee and the
Panel of Experts should take a long-term View, have
the big picture in mind and support and cooperate with
the diplomatic efforts to resolve the Iranian nuclear
issue. At the same time, all parties should, in a spirit
of objectivity, impartiality and pragmatism, continue
an in-depth discussion and reach conclusions based on
consensus.

China has taken note of the midterm report
submitted by the Panel of Experts and we acknowledge
the efforts of the experts. We hope that, as mandated by
resolution 1737 (2006) and guided by the Committee,
the Panel will continue to strictly carry out its work
prudently and soundly. China has all along believed
that dialogue and negotiation are the only right way to
solve the Iranian nuclear issue appropriately. We have
been acting in an objective and fair and responsible
manner to push for talks and a peaceful solution. We
have played a constructive role in promoting negotiation
on a comprehensive agreement. China is ready to work
with all parties and make its contribution to reaching a
comprehensive, appropriate and long-term solution of
the Iranian nuclear issue.

