Mr. Cengizer (Turkey): Turkey has aligned itself
with the statement made earlier by the representative of
Italy on behalf of the European Union. That statement
thoroughly expresses our shared concerns about the
dangerously deteriorating situation on the ground and
calls upon the parties to act in a sensible and
responsible manner, hence preserving the hopes of
restarting the negotiations on the implementation of the
road map. I am taking the floor to briefly emphasize a
number of points that, from our perspective, have
particular importance.

As we have stressed on numerous occasions, the
current critical juncture in the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict requires both sides to act, more than ever
before, with the utmost restraint. Turkey is gravely
concerned about the recent decision in principle by
Israel's security cabinet to expel Mr. Yasser Arafat,
President of the Palestinian National Authority. The
international community and the Secretary-General, by
drawing attention to the serious repercussions of such
an action, have justifiably called on Israel not to
implement this decision. We are concerned that its
implementation could trigger developments that might
jeopardize the stability of the whole region.
Furthermore, we do not believe it serves any purpose in
our quest to solve the current stalemate in the Middle
East.

The Palestinian-Israeli conflict is not an issue that
can be resolved without the support of the international
community. Furthermore, the conflict has aspects
pertaining to regional and global security that impose
heavy responsibilities, not only on the parties, but also
the international community - just like in Iraq, where
the Security Council is trying to formulate a suitable
framework and appropriate procedures to bring
stability to that country.

The terrorist attacks against Israeli civilians have
consistently been denounced in the strongest terms by
Turkey. The Palestinian Authority has been reminded
of its responsibility to take all the necessary measures
to halt violence. On the other hand, the methods used
by Israel in its fight against terror apparently fuel
enmity, and should be discontinued. The main premise
of the Quartet road map is to convincingly provide the
parties with the objective of two States living side by
side with recognized and secure borders.

This objective cannot be achieved unless both
sides display a true determination to fulfil their
respective responsibilities. Establishing security is,
indeed, of paramount importance, but it is not the
single most important aspect of this question. In fact,
the process of strengthening security cannot be
convincingly decoupled from the political process
itself. The Palestinian people are struggling for their
very existence. Improvements that they could see in
their daily lives would positively influence the security
situation on the ground.

