Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this open meeting, and to
welcome our guests, Mr. Xanana Gusmao and Mr. Jose'
Ramos-Horta. We consider their participation in this
meeting as a reflection of the close relationship
between East Timor and the United Nations, and of the
successful Timorization process, which is central to the
move towards independence. We have listened
carefully to their interventions, and we are moved by
the statesmanlike quality and integrity of their remarks.
We would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General He'di Annabi for his full and informative
briefing, although we are concerned about several
elements in it.

Ireland associates itself fully with the statement
that will be delivered shortly by the representative of
Sweden on behalf of the European Union. I will not
repeat the views expressed therein, which we share, but
will simply highlight a few issues which Ireland, as a
country with a long-standing involvement in East
Timor, considers to be of particular importance.

Since the establishment of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
in October 1999, significant progress has been made
towards independence. We take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the dedicated personnel working with the
various components of the mission. As a result of the
further development and intensification of that work,
we look forward to the people of East Timor
participating in truly democratic elections, which, in
turn, will provide a solid foundation for the future. We
hope that the political dissension within East Timor, in
itself a positive sign of normalization, will be
addressed by the relevant parties through debate and
constitutional means, and that it will not lead to civic
unrest and violence.

We are very heartened to hear from Mr. Ramos-
Horta of the important components now under active
consideration for the proposed national pact to be
signed, inter alia, by all political parties in East Timor.
Any points that may be at issue in this context require
resolution through strength of argument rather than
physical force. We therefore believe that extreme care
must be taken to ensure that calm and stability are
maintained during the election process and during the
subsequent constitutional building period.

In that regard, Ireland remains concerned about
the security situation and believes that the significant
efforts of the international community should not be
endangered by a premature reduction of troops. We
agree fully with the Secretary-General's assessment
that the military component of UNTAET should be
maintained in its present form until the new
Government in East Timor has established itself. We
also believe that a substantial international presence
will be necessary in the post-independence period. This
should be commensurate with actual requirements and
calibrated to a timetable of careful scrutiny and review.
We look forward to the recommendations of the
Secretary-General and to further discussions about the
structure of such a presence, in which Ireland would
hope to participate.

Ireland believes that significant progress towards
successful elections is being made in East Timor
through the registration process and through the all-
important civic education programme. However, we are
concerned about the pace of the refugee registration
process in West Timor. Those who wish to vote in the
elections for the Constituent Assembly in East Timor
must be able to return there in time to register. We are
very concerned to hear this morning from Mr. Annabi
that for more than one month now there has not been
further progress on the refugee issue. We urge the
Government of Indonesia to implement fully and
speedily its programme of repatriation and resettlement
in this regard.

Ireland believes it is essential that those who have
violated human rights and international humanitarian
law should be prosecuted in conformity with
international standards of justice and fairness. While
we welcome the steps taken to investigate such
violations, we are concerned about recent
developments, including the light sentences handed
down in connection with the killings of three personnel
of the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner
for Refugees in Atambua and the limited scope of the
ad hoc human rights tribunal. We understand that these
issues are under review. While we fully respect the
separation of executive, legislative and judicial powers
within Indonesia, we urge in the strongest terms the
competent authorities to take full cognizance of the
gravity of such acts and to ensure that the perpetrators
of all such violence face the full force of the law. The
punishment must fit the crime and must be seen to fit
the crime. Mr. Ramos-Horta has just spoken eloquently
and tellingly in this regard.

Ireland raised in a previous meeting the question
of women who were abducted from East Timor during
the conflict there, some of whom are now allegedly
held in conditions of sexual slavery in West Timor.
Ireland is extremely concerned about this matter. We
are further concerned to hear today from Mr. Annabi
about continuing difficulties in making progress with
this problem. We urge in strong terms that the
Indonesian authorities provide full cooperation in this
urgent matter. We expect and require this cooperation.

Finally, let me affirm Ireland's commitment to
supporting the people of East Timor, both during the
period of transition to independence and after
independence has been achieved.

