Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I wish to associate myself
and my country with the statement made by the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union, specifically
with the indications it provides regarding key points
pertaining to the draft presidential statement.

I also wish to express Italy's warm appreciation
of the role performed by High Representative Lord
Ashdown in a crucial and very sensitive phase in the
history of both Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Balkans. I would add that that is a role he has
performed with great ability and resolve in a context
and in circumstances that are absolutely extraordinary.

With the approach of the 10-year anniversary of
the Dayton agreements, the international community -
the Peace Implementation Council, the Quint group of
France, Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom and the
United States, the Contact Group and the European
Union - has long been considering the opportunity of
cutting back its commitment in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and assigning greater responsibility to the
local political forces in order to overcome the
institutional anomaly of a State that is formally
sovereign but substantially conditioned, in many
respects, by a framework of strong international
supervision.

In the judgement of the international community,
the current phase has now reached completion. The
possibility of undertaking a reform of the Dayton
setting is facilitated by recent progress achieved on the
issue of reforming the police and the military -
progress that has paved the way to the upcoming start
of the stabilization and association negotiation with the
European Union. That new context now makes it
possible to give new impetus to the process of
reforming the Office of the High Representative. Italy
therefore believes that the time has come to discuss and
assess a significant reduction in the High
Representative's powers with an eye to giving greater
responsibility to the institutions and political forces of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, thereby making effective the
concept of empowerment and tangible the message that
the international community intends to convey -
namely, that the institutions and people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina hold in their own hands the prospects for
a concrete approach to and integration into the
European Union.

In parallel to that process, we need to redefine the
international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which should be based on the need to assist
institutional capacity-building rather than substitute-
manage a country where the local institutions appear to
be weak.

The 10-year anniversary of the Dayton
agreements should mark a watershed in that sense and
provide an opportunity to overcome the strong
distortions present in the local administrative system,
which is dangerously overreliant on external
intervention in the management of questions of internal
policy.

