Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to extend our gratitude
to the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladnenov,
for the thorough briefing and for the efforts that he
has undertaken.

We are deeply troubled by the escalation of
tension in Palestinian-Israeli relations. We firmly and
categorically condemn any manifestation of terrorism,
which worsens the already difficult relationship
between the parties and erodes the situation in the
region as a whole.

We believe that a solution to the issue of Jerusalem,
a sacred city for the three monotheistic religions,
must hinge on General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. The specific parameters of an
agreement on the city must be arrived at through direct
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations. Prior to reaching
such an agreement, the parties must refrain from any
action that predetermines the final status of Jerusalem.
In that regard, the aim of close coordination between
Israel and Jordan is to help calm the situation at the
holy sites in East Jerusalem and to maintain the status
quo around them. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
plays a specific and important role in the management
of Muslim holy sites.

The protracted pause in the peace process carries
with it a high risk of further escalating the situation.
The destabilizing factors have not been addressed;
rather, they have worsened. Settlement activity is
ongoing and, in recent days, in the occupied territories,
including East Jerusalem, provocative rhetoric on both
sides has been heightened.

The situation in the Gaza Strip requires specific
attention. The humanitarian situation there remains
dire. There are major disruptions in the provision of
electricity. The unemployment level is among the highest
in the world. What remains on the agenda is the need
to provide for intra-Palestinian unity on the basis of the
Palestine Liberation Organization platform and under
the auspices of a legitimate Palestinian leadership. We
support the mediation efforts of the parties, including
those undertaken by the Arab Republic of Egypt. The
solution lies not only in stabilizing the current situation,
but - and this is important - in paving the way for
a genuine political horizon for an Israeli-Palestinian
settlement through direct talks between the parties on
the universally recognized international legal basis.
Russia helps to facilitate progress in the political
process, acting both bilaterally and through the Middle
East Quartet of international mediators, which we view
as a critical mechanism and which has been endorsed
by Security Council resolutions. We are keen to further
contribute to upholding unity within Palestinian ranks.
We reaffirm our initiative on conducting a meeting
in Moscow between President Abbas and Prime
Minister Netanyahu.

Our position was and remains steadfast: a
comprehensive, fair and lasting peace can be achieved
exclusively through the relevant international legal
instruments, including Security Council resolutions as
well as the Arab Peace Initiative, and through direct
talks between the parties, without preconditions. Such
negotiations must lead to a cessation of what began in
1967, namely, Israel's occupation of Arab lands, and
to the establishment of an independent, viable and
contiguous Palestinian State, coexisting side by side
in peace with Israel and within secure and recognized
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and with West
Jerusalem becoming the capital of the State of Israel.
We see no alternative to the two-State solution. That is
the sole realistic means to put an end to the Palestinian-
Israeli confrontation and to mutual recriminations.

The Middle East and North Africa region remains
in crisis - old crises and new crises. The most
recent wave of instability in the occupied Palestinian
territories only confirms this lamentable reality. There
are still terrorists in many parts of the region and
beyond, despite the gains in combatting terrorism, who
seek to gain possession of chemical weapons. Once
again, last night the Russian Embassy in Damascus was
shelled twice. We call upon our partners to condemn
such attacks.

We once again call attention to the fact that the
destabilization of the situation in the Middle East and
North Africa has significantly disrupted the fragile
ethno-religious balance that has historically prevailed
in the region. Extremists have exploited this religious
factor, thereby unleashing a veritable genocide against
Christians and other minorities with one end in mind:
to stoke hatred and to swell their own ranks.

All of that serves to bolter our position in favour
of concerted efforts on the part of the international
community to forge genuine cooperation and build a
wide-ranging counter-terrorism front to effectively
repel the global terrorism threat, including depriving
terrorists of access to chemical weapons and other
types of weapons.

It is axiomatic that, in parallel with counter-
terrorism measures, we must takes steps for a political
settlement to the myriad conflicts and to restore peace
and stability in the Middle East and the North Africa
region. With respect to resolving the crises in the Middle
East, Russia has steadfastly called for a political and
diplomatic process, for which there is no alternative, one
that hinges on inclusive national dialogue. We continue
to focus efforts on achieving effective and enduring
results and will continue urging the belligerents to
overcome the mistrust, without imposing any external
solutions, in order to seek a political settlement. It is
our hope that our partners share that approach.

We reaffirm our position in favour of respect and
upholding the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all States. Efforts to settle regional
crises must be premised on diplomacy, dialogue
and engagement. History attests to the fact that with
goodwill even the most intractable crises can be settled.

We call upon all international and regional players
to overcome their differences and disagreements on
an equal footing, without counter-productive rhetoric
or mutual recrimination, in order to demonstrate
a constructive position and self-restraint and seek
mutually acceptable solutions. On that basis, we stand
ready to work collectively.

