Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Let me join
previous speakers in acknowledging the presence in the
Council of Mr. Adnan Terzie, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also wish to
express appreciation for the report of the High
Representative, Mr. Christian Schwarz-Schilling, and
to commend him and his team for their positive
contribution towards the achievement of lasting peace
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina through wide-
ranging reforms.

We strongly endorse the emphasis placed by the
High Representative on the need for the people to
assume ownership of the transformation of their own
country. In that regard, we urge the various ethnic
groups to cooperate in fulfilling their shared aspiration
to a better life. The success of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will no doubt be an exemplary model for
ethnically diverse societies in other parts of the world
that are struggling to live harmoniously as one nation.

We are equally mindful of the unique and
invaluable contribution being made by the European
Union (EU), NATO and others that are supporting the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, alongside the EU Stabilization and
Association Agreement. We believe that the two
Agreements embody a viable international strategy for
overcoming the ethnic and political divisions that
continue to impede the progress of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and threaten its stability. We urge the
parties to strive to transcend their narrow nationalist
aspirations in order to benefit from broader Euro-
Atlantic integration. It is regrettable, in that regard,
that the proposed constitutional amendments were
defeated by the Parliament, albeit by a narrow margin.

The inflammatory rhetoric and the marked
polarization that followed the rejection of the
constitutional amendments clearly show that the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina have no viable alternative
to the proposed reforms, which will affect every sector
of national life. We hope that, in the coming months,
the High Representative, together with the federal and
local authorities, will be able to accelerate the pace of
reform with regard to education, the national economy,
the security sector and related social issues.

In that connection, we urge the leaders of the
Republika Srpska to pursue their interests through
negotiation so as not to undermine the unity and
stability of the country, which remains fragile. In
particular, we urge them to accept the reform of the
police, within the framework of a broader national
agenda aimed at bridging the ethnic divide by building
confidence in State institutions. It is only through
rigorous implementation of the police sector reforms
that organized crime can be successfully eradicated.

At the same time, we call for the establishment of
an investigative commission to determine the fate of
the missing civilians of Sarajevo who were victims of
the war. The resolution of that matter, which is
necessary for confidence-building, seems long
overdue. Closely related to that issue is the question of
the return of refugees and displaced persons.

We commend the High Representative for the
tremendous progress that has been made in that area, as
a result of which responsibility has been handed over
to the domestic authorities, in accordance with the
General Framework Agreement for Peace. Nonetheless,
problems still persist. We hope that they can be
resolved with the necessary determination and external
support.

Once again, we call on the leadership of the
Republika Srpska to cooperate with the Human Rights
Chamber in determining the whereabouts of Colonel
Avdo Palic.

We believe that much effort has gone into
establishing the institutions and mechanisms required
for Bosnia and Herzegovina to function as a
democratic State based on the rule of law. International
support has not been lacking. It is up to the people to
put the past behind them and to seize the moment in
order to transform their society for the benefit of all.

