Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Lieutenant General Maqsood
Ahmed and the commanders of the military components
of the United Nations missions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mali and the Golan for their
substantive briefings, which reflect some of today's
most pressing themes, not only for the missions that
they represent but also in the broader context of United
Nations peacekeeping.

Recently, United Nations peacekeeping operations
have increasing been deployed in complex conditions
of internal political crisis compounded by armed
confrontation, difficult socioeconomic contexts
and cross-border threats. That creates additional
non-traditional security risks for peacekeepers. The
mandates of the operations themselves are increasingly
providing for the use of force and being endowed with
multiple components. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) is a salient example of that, on the
basis of which we still have to substantively analyse the
experience of the use of the Intervention Brigade and
the practice of using unmanned aerial vehicles.

Protecting civilians is one of the central, although
far from sole, tasks of today's peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, we have serious concerns over the recently
observed desire to loosely interpret the standards of
international humanitarian law regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. It is unacceptable that
there should be any action taken under the slogan of
protecting civilians that in practice pursues selfish
geopolitical aims, including the removal of legitimate
authorities in sovereign States.

Actions to protect civilians should not go beyond
the framework of Security Council mandates, which,
in turn, must be clear, preclude dual interpretations
and be fully complied with by those who are entrusted
with implementing the relevant tasks. Another priority
is to work out constructive daily interaction between
peacekeepers and local authorities, who by definition
bear the direct responsibilities for protecting their
populations.

There is considerable concern over the increase in
terrorist activity in the areas of deployment of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. A disturbing sign
in that regard is evidenced by the spate of violent
and openly terrorist acts aimed against the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) peacekeepers in that
country. The latest tragic incidents involving the death
of peacekeepers from Chad, the Niger and Senegal
clearly demonstrate the great perils involved in serving
in northern Mali. In that regard, it is critical to try to
qualitatively enhance the effectiveness of interaction
between the Mission and the French forces in the country.
We also anticipate that the Mission contingent, which
has brought capacities under the existing mandate,
enabling it to provide effective support to Bamako in
addressing the most pressing problems, above all in
the area of security, will promptly be brought to the
mandated strength and receive the logistical support
commensurate with the tensions of the situation.

A careful assessment of emerging threats to United
Nations personnel is a requisite component when
planning operations. In that regard, we believe that the
stated plan to move the core United Nations force to the
troubled northern part of the country cannot be carried
out without unwarranted risks to the United Nations
Blue Helmets.

The Middle East continues to be another, but
unfortunately not the last, region of the world where
peacekeepers are exposed to serious risks. Attacks
on personnel of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, which is an important stabilizing
factor in the Golan, again highlight the priority need
to ensure their security. The requirement of preventing
aggressive actions against peacekeepers must be
addressed not so much to the authorities of Israel
and Syria but, given today's realities, above all to the
armed fighters whose actions exacerbate the situation
in the disengagement area. Those who have leverage
over them need to actively make use of their influence
to prevent the situation from spinning out of control,
provoking a complete drawdown of that critically
important peacekeeping mission.

