Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today to discuss the report
of the International Independent Investigation
Commission on the assassination of the martyr leader
Rafik Hariri and his companions. This is an occasion to
reaffirm the importance of the United Nations follow-
up to that fundamental and vital issue in Lebanon.

The professional and solid work of
Mr. Brammertz and his team is further consolidated by
the current report, as it was by previous ones. The
report provides additional evidence of the painstaking
methodology being used to pursue the investigation
and to achieve the progress reflected in the sure and
firm advances towards the universally desired
objective.

Lebanon has repeatedly, and in the person of
every one of its officials, expressed its full confidence
in the Commission's work and ability to attain the
truth. The diverse political scene in my country
represents an amalgam of disparate ways of identifying
the truth - the whole truth - surrounding the
assassination of the martyr leader Rafik Hariri and his
companions and the crimes that preceded and followed
It.

Believing in the role of the International
Independent Investigation Commission and its noble
objectives, the Government of Lebanon continues to
offer all necessary assistance to the Commission and to
follow the progress achieved in the investigation as it
reaches the important milestone of unmasking the
perpetrators of the crimes and bringing them to justice
before an international court. The draft statute of such
a court has been drawn up, as has the memorandum of
understanding to be signed between the United Nations
and the Lebanese Government, in accordance with the
constitutional mechanism in place in Lebanon.

The efforts of the International Independent
Investigation Commission and the formation of the
international tribunal will break the cycle of violence
that has gripped Lebanon, most recently in the
assassination of the martyred minister Pierre Gemayel,
whose murder the Security Council speedily added to
the Commission's mandate. This will deter anyone who
would dare to disturb the civil peace that the whole
Lebanese society has striven to establish and preserve,
with the support of the international community.

In conclusion, the Government of Lebanon
deeply appreciates the efforts of Mr. Brammertz and
his team, and reaffirms its determination to offer every
possible assistance to his mission. It expresses its
complete satisfaction with the Security Council's
resolve to extend Mr. Brammertz's mandate for an
additional six months and his acceptance of the
extension. That is further testimony to the efforts being
made by the Security Council and the Commission to
reach their goal of seeing justice done.

