Mr. Shahid (Maldives): I wish to thank the
Dominican Republic, which holds the presidency of the
Security Council for the month ofJanuary, for convening
this important debate. I would also like to thank the
eminent experts for providing us with valuable insights
in their briefings this morning. Let me also take this
opportunity to congratulate the newly elected members
of the Council - Belgium, the Dominican Republic,
Germany, Indonesia and South Africa, which took up
their membership on the Council this month.

As I left the Maldives to travel here, I met a 5-year-
old little girl, Aisha, at Male' International Airport. She
asked me where I was going and I told her that I was
travelling to New York to speak about climate change
in the Security Council. We had a little chat and she
hugged me and waved me goodbye as I walked away to
board my flight.

On my very long flight to New York, I could not
stop thinking about the little girl who had embraced
me, the bright sparkle in her eyes and the joyous
innocence in her smile, unaware of the kind of future
that she may have ahead of her. I asked myself: can
I really do something meaningful for that little girl?
Can we all collectively help her to realize the hopes
and dreams that she carries in her young self? Can we
deliver her the future to which she aspires and that she
deserves - a future that is safe, secure and healthy?
Looking at the current state of affairs in the world, I
must answer no.

Climate change has been destroying our tiny island
country for years. It is eroding our beaches, killing the
coral reefs that protect our islands and contaminating
our fresh water with sea water, and we are losing our

fish stock. But, most importantly, climate change is
going to take our home away from us.

On 17 April 2007, when the Security Council held
its first-ever debate on the impact of climate change on
peace and security, I spoke in this very Chamber on this
very same matter (see S/PV.5663). That day, I reminded
the Council that climate change is not only an everyday
fact of life for the Maldivians, but also an existential
threat. I reminded the Council that a mean sea-level rise
of two metres would suffice to virtually submerge the
entire Maldives under water. That would indeed be the
death of a nation.

Yet today, 12 years later, I am still repeating the
same message in the Council. The prospects for our
future are far worse than we ever imagined. While we
are still trying to decide which forum of the United
Nations must address which aspect of climate change,
in our countries across the world lakes are drying up,
depriving tens of millions of people of fresh water.
Unseasonal droughts are leaving millions of people
homeless. Hunger and displacement are leading to
conflicts, and entire nations are sinking under water.
What is a greater security threat than that?

We are encouraged by the Paris Agreement with
its aim to combat climate change and to accelerate and
intensify the actions and investments needed to that
end. We also hope that the Katowice rulebook will
help to improve our collective ambition to deliver on
our pledges and keep global warming to well below
2°C, or if possible 1.5°C, above pre-industrial levels.
However, for the Maldives, waiting and hoping are not
enough. We must drastically reverse the current trends
in climate change to ensure that a future exists for little
girls like Aisha and her friends.

We need solutions that are based on the principles of
justice and common but differentiated responsibilities,
within respective capabilities, and that are achieved
through consensus and national ownership. The
solutions we seek should narrow the gap between
adaptation and mitigation. A large share of funds
must be reserved for adaptation. That will enable
countries to build infrastructure to reduce the risks of
climate-induced disasters, as envisaged in the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The solutions we seek should also aim to strengthen
the capacity of the United Nations system to identify
potential climate-related risks in conflicts and to
take mitigating measures early on. The Secretariat's
briefings to the Council should, in our opinion, include
expert analyses of climate-related risks and how such
risks are driving conflicts.

The countries that are on the front line of impact,
such as the Maldives, cannot afford to wait. We cannot
wait until we can all agree with the facts on the ground:
that climate change is a threat to international peace
and security. We cannot wait until the impacts of
climate-induced disasters destroy our economies and
our livelihoods. We cannot wait for climate change to
force us to abandon our identity and lose our homes. We
need actions that are consistent with the commitments
that we have already made. If we do not act, we will
extinguish the sparkle in the eyes of Aisha and millions
of children like her.

