Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking the Japanese
presidency for convening today's open debate. It has
the full support of my delegation. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

If we were to analyse the threats and challenges
to international peace and security that existed at the
moment when the the United Nations was created and
compare them to those we face today, we would see an
increase not only in the quantity of threats, but also in
the complexity of such phenomena. The new challenges,
threats and challenges that arise in the international
context must persuade the Security Council to consider
all issues that could trigger or exacerbate conflicts.
The increase in armed conflicts characterized by
unprecedented violence, the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, and the growth in the legal and
illegal trade of all types of weapons, the progression
of terrorism, cyberattacks, hunger and the effects of
climate change, to name just a few, require more than
ever a strong commitment on the part of the international
community to addressing them.

In times when many of those manifestations of
violence and devastation arise from global causes,
frameworks or strategies, it would be negligent to
imagine that the reponse could be merely local. The
international community must rise to the occasion, be
more supportive, consolidate its frameworks of joint
action and strengthen global governance in order to
find solutions to such serious problems. The increasing
complexity of the threats and challenges to international
peace and security force us not only to pay special
attention to prevention, but also to be creative in our
proposed solutions.

To that end, greater coordination between the
agendas of the various organs of the United Nations
is indispensable, although we should not modify or
interfere with their respective mandates and areas
of competence. The dynamic of work in the United
Nations demonstrates that the nexus among security,
development, human rights and the humanitarian field
is becoming increasingly evident. Uruguay believes
that, in addition to explicit threats to international peace
and security, there are also some phenomena that can
exacerbate crises in conflict or post-conflict situations.
Examples of such exacerbating phenomena are the
effects of climate change, pandemics and transnational
organized crime.

It is important that a comprehensive approach
be adopted in order to sustain peace, in particular by
preventing conflicts and addressing their root causes,
strengthening the rule of law at the international and
national levels and promoting sustained and sustainable
economic growth, the eradication of poverty, social
development, sustainable development, national
reconciliation and unity through inclusive dialogue
and mediation, access to justice and transitional
justice, accountability, good governance, democracy,
accountable institutions, gender equality and respect
for and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms.

It is no trivial matter that the world's military
expenditure was $1.69 trillion in 2016, representing an
increase from 2015. We should ask ourselves how many
needs could have been satisfied if only a portion of
that spending had been redirected to the economic and
social development of less richly endowed countries.
The possession of nuclear weapons is worrisome and
the delay in the disarmament of nuclear-weapon States
also endangers and threatens global stability and the
security of humankind. The use and threat of the use of
nuclear weapons constitute a crime against humanity
and a serious violation of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.

In the context of our concern over the development
of nuclear weapons, we must not lose sight of what has
been recognized as the main threat to international
peace and security today, namely, the situation in the
Korean peninsula. A solution to the tensions on the
Korean peninsula will be found only through dialogue,
negotiation and political commitment. We therefore
urge the parties concerned once again to comply with
the provisions of the numerous resolutions of the
Security Council on the situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and to resume the Six-
Party Talks in order to contribute to a lasting political
solution.

Finally, I commend the efforts of the Secretary-
General to carry out reform of the Secretariat within the
peace and security pillar of the Organization. We hope
that an improvement in the effectiveness, efficiency and
coordination of the Secretariat will produce benefits
at the systemic level that we can all enjoy in the best
possible conditions as we face the evolving challenges
and threats to international peace and security.

