Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I join other colleagues
in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Ould Abdallah, for
his briefing. I also wish to welcome the Foreign
Minister of Somalia and the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, Mr. Lamamra, and
thank them for their briefings.

We are happy that the Minister for Foreign
Affairs could make it to New York to share with us the
latest developments in Somalia. The challenges facing
Somalia within the country are many and indeed
pressing. The conflict in Somalia has also had negative
consequences for the region in terms of refugees,
piracy and proliferation of small arms, as well as
fostering a breeding ground for terror activities.

We are therefore encouraged that the recent
positive political developments, particularly in regard
to the implementation of the Djibouti peace agreement,
point to a new and positive direction in Somalia. These
developments have in the last couple of months
included the expansion of the parliament, the election
of President Ahmed, the appointment of Prime Minister
Sharmarke and the formation of a Government of
national unity. All of these developments provide a
unique opportunity for peace and stability in Somalia.

Uganda therefore welcomes the efforts of
President Ahmed and his Government in reaching out
to various groups and for being accommodative of
different opinions. The decision to move the seat of
government to Mogadishu and the Government's
announcement of four priority areas where minimum
recovery could be expected within the first hundred

days - security and reconciliation, humanitarian
access, institutional capacity-building, and
management of transitional arrangements - are bold

and commendable. In view of that, we call upon all
parties to respond positively to the President's
initiatives and join the political process so that the
urgent task of rebuilding the country can begin in
earnest.

We commend the international community for the
support that it has extended to the Somali people in
facilitating negotiations in their quest for peace. In this
regard, I want once again to salute the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, for his pivotal role in the Djibouti peace
process.

While we recognize these positive developments
and thank all who have facilitated the process, we
remain fully aware that the situation in Somalia is still
fragile and that there are some groups that are still bent
on taking the path of violence and who continue to
mount attacks in different parts of the country. The
latest attack on the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which killed a Ugandan army officer, is
one such desperate and condemnable act. Besides
destabilizing the country and delaying the return to
normalcy, these attacks also impede the delivery of
much-needed humanitarian assistance to ordinary
citizens, particularly the most vulnerable. We therefore
condemn the targeting of humanitarian personnel and
all acts of impunity, violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.

Like many of those who have spoken before us,
we are deeply disturbed by piracy off the coast of
Somalia. Not only does it impede the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the needy, it also interferes
with international trade and raises shipping costs.
Therefore it has a negative impact on economic
development in the region and worsens the already
negative impact of the current global economic crisis.

The seizure yesterday of a Greek vessel in the
Gulf of Aden is yet another reminder of the menace of
piracy despite the measures that have been put in place
to address the problem. While measures such as naval
patrols have checked the incidents of attacks, the latest
seizure demonstrates once again that the ultimate
solution to the problem of piracy lies in supporting and
enabling Somalia to regain its standing as a sovereign
entity with working institutions having the capacity to
enforce law and order, rein in pirates on its territory
and provide basic services to the Somali people.

In all these areas, be it in peace and political
processes under way in Somalia or in helping with the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, the rebuilding of
State institutions and the fight against piracy,
AMISOM. has been playing a vital role. We believe it
could do even more in these areas to assist the people
of Somalia if it is strengthened. We are therefore
encouraged that a support package is being put in place
that will enable AMISOM. not only to sustain its
operations but also to attain its full authorized strength
so that it can better fulfil its mandate.

Finally, the Somali people have suffered long
enough. The initiatives aimed at reconciliation and
political accommodation pursued by President Ahmed
deserve our full support. However, we - as the
international community or as neighbours - can only
do so much. Ultimately, the responsibility for bringing
lasting peace and stability to Somalia rests squarely
with the Somali people themselves. We therefore urge
all Somalis, of all shades of opinion and belief, to give
peace a chance, to forget the past and to look to the
future in rebuilding the country.

Uganda has circulated a draft statement to the
press that we hope can meet with the consensus of the
Council, but we welcome any input by Council
members.

