Mr. Kpotsra (Togo) (spoke in French): Allow me
first of all to congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am sure that your country, Bangladesh, will
make a positive contribution to the work of this body
during your term of office.

I should also like to thank the members of the
Security Council for giving me an opportunity to speak
during this debate on the situation in Angola and to let
them know, on a preliminary basis, my observations on the
report of the Panel of Experts set up in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1237 (1999). Naturally, my
country reserves the right to provide the Security Council
with any necessary additional information at a later stage.

I should first like to say a few words about the people
of Angola and all of those who are suffering from the civil
war in that country. The most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2000/23) stated that there are 3.7
million victims of the conflict, 2 million of whom have
been displaced. That report also indicates, in paragraph 15,
that in Angola, "various military elements, including
UNITA, have been responsible for the looting of crops and
destruction of property".

Togo profoundly wishes for peace to return to that
country and for a political solution to be quickly found to
the conflict, which has lasted too long. We sincerely hope
that both parties to the conflict, the Government and
UNITA, will recognize the possible role that the United
Nations could play.

During the most recent meeting on this issue, on 18
January, the Chairman of the sanctions Committee was so
kind as to provide us with a video presentation worthy of
the sorry episodes of the Moscow trials, showing UNITA
defectors bearing witness. Today, the Council has before it
the report of the Panel of Experts responsible for studying
violations of sanctions against UNITA.

While condemning the flimsy and selective nature of
the accusations in the report, I should like to make two
comments. First, it should be emphasized that, normally,
anyone bringing an action in a court or making an
accusation against a third party has an obligation to prove
the facts. It is the person bringing the charge who must
provide the evidence, not the other way around.

Secondly, almost all of the serious accusations
against Togo are based on declarations made by deserters
and defectors from UNITA, namely, General Bandua,
Colonel Alcides Lucas Kangunga, alias Kallias, Colonel
Aristides Kangunga, brother of the aforementioned, and
Mr. Araujo Sakaita. I would point out, that contrary to
what is said in the report in footnote 5 to paragraph 9,
where the latter is said to be "a son of Jonas Savimbi",
who "broke with UNITA and returned to Angola from
Lome in October 1999", the student Araujo Sakaita was
kidnapped in October 1999, when he was 19 years old.

This kidnapping was followed by an attempt, on 19
November 1999, to kidnap his younger brother, Eloy
Sakaita, who was 17 years old at the time. Thwarted by
the Togolese security services, this attack was carried out
by Mr. Manuel da Silva Casimiro, the Second Secretary
in the Angolan embassy in Lagos. Arrested and indicted,
he then said that he was acting on his own, in order to
get a promotion, following the example of those who had
carried out the first kidnapping.

I would also like to stress in particular the working
methods followed. Unfortunately, the working methods
consisted of compiling rumours, hearsay and gossip that
were then regarded as being verified because they were
confirmed by UNITA defectors. How can one give any
credence to allegations made by such people when they
all subsequently joined the Government army? Is it not in
their interest, just for the sake of survival, to repeat what
others, trained in the best schools of the cold war, have
whispered to them?

In one of those very few cases where the
information given by a defector, in this case General
Bandua, was indeed verified by the Panel of Experts, the
information proved to be unfounded. To be specific, let
me refer to paragraph 40 of the report:

"General Bandua stated that he thought that
BM-27 (Hurricane) Multiple Launch Rocket
system had come from Ukraine, via Togo.
However, the Government of Ukraine reported
that there were no authorized arms sales from
Ukraine to Togo during the relevant period."

On this point, the report concludes again in
paragraph 40:

 

"The Panel's investigation turned up no evidence
that the Government of Ukraine sold arms or
otherwise provided military assistance directly or
indirectly to UNITA."

So why does the Panel not exonerate Togo in this case
in the same way as it exonerated Ukraine?

The absolute lack of rigour in the approach taken can
be seen again from paragraphs 101 and 102 of the report,
in which the Panel of Experts claims that payments were
made in the form of diamonds. No date is given, which is
hardly astonishing since the facts are invented. Assuming,
however, that the sanctions Committee would like to ask us
for additional explanations, we would like to know the
specific dates of the meetings that are mentioned. Did the
meetings all occur after 28 August 1997, the date on which
the Security Council adopted resolution 1127 (1997)
prohibiting travel by members of UNITA? And the
supposed exchange of the diamonds, did that happen after
12 June 1998, when the Security Council adopted resolution
1173 (1998) prohibiting the transfer of diamonds held by
UNITA?

Yet such a generously financed body should really
take a more rigorous approach that particularly takes into
account the gradual evolution of the sanctions imposed and
the way they progressively became more diversified.

Then in paragraph 64 of the report, we are virtually
accused of being "solicited", along with Burkina Faso and
Zambia, by UNITA with a view to providing it with
petroleum products. "Solicited" obviously does not mean
that we agreed to do this, and the Panel of Experts is
careful not to accuse us on this particular score. But,
nevertheless, the damage is done, the seeds of doubt were
sown.

I, too, could take information from here and there and
proclaim it loudly in all directions from the rooftops. For
example, I could speak of the content of the excellent
report from the Canadian non-governmental organization
Partnership Africa-Canada on diamond trafficking in Sierra
Leone and say that the De Beers diamond company -
which, curiously, is so seldom cited in the report of the
Panel but which controls between 80 and 90 per cent of the
world diamond trade - acquired, in 1999, 35 per cent of
the Ekati mine in Canada, which is to represent 6 per cent
of world production in the years to come.

I could also mention the case of Sierra Leone, for
while there is no Canadian interest in the case of Angola,
in Sierra Leone there are three Canadian companies -
Rex Diamond Mining Corporation, Am Can Mineral
Limited and Diamond Works - which have all been
operating in Sierra Leone. I could say that those in charge
of the Rex Diamond Mining Corporation, which was
registered on 14 September 1985 in Toronto, have
publicly boasted of their privileged relations with Foday
Sankoh's Revolutionary United Front (RUF).

These are proven facts that I am citing. Should I
conclude from all this that the Government supports
RUF? Would I go and write such a thing without asking
for the view of the country concerned? This, nonetheless,
is what has been done in the case of Togo, and I ask all
the members of the Security Council to think about this.

Let me come back to the working methods of the
Panel. My country attaches great importance to this. We
sincerely believe in the neutrality of the United Nations.
On several occasions the report accuses my country of
having hosted the family of Mr. Savimbi, including his
children, in violation of existing sanctions. We do not
deny this fact, but unless we enter the logic of personal
vendetta, we do not see how children can be held
responsible for the actions of their fathers. It is, however,
clear that if the children were on the list drawn up by the
sanctions Committee, we would immediately take the
necessary steps to expel them from our country. But
would the United Nations venture to proceed along this
road and deny the right to life and the right to education
to children whose parents are - at a given
moment, because things do change in life - presumed
guilty of certain crimes. The devastating consequences for
innocent civilians of the sanctions imposed and applied
blindly against Libya and Iraq, for example, make us
shudder at the very idea.

In any case, let the Security Council and the
sanctions Committee shoulder their responsibilities, and
I assure the Council that we will shoulder ours. Certainly
we can be accused of many things - of advocating
dialogue in order to foster peace on our continent, and of
rightly refusing to hurl anathema on certain individuals -
but I do not believe we can honestly be accused of having
violated existing sanctions.

Turning again to the selective nature of the
accusations by the Panel of Experts, I would like to note
and deplore the fact that many countries that have long
been known to be involved in violations of sanctions
relating to Angola are deliberately omitted from the
report, and sometimes mitigating circumstances are

 

invoked by the Panel in favour of certain Governments or
countries. One cannot otherwise understand how in
paragraph 142, for example, the Panel of Experts can allow
itself to say, "the current military leadership in Abidjan is
said to be close to Savimbi and very sympathetic to
UNITA." But there is not a word about the considerable
influence brought to bear by distinguished individuals on
spheres of power or on the decision-making process in
certain countries.

Also, one could well wonder about the relevance of
omissions in recommendation 34 of the Panel, where
nothing is said about certain subregional organizations to
which the Council is invited to submit the report, as though
to imply that there is a certain hostility on the part the
members of these subregional organizations vis-a-vis the
peace process in Angola.

I now come to the investigations undertaken in my
country. I should point out, since the Panel of Experts did
not deem it opportune to do so, that the period of 8 to 11
December 1999 was slated for the visit to Lorne of three
members of the Panel. Unfortunately, that coincided with
the summit of the West African Monetary Union, which
was followed by the conference of heads of State of the
Economic Community of West African States. We therefore
proposed to the Chairman of the Panel to delay the visit
slightly and to come after 10 December. However, the three
experts did not heed our suggestion and kept to their initial
plan as though their presence alone meant that all the
competent national departments should be available to them
regardless of the summits being held. As a result, it was not
until a few hours before their departure on 11 December
that the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of my
country and the chief of police met with them, twice.

Having some information on the violations cited in
connection with the UNITA meeting, the Togolese side
gave its reactions. Responding to information regarding the
welcoming of Mr. Savimbi on his arrival at Lome on 17
November. The Togolese side provided evidence to show
that the Government was at that time meeting in the
Council of Ministers at Kara, in the north of Togo, and that
there it met President Alpha Oumar Konare of Mali.
Obviously, if Mr. Savimbi had landed at Lorne on the same
day aboard a military aircraft, accompanied by Mr. Jean-
Pierre Bemba - leader of the Movement for the Liberation
of the Congo (MLC) - he certainly did not receive a
welcoming ceremony commensurate with his presumed rank.

Apart from the rather disconcerting frivolity with
which the Experts - entrusted by the Council to work on
a noble cause - offered these accusations against States,
and above all against heads of States, leaks were
cunningly orchestrated to make the report available to the
media; there were attempts to set States and subregions
against each other; and there was an impression of
collusion between the interests of a country that has an
official mandate and the implementation of sanctions
against UNITA. These are elements that could
significantly affect the credibility of the Security Council
and of the United Nations. I think this should be remedied
immediately.

As far as Togo is concerned, we have always
affirmed and reaffirmed our commitment to the United
Nations, to the ideals of the Charter and to peace in
Africa. We have always advocated cooperation between
the Angolan and Togolese security services. I am happy
to be able to tell the Council that an Angolan delegation
visited Togo last week, specifically from 4 to 10 March
2000. The delegation visited a number of locations that
the international brainwashing campaign has identified as
being involved in violations of the sanctions against
UNITA. It went to the Commando de Kpewa National
Training Centre, in the north of Togo, which was
established in 1975 and has already provided training for
and graduated over nine classes of monitors and
commando instructors, both nationals and foreigners. Is
this not evidence of Togo's commitment to transparency
in inter-State relations? Is this not an indication of our
willingness to dispel all misunderstandings and to
contribute to the relaunching of the peace process in
Angola?

I cannot conclude my statement without stressing,
for the benefit of those who have called for it, that just as
they would not be inclined to interfere in the way in
which the Innuit of Labrador or the Nisga'a people of
British Columbia are ruled over, so are Africans loathe to
accept directives or injunctions from individuals who
come from elsewhere - whatever mandate they may
have taken on. Until the contrary is proved, the future of
the Organization of African Unity remains in the hands of
Africans.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
importance my country attaches to achieving lasting peace
in Angola. Would not the energies we are now expending
in accusing each other, in defending ourselves and in
indicting each other not be better utilized in favour of that
objective?

 

