Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Stephen O'Brien, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing and the tireless efforts of
the Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs
in providing humanitarian assistance to all areas of
Yemen. We and all countries of the world highly value
their work. My statement will focus on the situations in
Yemen, South Sudan and Somalia.

With regard to the situation in Yemen, my
delegation is concerned about the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation affecting our brotherly Yemeni
people. We stress the need to allow the unconditional
access ofhumanitarian assistance to all areas onemen.
We regret that Houthis continue to stall in providing
access for and entry of assistance in Taiz city. We also
denounce the fact that they did not allow the Under-
Secretary-General to enter Taiz city during his visit to
Yemen. We call upon the international community to
increase its contributions at the humanitarian level in
Yemen to ensure sufficient funding for relief agencies.

Moreover, it is important to continue to promote
the efficient delivery of assistance in Yemen once it
reaches the country, including through improving the
delivery networks of relief agencies. We also call for
studying the possibility of deploying United Nations
observers ofthe stocks controlled by Houthis, especially
at Hudaydah port, so as to end certain practices that
have been recently reported by the coalition, including
stalling the entrance of authorized ships into the port,
which only increases the suffering of our brotherly
Yemeni people.

The humanitarian suffering affecting the people
of South Sudan has increased over the past month and
reached unprecedented levels. The vicious cycle of
fighting that has been waged since 2013 has resulted
in the displacement of millions of civilians. Hundreds
of thousands have become the victims of hunger and
malnutrition. There is therefore an urgent need to
facilitate access to the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan in the affected areas in a rapid, safe and
unhindered manner to allow it to implement the mandate
entrusted to it by the Security Council. Today more
than ever, the people of South Sudan are in need of the
support of the international community and donors. The
necessary resources required to fight this humanitarian
crisis have risen to an estimated at $1.6 billion, the
greater part of which has yet to be raised.

We express our deep concern with regard to
the increasingly serious consequences of the crisis
resulting from the drought and malnutrition affecting
the people of the Somalia. We must urgently address
this crisis, which threatens to impede all political and
security gains achieved thus far in Somalia, while
taking into account the competition to draw on already
scarce natural resources and the conflicts that it could
cause in the affected regions. We also stress the need
to increase regional and international efforts to provide
relief for areas affected by drought and ensure the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to Somali citizens
whose number is estimated at 6 million.

It is also important to support the ongoing
coordination among different parties in the relief
process and ensure the participation the Somali Federal
Government and all concerned regional administrations
in every phase. If we hope to end the suffering of the
Somali people, we must build on the lessons learned
from our experience in dealing with the drug crisis
that has affected Somalia since 2011. We must also
promote the capacity-building of Somali institutions so
that they can mitigate the economic and humanitarian
consequences of future crises.

To conclude, I would like to stress that the common
denominator of the three countries is their ongoing
political crises. Despite their different contexts, the
continuing severe deterioration of the respective
humanitarian situations is a direct result of the absence
of a political settlement in the three countries. We can
sustainably improve the humanitarian situations and
end the suffering of civilians in Yemen, South Sudan
and Somalia only through an inclusive political process
that paves the way for a political solution based on
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Despite its
importance, humanitarian assistance will never be
able to provide a final long-term solution for the crises
affecting the people of those countries.

