Mr. Boiinovie (Croatia): Let me begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his statement and
expressing my country's appreciation for the personal
efforts he has invested in helping to advance the
Middle East peace process. Let me also express our
gratitude to Foreign Minister Lavrov and his delegation
for organizing this timely debate, which focuses our
attention on the need to reinvigorate diplomatic action
on reaching a comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

In many of its aspects, the Arab-Israeli conflict
remains the defining conflict of our time. Tension and
turbulence in the region often reverberate globally.
Conversely, the dynamics on the international scene
have not always been conducive to achieving a
solution. We deem this to be an opportune moment that
provides the right context and momentum, which
should be harnessed to achieve a final and lasting
peace.
At the heart of this lies the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process. While respecting its essentially bilateral
nature, we also recognize that unwavering international
support to the process and to the parties' efforts is
critical in creating the political context for successful
negotiations.

We should also not lose sight of the regional
dimension of the process. For its part, Croatia values
the efforts of responsible regional partners towards
securing a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East, including the Arab Peace Initiative. We
recognize and commend the role played by the United
States in this regard and are encouraged by the early
and principled engagement of President Obama's
Administration with regional actors, including with
both the Palestinians and the Israelis.

Today's meeting comes at a critical time when all
efforts should be channelled into preserving this
momentum and creating an environment that would
allow the parties to continue to build on the progress
achieved, guided by the principles and mutual
understanding reflected in resolution 1850 (2008),
which the Council adopted last December.

Last year, we witnessed the evolution of a
comprehensive, direct and results-oriented Israeli-
Palestinian negotiating process within the framework
set out at Annapolis. There was also the opening of
important regional tracks between Israel and Syria and
between Syria and Lebanon. Despite the recent
impasse, we cannot afford to lose the momentum that
has been achieved. We therefore welcome the Russian
initiative to provide new impetus for a comprehensive
peace process, on both the Israeli-Palestinian and the
Syrian-Lebanese tracks, primarily through preparations
for the Moscow conference.

For Croatia, resolution 1850 (2008) remains an
important benchmark. It emphasizes the irreversibility
of the peace talks and the need to advance the process
under the Annapolis guiding principles, as well as the
need to intensify efforts to foster mutual recognition
and peaceful coexistence in the region. I would like to
reiterate here our belief in the ongoing peace process
based on a regional approach and on a two-State
solution 4 a democratic and peaceful Palestine living
side by side with a democratic and secure Israel - and
in the need to advance the momentum towards just,
lasting and comprehensive peace for the Middle East.

It is important that the parties continue to engage
in direct and substantive negotiations at all levels and
that they receive our full support along that journey.
We recognize the challenges that the parties face on
that journey, even more so now in the wake of the
recent conflict in Gaza and the sensitive period of
political transition. We welcome the opportunity that
the formation of the new Israeli Government can bring
in providing for the resumption and consolidation of
the peace talks.

We also understand that the dynamics in Gaza
cannot be separated from the broader picture and the
efforts towards achieving a comprehensive peace. Gaza
remains in dire and urgent need of humanitarian and
reconstruction assistance. Despite encouraging donor
responses in the aftermath of the crisis, we are mindful
that reconstruction and the long-term recovery and
development of Gaza depend principally on a stable
and secure environment, which in turn remains critical
for the sustained opening of Gaza crossings, as
requested in resolution 1860 (2009).

Moreover, the full implementation of resolution
1860 (2009), which includes putting an end to arms
smuggling and the capacity of Hamas and other
militant groups to launch attacks against Israel, is
critical for attaining a durable ceasefire. In that regard,
let me reiterate our appreciation for international and
regional efforts, notably those of Egypt.

The aftermath of the crisis in Gaza has
highlighted the significance of intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. We support efforts to that end and
would support a Palestinian Government that
renounces violence and respects previous agreements
and obligations, as well as the Quartet principles.

As the political and diplomatic processes remain
inextricably linked with the situation on the ground, we
hope to see tangible changes in accordance with the
obligations to which both parties committed
themselves under the Road Map, which were
reaffirmed at Annapolis. We also hope that both parties
will refrain from all measures that risk prejudging the
outcome of negotiations or eroding trust and
confidence.
Furthermore, we understand that development
and peace are mutually reinforcing and that economic
development is an essential part of a lasting solution.
Here too, sustained international engagement remains
critical, both to stimulate Palestinian economic renewal

and for the reform processes, notably in the sphere of
security and the rule of law. The ability of the
Palestinian Authority to build credible institutions and
a security infrastructure that is willing and able to
combat terrorism and anarchy remains an essential
element of Palestinian State-building and a legitimate
expectation on the Israeli side.

We understand, through personal experience from
our region, that the current period is beset by
challenges for both the Israeli and the Palestinian sides.
This makes it all the more important that the
international community, including this Council and
the active Quartet, continue to encourage the parties to
persist in their efforts towards achieving the shared
goals of ajust, lasting and comprehensive peace for the
Middle East, with two States, a democratic and
peaceful Palestine living side by side with a democratic
and secure Israel.

Before finishing, my delegation would also like
to thank the Russian delegation for preparing the draft
presidential statement that we are about to adopt and
other Council delegations for the constructive position
and flexibility shown in bringing this consensus text
together.

