Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. I also thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America, for his
stewardship of the Council last month. In addition, I
should like to join you in welcoming the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and I thank him for his
tireless efforts to bring about peace in the region. We
urge him to pursue those efforts, including his work
with the Quartet.

Last Thursday, 19 September 2002, Israel, the
occupying Power, sent its forces and tanks to reoccupy
the compound of President Yasser Arafat in the city of
Ramallah. The forces of occupation razed some
buildings within the compound and blew up others,
digging a trench around the only remaining and now
damaged building, in which President Arafat and other
officials and security officers remained. Israeli forces
also built a barbed wire fence around that building.
Meanwhile, the Israeli occupying forces opened fire on
the area, resulting in at least one death and an unknown
number of injuries and, of course, directly threatening
the lives of President Arafat and those with him. The
explosions, the razing and other forms of threat and
coercion have continued for days.

Those grave and illegal criminal acts, which are
yet another assault on the entire Palestinian people,
were accompanied by announcements from Israeli
officials that the Palestinian President would be
deported from Palestinian territory and that he would
be harmed, along with other statements concerning the
wish of Israel, the occupying Power, to arrest a number
of the officials who remained with the President.
Needless to say, those announcements are absolutely
unacceptable, as they represent an escalation of the
aggression and an attempt to further humiliate our
leadership and our officials. Israel's repetition of such
lies will amount to an encouragement of aggression.

After those events, the population of Ramallah
and of many other Palestinian cities defied the curfew
imposed upon them and took to the streets to express
their rejection of the new Israeli criminal aggression.
The reaction of the Israeli occupying forces was
typical: they fired directly on the demonstrators,
resulting in the martyrdom of five civilians and the
injury of scores of others.

Clearly, there is no limit to the crimes committed
by Mr. Sharon, by his Government and by his army in
the series of war crimes and acts of State terrorism
committed against the Palestinian people.
Unfortunately, it is all being carried out with total
impunity while the international community,
represented by the Security Council, fails to fulfil its
obligations because of the position of a permanent
Council member.

Despite everything, we officially call on the
Council to adopt a clear resolution demanding that
Israel withdraw immediately from the headquarters of
President Arafat, in addition to whatever other action
the Council might deem appropriate in order to put an
end to the humanitarian crisis being endured by our
people and to the tragic confrontation between the two
sides. It is not too late to do that, despite the regrettable
and unwarranted delay of this Council meeting from
last Friday until today. I express that position not only
in my national capacity, but also as this month's
Chairman of the Arab Group, which had requested an
immediate Council meeting to consider this grave
situation.

Throughout the years, the Palestinian people have
been subjected to uprooting, displacement, denial of
their existence, destruction, murder and confiscation of
their land and property. They have been the target of
massacres, from those at Deir Yassin and Kafr Qassem
to that at the Jenin refugee camp. During the past two
years in particular, since Mr. Sharon assumed power,
Israel, the occupying Power, has not stopped its
extrajudicial executions, its collective punishments
such as home demolitions, the deliberate murder of
civilians and the infliction of maximum injury,
continuing its abductions and arrests and causing
widespread, deliberate destruction to property and
farmland. Israel has continued to severely restrict the
movement of persons and goods, including those of
United Nations agencies and other humanitarian
organizations, imposing closures and, most recently,
imposing a curfew on hundred of thousands of people.

In brief, Israel, the occupying Power - even
during periods of calm on the Palestinian side,
including over the past six weeks - has continued to
destroy the Palestinian Authority and its institutions
and to destroy the entire life of the Palestinian people.
Israel has reoccupied the areas under Palestinian
control, as if to return the situation to what it had been
before the peace process.
The political objectives of the Israeli side, in
particular those of Mr. Sharon, are very clear: to
destroy the Palestinian Authority and to break up the
Palestinian leadership in order to create a situation of
vacuum and anarchy with a View to subjugating the
entire Palestinian population.

Its purpose is not only to prevent permanent
settlement that would ensure Israel's withdrawal from
occupied Palestinian territory, but to ensure the
continuation of occupation and colonial settlement. In
fact, Mr. Sharon, and unfortunately some of his
supporters, do not want a different Palestinian
leadership, but total absence of any leadership. He does
not want a solution with the Palestinian people, but
wants to force it to abandon its rights.

What I have just said is not an analysis.
Mr. Sharon has been very clear in his public statements
for those who want to listen and understand.
Mr. Sharon has repeatedly said that he rejects any final
settlement and that he wants long-term interim
arrangements. Mr. Sharon has repeatedly said that
Palestinians had to be harmed and totally defeated. He
objected to the Mitchell recommendations until he
managed to bury them. Mr. Sharon said that he had
hoped to have killed President Arafat in Beirut.
Mr. Sharon rewrote resolution 242 (1967) in open
defiance of the Security Council and all those who
supported the peace process, and he was categorically
clear when he recently said that the Oslo Accords no
longer exist. This is the very same Mr. Sharon who is
the hero of the massacres of Sabra and Shatila, Qibya
and Khan Yunis. He is the person responsible for all
kinds of war crimes and State-sponsored terrorism
committed by the Israeli occupation forces during his
premiership of the Israeli Government. He is the person
who is pushing the entire region towards catastrophe.

For its part, Israel is trying to deny these political
objectives and is waging psychological warfare against
our people and leadership, in addition to a systematic
global campaign of falsehoods and misleading lies.
One major component of this is an attempt by Israel to
project that all of the atrocities committed against our
people are a reaction against suicide bombings,
projecting the entire conflict as having started with all
these explosions. Nothing could be further from the
truth.

For our part, our position has been clear. We
condemn these bombings against civilians in Israel. We
condemn them as acts of terrorism that are harmful to
the Palestinian national interests. In any case they are
being committed by groups that oppose the peace
process and the accords signed between the two sides.
However, I would like to state here that the first suicide
bombings took place towards the end of 1994. That is
27 years after the gruesome Israeli occupation began,
and after Israel, the occupying Power, had already
transferred about 350,000 Israeli settlers to occupy
Palestinian land in order to settle there, colonize it and
take it over.

No, the Israeli occupation and its reprehensible
practices have not resulted from the suicide
bombings - it actually created them. When the Israeli
political position favoured the continuation of the
peace process and efforts to achieve a final solution,
those acts were not allowed to derail the peace process
but rather were used to strengthen cooperation with the
Palestinian Authority.

When the political position became Sharon's
political position, the peace process was halted and the
suicide bombings were used as a pretext to hit the
Palestinian Authority and to revert to the pre-Oslo
situation.

Why is the Palestinian Authority being targeted
instead of assaulting the perpetrators of the suicide
bombings? Why are the lives of the entire Palestinian
people being destroyed instead of convincing them that
there is a viable path to peace to fulfil their rights.
Even if we accept the Israeli version of the story, how
can a State be allowed to prevent attacks against its
own civilians through ferocious and destructive attacks
against an entire other population?

If Mr. Sharon wanted a solution, he should have
known by this time that there was no military solution.
He is pursuing a military solution through suppression
and brutality, because he does not want a political
solution.

If we examine all of Israel's actions in the context
of international law and Security Council resolutions,
we find a clear case. It is a case of three decades of
defiance of Security Council resolutions. Three
decades and more. Twenty-eight resolutions have been
adopted by the Council with regard to Israeli practices
and measures in our occupied territory. All were
rejected by the occupying Power; it did not comply
with even one of them. These include resolutions on
Israeli violations and breaches of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949; resolutions on illegal Israeli
measures in Jerusalem; resolutions on the settlements;
resolutions on deportations; resolutions on providing
protection to the Palestinian civilians; and resolutions
on dispatching envoys and fact-finding missions. All
have been rejected and, in fact, defied through
continued Israeli occupation.

Israel is the only State in the world that is
officially recognized as an occupying Power by the
Security Council. Israel is the only State engaged in
settlement colonialism in the post-colonization era. It is
the only State that has systematically violated and
breached provisions of international law and
international humanitarian law. It is the only country in
the world that has openly rejected all relevant Security
Council resolutions. As if that is not enough, Israel is
the only State in the region that has illegally acquired
nuclear weapons, in addition to other weapons of mass
destruction. What has the Security Council done?
Unfortunately, not much. What does the Council intend
to do now? We hope that the Council will show the
necessary seriousness in shouldering its responsibilities
towards the implementation of its own resolutions.

Another classic component of Israeli campaigns
is the attempt to divert attention to issues other than the
main issue at hand and to shift the onus onto the
Palestinian side. We see this clearly in focusing on the
question of reform. It is true that this is a very
important issue for us, but it remains a Palestinian
matter and is not part of the international agenda that
deals with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Unfortunately, some appear to want to implement
Mr. Sharon's plans through this approach. They are
trying to give democracy a new meaning that does not
recognize free elections and are trying to impose a
political system, even an electoral system, on our
people. This crude intervention in the affairs of our
people is unacceptable. In any case, this issue cannot
substitute for addressing the main issue - namely, the
continuation of the Israeli occupation and the need to
end this occupation.

Yes, we will proceed with our second round of
national elections, and we will do our best to rebuild
our institutions and reform them. We welcome any
international assistance in this regard. But at the same
time, we understand the limitations of this process, and
we know that no true, full democracy can exist under
foreign occupation, and we know that we cannot build
and maintain stable and effective institutions while
killing, destruction and aggression continue.

Demanding that the Palestinian side fulfil its
duties in the area of security following the destruction
of its security apparatus, expecting it to complete
reforms and establish true democracy while under
occupation and continued oppression is ludicrous and
impossible to achieve. Either intentionally or
unintentionally, this for all practical purposes provides
a new cover for Mr. Sharon and his policies, while
blaming the Palestinian side for failure.

All this is happening while the peace process is
being marginalized and extremist forces are rising.
This hysteria must come to and end and the moment of
truth must be faced, namely the truth of Mr. Sharon, his
Government, his army and their policies. Otherwise,
we are drifting to a course that will drag the entire
region into a worse situation.

The only viable way to end the current tragedy
and to return to the peace track is to pursue a
comprehensive approach along with an effective
international presence on the ground. What is meant by
a comprehensive approach is not only how to deal with
political, economic and security dimensions all at once,
although these are important; but also to have a prior
declaration of the form of the final settlement, not only
on the basis of two States - Israel and Palestine - but
also by identifying the borders between the two States,
with the possibility of the two sides agreeing to some
specific amendments thereto.

This border is, of course, the armistice line that is
now commonly known as the 1967 border. On this
basis, there would be specific stages and steps that
would lead us from here to our final destination, the
final settlement. This is the only approach that would
create a different dynamic on the two sides and
inevitably lead to support by the overwhelming
majority of both sides for this settlement.

This approach also requires a genuine and
effective international presence on the ground. This
could be in the form of official observers in sufficient
numbers and having a clear mandate, or, even better, in
the form that was proposed by Secretary-General Kofi
Annan: the establishment of a multinational force
under Chapter VII of the Charter.

The parameters of the final settlement are widely
known, and our direct experience has taught us that the
only possible and available way to achieve peace is
that just described. What, then, is the obstacle to this
settlement? I do not want to get into that from my
official position of responsibility, because, like every
Palestinian, I am angry and furious at everything that is
happening in our country and in our region. But we, the
Palestinian people, have not lost hope, and we await
your measures.

