Mr. Motoc (Romania): I would like to join my
colleagues in expressing appreciation for the
participation in this extraordinary Security Council
meeting of the President of the Somali Transitional
Federal Government, of representatives of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
of Member States Kenya, Djibouti and Ethiopia, and of
representatives of the African Union. Their statements
on recent developments in Somalia are very much
welcome.

Romania associates itself with the commendation
of the recent progress made at the Somali National
Reconciliation Conference, culminating in the adoption
of the Somali Transitional Federal Charter, the
establishment of the Transitional Federal Parliament,
the election of the Speaker of Parliament and the
President of the transitional federal Government and
the recent appointment of the Prime Minister. For those
remarkable advances, tribute is due to the States
members of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) - in particular the Government
of Kenya - and to other countries and organizations,
mainly the European Union, the African Union (AU),
the League of Arab States and the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia. We encourage them to
continue their efforts in that regard. At the present
crucial juncture, Somalia needs our solidarity and our
dedication more than ever before.

As provided by the Transitional Federal Charter,
Somalia is now entering a five-year transitional period.
The stakes are high, and they must be matched by the
determination of all Somali parties towards peace and
by the investment of the international community in
support of their efforts. Prospects for a successful
transitional period should be secured from the very
outset. The most immediate task for the new Prime
Minister will be related to the ability to establish a
transitional Government that enjoys internal credibility
and is able to fairly distribute, with political wisdom,
the dividends of national reconciliation and
reconstruction.

The challenges lying ahead for the new
Government are certainly notable. In the short term,
there is an urgent need to improve and expand security
throughout the country, first and foremost through
effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) activities. Increased reconciliation
and reconstruction efforts, accompanied by concrete
steps aimed at building democratic institutions, would
then pave the way for national elections at the end of
the five-year transitional period.
Undoubtedly, the path leading to peace in
Somalia after long years of severe conflict will not be
easy to travel. However, the progress achieved thus far
gives us reason to hope. Today could see the dawning
of a new era for peace in Somalia. It is important to
sustain the momentum and to encourage all Somali
parties to assume their primary responsibilities in that
regard.

International support for Somalia remains crucial.
Romania welcomes and supports the decision taken by
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union at
its eighteenth meeting, held on 25 October, to
accelerate preparations for the deployment of an AU
military observer mission in Somalia upon request by
the President of the transitional federal Government.
We call on the African Union, in cooperation with the
Somalis and in close coordination with IGAD and the
United Nations, to explore the most appropriate
configuration and mandate for such a future mission in
Somalia in order to allow for the smooth progression of
DDR and other activities aimed at consolidating the
security climate throughout the country. The ultimate
aim of the mission would be to assist in confidence-
building and to foster national dialogue and the
peaceful resolution of whatever disputes might emerge
during the disarmament process.

We followed with interest the proceedings of the
planning seminar on stabilization in Somalia during the
transition, convened by the African Union in
November in Addis Ababa. In particular, we agree on
the need for the conclusion of a ceasefire agreement
between the Government and other Somali forces and
armed groups and for the establishment of the
necessary legal, administrative and institutional
framework prior to the deployment of an AU mission.

We also join in the appeal to the donor
community to provide financial and material support to
the newly established Somali institutions to ensure
their functioning inside Somalia aimed at assisting in
reconciliation, reconstruction and DDR efforts. In that
regard, we commend the timely mobilization of the
donor community, particularly the convening of the
donor meeting in Stockholm on 29 October 2004.

In supporting efforts to rebuild the country, the
international community needs to be guided by the
expectations and needs of Somalis themselves. Somalis
themselves must therefore reach consensus on
establishing their own priorities and requirements for
assistance through the expeditious formulation of a
programme of action that contains concrete measures
and deadlines covering the transitional process.

National consensus must be accompanied by
consensus at the regional level. In that regard, we
encourage the establishment of a framework that would
provide for periodic consultations among members of
IGAD, other States of the region and relevant regional
and international partners as a viable opportunity to
achieve a regional vision of the stabilization and
reconstruction of Somalia. National and regional
consensus would then brighten the prospects for
increased international support and facilitate future
discussions between the new Government and the
United Nations aimed at exploring possibilities with
regard to an expanded peace-building role and
presence for the United Nations in Somalia.

