Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): Slovakia aligns itself with
the statements that will be delivered by the observer
of the European Union and by the representative of
Norway, on behalf of the group of States endorsing the
Safe Schools Declaration; and with the statement made
earlier by the Permanent Representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict, of which Slovakia is a very active member.

At the outset, I would like to thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres for his timely briefing and
recent report (S/2017/821), covering the impacts of
armed conflicts on children in 2016. Furthermore, I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Virginia Gamba, for her remarkable and tireless
efforts in focusing on the protection of children in
armed conflict, and Mr. Mubin Shaikh for his briefing,
which was much appreciated. Of course, I would also
like to thank the French presidency for convening this
open debate.

Slovakia is deeply committed to the protection of all
children, particularly those affected by armed conflicts.
We have been championing, since its adoption in 2011,
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on a Communications Procedure, which
has been signed by 36 States so far. Therefore, we call
on other Member States to ratify the Optional Protocol,
which allows individual children to submit complaints
regarding specific Violations of their rights under the
Convention and its first two Optional Protocols.
In January, we marked the tenth anniversary
of the Paris Commitments and the Paris Principles
and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups. A month later, in February,
we marked the twentieth anniversary of the General
Assembly resolution 51/77, which created a mandate
dedicated to improving the protection of children
affected by conflict. Those documents were pivotal in
galvanizing the interest of the global community in the
children and armed conflict agenda, delivering tangible
and measurable results.

In the past 20 years, a tremendous amount of work
has been done. Tens of thousands of child soldiers have
been released and almost 30 action plans have been
signed with parties to conflict, leading to a situation
wherein the recruitment or use of child soldiers no
longer exists in five countries where it existed earlier.
But this is certainly not the end of the process. On the
contrary, there is much more that remains to be done.
That is confirmed clearly by the Secretary-General's
report and the report of Special Representative Virginia
Gamba (A/72/276). We must acknowledge that a lot
remains to be done to achieve desirable results.

Less than three weeks ago, we heard the eerie
testimony of Joy Bishara, one of the 276 schoolgirls
kidnapped from a secondary school in the town
of Chibok, in Borno state, Nigeria. The civilian
character of schools is supposed to be the guarantee
of their sacredness. Attacks on schools, their damage
or destruction, as well as threats to, attacks on or
abductions of scholars and academics undermine the
right to education and have far-reaching consequences.
The main purpose ofthose attacks is to spread fear - the
fear of receiving education - because the perpetrators
know that education and knowledge are cornerstones
of progress.

Education helps to eliminate regional inequality. It
provides tools for girls and boys alike to move forward
towards a better future for their families, communities
and countries. On the other hand, a lack of education
increases the risk of the radicalization and recruitment
of children. Their place is not on the battlefield and
their tools are not bombs and firearms; they should be
at their school desks with a pen and a book in their
hands. That is the natural set-up for all children, and we
must do our best in order to achieve that.

We urge all State and non-State parties to respect
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. All perpetrators should be named and held
accountable for violating the rights of children. That
is an important step, and I would therefore like to
commend the Secretary-General for providing in his
report a list of the parties that have committed one or
more violations against children. We should work with
those parties and prepare, sign and implement action
plans in order to eradicate this malpractice. We should
hold recruiters, kidnappers, sexual offenders and all
other perpetrators accountable in a court of law for
their crimes against children. We should support the
global consensus to end the military recruitment and
use of children, and promote the straight-18 standard.

Last but not least, we should all engage in the release
and sustainable reintegration of children following their
terrible experiences of recruitment or other violations.
We must keep in mind that, first and foremost, they
are victims in need of specialized psychological and
social assistance, and we must therefore provide them
with professional help, support and education. That is
the only way they will be able to resume their lives
and focus on their future, without being affected by
their past. Violence against children, as well as their
placement or even their active role in conflicts terribly
affect the children themselves, but also all humankind.
After all, children are our future and we are obliged to
do our utmost to provide the best possible prospects for
them. If we do not, the price to pay will be high.

In conclusion, I would like to recall one of my
earlier visits to Juba, in South Sudan, where we have
been supporting a vaccination campaign for the
children most in need - those that suffer on a daily
basis and are not only poor, but truly experience hunger
and are affected by it in their everyday lives. It is our
obligation to children in places like South Sudan and
elsewhere to do more to provide them with things that
we consider normal. I would like to end by quoting
former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who said,

"Education promotes equality and lifts people out
of poverty. It teaches children how to become good
citizens. Education is not just for a privileged few,
it is for everyone. It is a fundamental human right".

