Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): I
am grateful to the members of the Council for offering
me this opportunity. I would first thank the
Representative of the Secretary-General in Guinea-
Bissau for having introduced the Secretary-General's
report (S/2008/395) and also for the additional
information which he brought to the Council's
attention.

Like the Secretary-General, and like most of the
citizens of Guinea-Bissau, I, too, feel that notable
progress has been made in my country. In spite of all
the difficulties we are facing, we are determined to
move forward so that peace and stability can become
reality in my country and so that we can finally focus
on much more crucial questions, such as the socio-
economic development in our country. I observe, as the
Secretary-General did in his report, that there is further
room for work; there are serious problems that persist
and the authorities in Guinea-Bissau have to make
more of an effort, so that, as a nation, we can muster
all the energy to work together in an inclusive
democracy.
However, as is recognized in the report we still
need the unwavering support of the international
community. Without that support, it will not be
possible, despite of our resolve, in spite of our will and
in spite our clear awareness of our prime responsibility
as citizens of Guinea-Bissau, it simply will not be
possible to meet all of the challenges we face because
they are so numerous.

Without taking too much of the Council's time, I
would like to acknowledge that we have to solidify
democracy in our country. Mr. Omoregie indicated
earlier that everything is being done in order for the
elections to take place, as announced on 16 November.
He just explained the remaining difficulties to the
Council. I, too, would like to appeal to the
international community so that the requisite financial
support be given as soon as possible so that all of the
steps can be covered leading up to that crucial date of
16 November.

I should also like to thank Mr. Costa for his
report, and in particular for all the aid that the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has been giving
Guinea-Bissau. That support is crucial. We are facing
enormous difficulties because the challenge is
tremendous. We are a small country, the weak link in
the subregional chain, with drugs being a subregional
problem. That dimension has, fortunately, been
recognized not only by Guinea-Bissau, but by all
countries in the West African region, as well as by our
international partners.

We are making efforts. We have already made
considerable progress, but more has to be done. As I
said earlier, we are the weak link in the chain. Drug
traffickers know full well that, so long as Guinea-
Bissau does not have the means to combat that scourge,
which, as Mr. Costa said when he referred to
metastasis, is a real cancer. It is a terrifying cancer that
has to be fought rapidly with effective means so that
drugs, which we never had in our country until 2005,
do not hinder our country's socio-economic
development. Thus, I should like to thank Mr. Costa for
all his efforts and for all the help he has given to my
country.

Finally, I should like once again to thank our
colleague from Brazil, the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration, for her praiseworthy efforts, working
together with other members of the configuration,
because we have been able to make great progress.
Earlier, she referred to the visit to my country, thanks
to which it was possible to observe the situation there
and to make contact not only with the national
authorities, but also with civil society and private
citizens, to take the pulse and to see exactly what is
happening in the country. That visit made it possible
not only to identify the many challenges, but also to
see that we have reason for hope in my country. We are
resolved to move forward and not to be discouraged in
our effort to create all the conditions necessary to
promote human rights and the rule of law so that our
democracy can be a truly inclusive democracy,
allowing all citizens to be involved in and to manage
our national affairs.
08-39896
I should like once again to thank members of the
Council for their focused attention to my country and
above all for their willingness, through an appeal to the
international community, to provide substantial support
and assistance to my country as soon as possible.

