Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Rodolfo Nin Novoa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Uruguay, and thanking the presidency of Uruguay for
convening this open debate. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing.

Indonesia associates itself with the statements to
be delivered by the representatives of Iran and Kuwait
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization for Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

I will focus my statement on the question of
Palestine and the conflict in Syria, with emphasis on
developments in 2015 in those areas and the actions that
must be taken to achieve workable solutions.

The year 2015 was another depressing one for
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Intimidations, violations of human rights
and fundamental freedoms and violence perpetrated
against them by the Israeli forces and settlers occurred
on almost a daily basis. The spiralling violence has
only deepened the enmity between the Palestinian
and Israeli communities. Provocative actions continue
to occur and further complicate the prospect for
restarting the peace process. Furthermore, violence in
the occupied Palestinian territory has had inevitable
repercussions on the stability of the Middle East.
The dangerous situation on the ground is also being
exploited by extremists to justify their cause. Despite
those alarming developments, the Security Council has
not been able to respond decisively.

Indonesia is consistent in its strong condemnation
of the Israeli occupation of Palestine. In our view, the
occupation is nothing but a betrayal of the principles
of justice and the self-determination of people, which
are the very principles on which this Organization was
founded and which it was intended to defend. Moreover,
the longer the occupation is in place, the more violence
the world is likely to see. Let me reiterate, therefore,
Indonesia's unwavering position on the question of
Palestine. The Israeli occupation must end without
further delay. The Security Council must uphold its
Charter responsibility and work in earnest and with
stronger determination to achieve a just, lasting, and
comprehensive settlement based on the various relevant
United Nations resolutions.

It is high time to give peace a chance and to stop
actions that will furtherjeopardize the efforts to restart
the peace process. Pending the attainment of a final
solution, Israel must comply with its international
obligations as the occupying Power. The most important
among them are the protection of the Palestinian people
and stopping the Violence and violations of human rights
and fundamental freedoms that are being perpetrated
against them.

In December 2015, my Government hosted the
International Conference on the Question of Jerusalem.
At the Conference, participants reaffirmed, among
other things, their opposition to Israel's illegal actions
and the imperative to strengthen people-to-people
relations among Palestinians and Israelis. That is
because the spirit of coexistence is a critical foundation
in any meaningful peace process.

Let me now turn to the catastrophe in Syria, which
has lasted for almost five years. The consequences of
the conflict in Syria are extremely horrendous, with
ramifications that go beyond the national boundaries
of Syria and the region of Middle East. Again, I would
like to emphasize Indonesia's call to end Violence and
to allow the immediate and unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance to all victims. Indonesia is also
mindful that Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
or Daesh, continues to take advantage of the conflict in
Syria. In that regard, we are ofthe view that combatting
ISIL should serve as a unifying drive for all parties in
the pursuit of peace in Syria.

Indonesia remains convinced that the conflict
in Syria can only be settled through an inclusive
political process involving all Syrians. We welcome the
convening of meetings in Vienna last month and the
plan to hold peace talks in Geneva this week. We hope
that all parties can set aside their differences and take
advantage of this rare opportunity to find a political
solution.

