Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to take this opportunity once again to express our
admiration to you, Mr. President, for the way in which
you have been guiding the work of the Council. We
would also like to thank your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of France.

When we review the actions of the Council in
implementing its resolutions to combat international
terrorism, we feel a sense of optimism with regard to
the consensus within the Council and the United
Nations as a whole in opposing that serious
phenomenon. The declaration annexed to the recent
Council resolution on this subject - resolution
1456 (2003) - provides for specific procedures and
measures whose implementation is designed to provide
significant impetus for concerted action in that sphere.

The position of the Republic of Yemen on
international terrorism is well known; we have made it
clear on many occasions. However, it is always
important to reaffirm that the phenomenon of
international terrorism remains one of the most serious
issues facing the international community. Terrorism is
a criminal act that is not directed at a specific culture,
religion or race. It does not stop at the borders of
States. It is a scourge that can strike all of us. It thus
requires the coordination of efforts with a view to
providing guidance based on a clear analysis of the
causes of the phenomenon and an understanding of its
underlying roots and of the remedies needed to combat
those symptoms.

The Republic of Yemen is gratified that the
international community is aware of the seriousness of
the problem. We welcome the international consensus
on the need to combat the scourge of terrorism with a
view to its elimination. The Republic of Yemen was
among the first States to draw attention to this
phenomenon for one simple reason: the State of Yemen
suffered from that scourge two years after its
establishment. Terrorism is increasing in my country;
17 acts of terrorism have taken place there to date.
There is no doubt that those acts were designed to
destabilize the State, endanger peace and political
security and hamper development efforts. We estimate
that the material damage resulting from that
phenomenon is costing us $1.8 billion annually.

Aware of the seriousness of such destructive acts,
the Government of the Republic of Yemen attaches
priority to combating terrorism. We have adopted
measures and procedures aimed at containing and
eliminating terrorism. We will not list all of them here,
but some of the measures have been described in the
national report submitted to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in document S/2002/240, following the
terrorist acts of 11 September 2001. The measures have
also been described in the answers and clarifications
provided to the Committee. The Government of the
Republic of Yemen is working at the national level, in
coordination with other States, including the United
States, to implement further measures for the future.
We will also be describing those to the Committee in
future reports. We have also notified most regional and
international conventions on terrorism. We are
currently working on enacting further legislation on
this subject.

With regard to the recent Council resolution in
this area, we feel that international efforts lack the
legal framework that should underlie policies and
practices undertaken by States alone or collectively. We
would like to reaffirm that the delegation of Yemen
will spare no effort to achieve agreement on draft
international convention, and we would like to thank
India for its work on the draft text.

In this context, we associate ourselves with the
view expressed by a number of delegations that an
international convention must give equal emphasis to
all terrorist acts, whether waged by individuals, groups
or States. As a matter of principle, we will not be able
to accept language that deprives peoples of their
legitimate right to resist occupation, and we are
committed to the principle that a distinction must be
made between terrorism and legitimate resistance.

The international positions on the need to fight
terrorism after the 11 September 2001 attacks give us
cause for optimism. Specific and coordinated measures
have been adopted, and affected and interested States
have begun to implement those measures to bring an
end to this scourge. However, certain practices do not
in fact serve the cause that they are designed to serve
and threaten international consensus on this issue. We
have noticed that there is a ferocious campaign under
way to falsely identify Islam with terrorism. This is
slander intended to achieve insidious goals alien to our
joint campaign against terrorism.

Many of us have warned of the danger of
selectivity and double standards in the implementation
of international resolutions, in particular those
pertaining to the Middle East. We do not believe that
Palestinians can be deprived of their legitimate right to
resist occupation and settler colonialism. There are
those who in effect endorse the crimes of the Israeli
settlers and Israel's colonization policies.

In conclusion, I wish to express our gratitude for
and acknowledgement of the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the efforts and wise
leadership of its Chairman, Sir Jeremy Greenstock. I
also wish to reaffirm our readiness to do everything we
can to strengthen international cooperation and further
develop the efforts to eliminate the scourge and evil of
terrorism.

