Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Judge Carmel Agius, in his role as President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
respective reports and insightful briefings on the
ongoing work of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. Our gratitude also goes to you,
Mr. President, for your leadership of the Council's
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.

Before I continue, I wish to reiterate Indonesia's
support for the effective contribution of the Mechanism
to fighting impunity and ensuring accountability for
the most serious crimes under international law. I will
focus on three issues today:

My first point concerns the workload of the
Mechanism. We carefully note that in this reporting
period alone, 225 decisions and orders were issued
by the Mechanism. That is a very impressive
output despite a number of challenges faced by the
Mechanism. We also note with satisfaction that the
working methods implemented by the Mechanism have
enabled the judges to expeditiously render judgments
in the smaller legal proceedings. In that regard, we
fully support those efficient working methods and we
encourage the Mechanism to continue on that path.
We also note that, of those 225 decisions and orders,
142 of them, or approximately three in five, related
not to the adjudication of the core crimes but instead
to the adjudication of requests pertaining to other
residual functions.

One such aspect leads to my second point, which
is on assistance to national jurisdictions. Indonesia
attaches particular importance to capacity-building
programmes to develop the national judicial capacity of
relevant States in order to ensure that all referred cases
are conducted in full compliance with the standards of
due process. As States bear the primary responsibility
for ending impunity and investigating and prosecuting
those responsible for the most serious crimes under
international law, it is important that national judicial
authorities be assisted, supported and advised in
fulfilling their responsibilities. We encourage the
Mechanism to continue those very important activities.
However, it must be done without losing sight of the goal
of fulfilling the mandate of the Mechanism to conclude
the remaining trials in a timely and effective manner.

Turning to my last point, which is the trial of
fugitives, we believe that the Mechanism cannot fully
complete its work until it brings the principal indictees
to justice. Justice cannot be fully served as long as
the remaining fugitives are still at large. The system
must be able to bring them to justice, no matter when
or where they are apprehended. Indonesia therefore
stresses the paramount importance of enhancing
cooperation among States in the service ofjustice. The
Mechanism relies on the Council's support and political
will of Member States in relation to that vital matter,
and my delegation strongly appeals to Member States
to take that responsibility very seriously.

In that regard, we note the significant challenges
pointed out in the report (S/2019/4l7, annexes I and II) regarding national prosecutions of war crimes in
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. We share the
concern that the victims of the Rwandan genocide are
still waiting for more justice and that all those who
committed crimes in it must be held accountable. In
View of the well-known cliche that justice delayed is
justice denied, we urge Member States to help to ensure
that justice is served soonest.

Finally, I wish to reiterate the firm commitment of
Indonesia to continue to cooperate with the Mechanism
to ensure that their mandates are fully discharged.

