Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): The current
situation in Kosovo is of grave concern to all of us. We and
our allies have begun military action only with the greatest
reluctance. But we believe that such action is necessary to
respond to Belgrade's brutal persecution of Kosovar
Albanians, violations of international law, excessive and
indiscriminate use of force, refusal to negotiate to resolve
the issue peacefully and recent military build-up in
Kosovo - all of which foreshadow a humanitarian
catastrophe of immense proportions.

We have begun today's action to avert this
humanitarian catastrophe and to deter further aggression
and repression in Kosovo. Serb forces numbering 40,000
are now in action in and around Kosovo. Thirty thousand
Kosovars have fled their homes just since 19 March. As a
result of Serb action in the last five weeks, there are more
than 60,000 new refugees and displaced persons. The total
number of displaced persons is approaching a quarter of a
million.

The continuing offensive by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is generating refugees and creating pressures on
neighbouring countries, threatening the stability of the
region. Repressive Serb action in Kosovo has already
resulted in cross-border activity in Albania, Bosnia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Recent actions by
Belgrade also constitute a threat to the safety of
international observers and humanitarian workers in
Kosovo.

Security Council resolutions 1199 (1998) and 1203
(1998) recognized that the situation in Kosovo constitutes
a threat to peace and security in the region and invoked
Chapter VII of the Charter. In resolution 1199 (1998), the
Council demanded that Serbian forces take immediate
steps to improve the humanitarian situation and avert the
impending humanitarian catastrophe.

In October 1998, Belgrade entered into agreements
and understandings with the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to verity its
compliance with Security Council demands, particularly
on reduction of security forces, cooperation with
international observers, cooperation with humanitarian
relief agencies and negotiations on a political settlement
for substantial autonomy. Belgrade has refused to comply.

The actions of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
also violate its commitments under the Helsinki Final Act,
as well as its obligations under the international law of
human rights. Belgrade's actions in Kosovo cannot be
dismissed as an internal matter.

For months, Serb actions have led to escalating
explosions of violence. It is imperative that the
international community take quick measures to avoid
humanitarian suffering and widespread destruction, which
could exceed that of the 1998 offensive.

I reiterate that we have initiated action today with
the greatest reluctance. Our preference has been to
achieve our objectives in the Balkans through peaceful
means. Since fighting erupted in February 1998, we have
been actively engaged In seeking resolution of the conflict
through diplomacy under the auspices of the Contact
Group backed by NATO. These efforts led to talks in
Rambouillet and Paris, which produced a fair, just and
balanced agreement. The Kosovar Albanians signed that
agreement, but Belgrade rejected all efforts to achieve a
peaceful resolution.

We are mindful that violations of the ceasefire and
provocations by the Kosovo Liberation Army have also
contributed to this situation. However, it is Belgrade's
systematic policy of undermining last October's
agreements and thwarting all diplomatic efforts to resolve
the situation which have prevented a peaceful solution
and have led us to today's action.

 

In this context, we believe that action by NATO is
justified and necessary to stop the violence and prevent an
even greater humanitarian disaster. As President Clinton
said today,

"We and our allies have a chance to leave our
children a Europe that is free, peaceful and stable. But
we must act now to do that".

