Mr. Fernandez de Soto Valderrama (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to
welcome the presence here today of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of France and congratulate the French
delegation on its work in presiding over the Council,
as well as on its initiative in convening this important
debate. I am also grateful for the briefings we heard
today, which have provided a clear overview of the
challenges we face in preventing and combating
the financing of terrorism. My delegation considers
resolution 2462 (2019), which the Council adopted
today, to be extremely important. We fully concur with
its spirit and value.

Colombia has firmly and resolutely assumed the
task of strengthening its capacities for the prevention
and punishment of terrorism. It is a State purpose
that requires moving forward in the adoption of the
relevant international instruments and of updated and
appropriate domestic regulations.

We are fully aware that crimes such as corruption,
illicit drug trafficking, illicit arms trafficking, human
trafficking, migrant smuggling and money-laundering
have allowed the strengthening of terrorist organizations
in size and scope, making them more dangerous and
giving them the technical, operational and financial
support that allows them to destabilize countries and
the international community. The fight against terrorist
organizations must include the fight against criminal
groups, with special emphasis on their finances and on
the money obtained through their illicit activities.

To face these challenges, my country is making
headway in strengthening the human and technical
capacities of our police forces, and it will continue
to be imperative to consolidate those of our judicial
system, equipping it with new tools to face equally new
criminal phenomena.

As a member of the Financial Action Task Force
on Latin America, Colombia has been evaluated on
four occasions by the Financial Action Task Force of
the International Monetary Fund, which highlights
some achievements that I would like to share in
this debate. I note, for example, the procedure
applied by the Colombian authorities with regard
to the Security Council's sanctions committees, in
particular Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh) Al-Qaida and associated individuals groups
undertakings and entities. The Group also appreciated
the procedure that Colombia has developed to comply
with the recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force on Latin America on the freezing of assets, which
involves financial institutions, the department in charge
of regulating financial institutions, the Prosecutor
General's Office and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
It also noted that financial institutions regularly verify
other sources, such as country designation lists, and
apply measures in accordance with our legislation,
which is used to find possible sources of financing for
terrorism.

Organized crime, criminal economies and terrorism
corrupt institutions, impede their normal functioning,
hinder the provision of goods and services, distort the
functioning of the economy and markets, deprecate
natural and human resources and discourage private
initiative. Put another way, they are declared enemies
of legality and entrepreneurship and, consequently,
of equity, which are pillars of the Government of
President Ivan Duque Marquez and are reflected in the
new defence and security policy. This policy does not
allow space to justify or validate terrorism and crime
as a means of political action in democracy, nor does it
allow arguments to be maintained in support of crime.
That is why we thank the Security Council for its
condemnation of the despicable terrorist attack on the
Bogota police academy in January.

Colombia views with concern the progress made
of groups that use violent extremism and terrorism
under ambiguous political and religious pretexts,
threaten international peace and security, and
undermine the values and principles of States. Such
groups have become a global threat that forces us to
develop integrated and coordinated actions within the
framework of international cooperation. In that regard,
the Doha Declaration of the thirteenth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
in 2015 is a point of reference that indicates some
emerging forms, such as environmental crimes, piracy
and cybercrime, among others. We also have a solid
legal framework to combat terrorism.

Finally, Colombia wishes to reaffirm its rejection
and condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, and considers it necessary to emphasize
that this problem cannot and should not be associated
with any particular religion, civilization, ethnicity or
nationality. With special emphasis since the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001) and its subsequent developments
and supplements, Colombia has updated its legislation
and procedures to fight this scourge, which we suffered
for years, and we will continue doing so in the conviction
that international cooperation is a priority task for the
benefit of humankind.

