Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Gambari for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation regarding the
settlement in the Middle East. We agree on the whole
with his assessment of developments in Palestinian-
Israeli relations and in the situation between Syria and
Lebanon.

Much has been said at the United Nations in
recent weeks about the situation in the Middle East.
The situation in the region is constantly evolving, but
unfortunately not yet in the optimal direction. Today
more than ever before, we need collective steps to
redress the situation.

Russia is firmly committed to the principle of two
States, Israel and Palestine, existing side by side, as
outlined in the Road Map. In our view, that implies the
existence of a viable, sovereign and territorially unified
Palestine living in peace and security with its
neighbour Israel. Progress towards that goal is possible
only through a cessation of violence and the parties'
compliance with all relevant international obligations.

It remains critical that urgent action be taken to
achieve a comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, based on the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, the road map and the proposals of
the Quartet of principal international mediators. The
latter recently held a meeting in Cairo, at which
various options were discussed for reviving the
Quartet's collective efforts to overcome the deadlock
on the Israeli-Palestinian track.

Russia has consistently promoted the revival of
the Middle East peace process on all of its tracks. That
core task was at the heart of the recent visit to the
region by Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Soltanov. It
is important that the Palestinian, Israeli, Egyptian and
Jordanian leadership reaffirm the abiding importance
of the road map as one of the bases of a Middle East
settlement. We also deem it necessary to convene as
soon as possible a meeting of the Quartet at the
ministerial level, with the participation of the heads of
the foreign ministries of Jordan, Egypt and Saudi

Arabia. It would also be highly desirable for
representatives of Israel and the Palestinian Authority
to participate in that meeting.

Given the ongoing Israeli military activity in the
Gaza sector, we wish to reaffirm once again our
profound concern at such actions. We recognize
Israel's right to self-defence, but it should be exercised
with maximum restraint and proportionately to the
existing threats. We call on the Israeli authorities to
refrain from extrajudicial executions and so-called
targeted assassinations. At the same time, we urgently
appeal once again to the Palestinian Authority to take
critical steps to halt the Violence and terrorist attacks,
including the firing of rockets from Gaza into Israeli
territory.

We look forward to the speedy and unconditional
release of Israeli soldier Gilat Shalit. We support the
mediation efforts in that respect, including those to
secure the release of Palestinian ministers and
legislators and a number of other Palestinian detainees.

Russia supports the conclusions and
recommendations of the Secretary-General, contained
in his report (A/ES-10/361) on the register of damage
to Palestinian property caused by Israel's construction
of the separation wall. We believe that United Nations
Members should consider that issue in a pragmatic,
non-politicized manner and endorse the Secretary-
General's recommendations.

One urgent task is to ensure the strict and full
compliance of the parties with the Agreement on
Movement and Access. It is essential to resolve
questions related to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to Gaza and the resumed functioning of the
Rafa and Karni crossing points.

We unconditionally support Palestinian Authority
leader Mahmoud Abbas and call on all inhabitants of
the Palestinian territories to show solidarity with his
efforts to achieve national reconciliation and to create,
in Gaza and the West Bank, a Government of national
unity, functioning in accordance with the well-known
requirements formulated by the Quartet.
It is impossible to ensure the comprehensive
nature of the peace process in the Middle East without
progress on the Israeli-Syrian track. We believe that
support from Damascus and Beirut for the idea of the
temporary transfer of the Shaba'a farms to United
Nations control could open the way to a resumption of
diplomatic contacts between Israel, Syria and Lebanon
in order to reach mutually acceptable agreements. Of
course, a positive attitude on the part of the Israeli side
will be necessary if that is to occur.

We are closely following progress in the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). We
consistently advocate strict and scrupulous respect for
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon by
all parties. In that connection, we stress the
inadmissibility of the ongoing violations of its airspace
by the Israeli air force. Such actions only raise
additional tensions and threaten the security of United
Nations peacekeepers.

We were shocked by the news of the murder of
Lebanese Minister of Industry and member of
Parliament Pierre Gemayel. We decisively condemn the
crime and express our sincere condolences to Mr.
Gemayel's family. We call for the organizers and
perpetrators of that crime and other terrorist acts in
Lebanon to be identified and duly punished. It is clear
that the ongoing actions of forces seeking to undermine
the already tense political situation in Lebanon are
unacceptable and should not be allowed to continue.
We hope that, at this difficult time, the Lebanese will
demonstrate resolve and not give way to provocation or
be tempted into confrontation.

