Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China thanks Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive Director Coninsx for their briefings. We welcome the tenth report (S/2020/95) of the Secretary- General on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh) to international peace and security. We also listened carefully to the statement by civil society representative Mona Freij. The international counter-terrorism - situation remains grim at present, with extremism and terrorism closely intertwined. Terrorist attacks in many parts of the world have wrought havoc on the countries involved. As stated in the Secretary-General's report, the transnational threat posed by terrorism remains grave. Despite setbacks, ISIL is rapidly reorganizing in the form of covert networks and continues to attack official personnel and facilities in remote areas of Iraq. The resettlement of foreign terrorist fighters, the links between terrorist organizations and transnational organized crime and the plethora of underground channels for terrorist financing pose severe challenges to countries. Faced with that reality, the international community must remain vigilant against a resurgence of global terrorism, while fostering a common awareness of humankind's shared future and strengthening practical cooperation in our joint efforts to address the threat of terrorism. First, it is imperative to continue to leverage the central coordinating role of the United Nations and the Security Council in the fight against terrorism, which must adhere to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, respect the sovereignty of the countries concerned and acknowledge the primary responsibility of Member States in counter- terrorism efforts. We should adhere to unified standards and comprehensively implement the relevant Council resolutions and the United Nations Global Counter- Terrorism Strategy. Secondly, we must strive to eliminate the root causes of terrorism. The international community should promote the peaceful resolution of hotspot issues by political means, while assisting Member States in alleviating poverty and achieving sustainable development. We must encourage dialogue among civilizations and religions on an equal footing, strengthen education for young people, increase employment opportunities, promote social inclusion and remove the influence of extremist ideologies. We should provide assistance to developing countries and help Member States to build their counter-terrorism and deradicalization capacities. Thirdly, we should strengthen international counter-terrorism cooperation in the light of current and emerging trends and characteristics of international terrorism. We must focus on supporting Member States in addressing prominent issues, such as terrorists' abuse of the Internet and information and communications technologies, the diversification of channels of terrorist financing and collusion between terrorist groups and organized criminal networks.The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), the Security Council Committee established pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and other mechanisms should strictly follow the relevant resolutions and rules of procedure, cooperate closely and work in synergy. On the more prominent issue of foreign terrorist fighters, China believes that the relevant departments of the Secretariat should strengthen the collection of information and the examination of each situation in order to lay the groundwork for Member States to take the next steps. In that process, it is imperative to strengthen consultations with the countries concerned and respect their judicial sovereignty. Priority should be given to the principle of territoriality. Each case should be dealt with according to law; imposed solutions must be avoided. China has been deeply engaged in counter-terrorism cooperation within the United Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Global Counter- Terrorism Forum, among others, and has cooperated effectively with many Member States in the areas of counter-terrorism intelligence-sharing and crackdowns on terrorist financing, transnational organized crime and cyberterrorism. Through the China-United Nations Peace and Development Fund, China has supported UNOCT in its various projects, including the security of major sporting events and capacity-building for African counter-terrorism coordination efforts. China will actively participate in and contribute to a series of regional conferences on counter-terrorism led by UNOCT, including the seventh review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and activities during the high-level week on counter- terrorism. China received CTED during its visit to China in late October, which facilitated understanding and policy dialogue between the two parties and strengthened counter-terrorism cooperation between China and United Nations agencies. China is ready to work with other countries to address the threat of terrorism and jointly safeguard world peace and stability. At the present time, the United States has levelled unwarranted accusations against China. Such attacks deviate from the subject of this meeting and are completely baseless. They also constitute unwanted interference in China's internal affairs and a brazen attempt to provoke confrontation. China expresses its firm opposition to, and categorical rejection of, such remarks. The issues that Xinjiang is facing do not involve ethnic groups, religion or human rights, but rather counter-terrorism and deradicalization. For some time, China's Xinjiang region has suffered frequent terrorist attacks that have seriously jeopardized the lives and property of all ethnic communities and resulted in grave violations of human dignity. In response, China has taken determined legal measures to combat terrorism and extremism, thereby eliminating - to the extent possible - all conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism and extremism. Those measures have produced good results and have effectively curbed the spread of rampant terrorist activities and served to safeguard citizens' basic rights, including their right to life and development. The Chinese Government has issued white papers on Xinjiang that comprehensively outline relevant policies and measures. The fight against terrorism and extremism in Xinjiang constitutes a crucial part of global counter-terrorism efforts. The useful exploration of preventive counter-terrorism in Xinjiang represents an important contribution to combating that scourge at the international level. At present, the situation in Xinjiang is largely stable and the local economy continues to grow. People of all ethnic groups live in harmony and the region has been free of terrorist attacks for more than three years. The Security Council is responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security - it is not and should not become a venue for a certain country to stage its political shows. The United States, in the name of Xinjiang, has hypocritically portrayed itself as a human rights defender while engaging in unilateralism and violating international law and the norms governing international relations, thereby plunging the world into chaos. That is what the United States has done. Regime change, interference in the internal affairs of other countries and triggering humanitarian crises - that is what the United States has done. The abuse of force in international relations and inciting war in the Middle East, where Muslim countries andpeople have suffered - that is what the United States has done. Serious human rights issues, lack of social cohesion, rampant racial discrimination have all arisen in the United States. We agree that counter-terrorism must not be pursued at the expense of human rights. We urge the United States to heed the demand of United Nations human rights mechanisms to close its prisons in Guantanamo and stop its actions. Some time ago, China invited close to 1,000 people from more than 70 delegations of foreign diplomats, officials and international organizations and press to visit Xinjiang. After seeing the situation on the ground, they all acknowledged and commended the Chinese Government's efforts to combat and prevent terrorism, in accordance with the law. Last October, more than 60 Member States expressed their support for China's position on Xinjiang in their statements in the General Assembly's Third Committee. China urges the United States to carefully listen to the international community's voice of justice, respect facts and give up bigotry and double standards. It must stop interfering in China's internal affairs, stop undermining the unity of the Council, stop politicizing counter-terrorism issues and stop seeking confrontation at the United Nations.
