Mr. McCully (New Zealand): New Zealand
congratulates China for this initiative. We agree that
this is the right time for the Council to undertake a
measure of serious self-examination and to assess
where we are performing well and where we are not.
We agree that the Council needs to do much better.
That is clearly the view of United Nations Members.

With others around this table, New Zealand has just
experienced the invigorating process of seeking support
from Members to win election to the Council. We have
not been left in doubt as to the desire of Member States
to see the Council lift its game.

The Council is charged with responding to threats
to international peace and security. Yet in relation to
too many of those current threats, the Council has dealt
itself out of its proper role. Where it is involved, it
has often been too late. The Council has a completely
inadequate focus on conflict prevention and a huge
focus on peacekeeping. Peacekeepers are hampered
and sometimes endangered by poor mandates and
inadequate resourcing. Too many of the cases on the
peacekeeping agenda have become part of a revolving
list of routine items rather than serious problems that
we really expect to solve.

These challenges to the Council's ability to live
up to its mandate in relation to international peace and
security are longstanding and complex - some would
say intractable. But we believe that it is within the
Council's reach to make real progress.

As we move towards the seventieth anniversary of
the establishment of the Council, we should listen to
the United Nations membership, including the smaller
members, which are often not heard. We should hear
their disappointment and their frustration. We should
resolve to use this anniversary year of the Council to
take action.

We believe that there are three simple areas in
which the Council could take action this year.

My first point is that the use of the veto or the threat
of the veto is the single largest cause of the Security
Council being rendered impotent in the face of too
many serious international conflicts. Whether we are
talking about Syria or the Middle East peace process,
the veto's impact today far exceeds what was envisaged
in the United Nations Charter - to the huge detriment
of the Council's effectiveness and credibility.

We congratulate France on its initiative on the
voluntary retirement of the veto in the case of mass
atrocities. We urge the permanent members to use this
anniversary year to find a way to make progress. While
it is difficult, the future credibility of the Organization
depends on it.

My second and related point is the Council's lack
of preventive action under Chapter VI, which is again
partly the result of the pervasive impact of the veto.
Conflict is costly in terms ofhuman lives, reconstruction
costs and lost opportunities for development. There is
something wrong when we are spending over $8 billion
per year on peacekeeping but virtually nothing on
the responsibility to prevent situations escalating into
intractable conflict.

My third point is that we must recognize and address
a major weakness in relation to peacekeeping. We
cannot send peacekeepers into dangerous environments
without adequate mandates and resources. The review
of peace operations being led by former President
Ramos-Horta will set the scene for the Council to
address that issue this year.

The 15 of us at this table can do more. We can solve
these issues. We must solve them. The perception of a
failure to act impacts negatively on the reputations of
both the Council and the United Nations itself. It is time
for us to confront the root causes that have seen the
Council avoid the challenging task ofconflict prevention
simply because the politics and the diplomacy have
been too difficult.

New Zealand is ready to work with fellow Council
members to make real progress in addressing these
issues. Only then will we, the Council, have earned
the right to celebrate the seventieth anniversary of this
body being conferred the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

