Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I wish to thank Italy,
President of the Security Council this month, for
holding today's debate on trafficking in persons in
conflict situations. I also wish to extend my appreciation
to the Secretary-General for the updates provided on
this topic.

Trafficking in persons is the modern form of
slavery. It should be outlawed everywhere in the world.
The Maldives Parliament criminalized trafficking
in persons in 2013, and the Government of Maldives
continues to take strong measures against this shameful
crime. Trafficking in persons in conflict situations is
one of the most dreadful crimes. Conflict situations
place individuals in the most vulnerable position, and
yet the reality is that conflict zones have become the
breeding grounds for criminal activities. Millions of
people are falling prey to human traffickers as they
desperately try to escape violence.

The Maldives takes note of the increasing
importance of the role of the Security Council in
confronting human trafficking in conflict situations.
Resolution 2331 (2016) condemns all acts of human
trafficking in areas affected by armed conflicts, and
the two open debates held in the last year on this subject
(see S/PV.7847 and S/PV.7898) highlight the urgency of
addressing the issue.

The Maldives believes that the best strategy to
bring an end to the heinous crime of human trafficking
is to cultivate a culture of respect for human dignity,
the fundamental values of human rights and the
responsibility to respect and uphold those rights, in
particular the rights of women, children and those that
are in vulnerable situations. It is therefore absolutely
necessary for the United Nations and other actors
to work with national Governments to strengthen
the capacities of relevant institutions to implement
national and international laws and norms and to bring
perpetrators of such criminal activities to justice. Only
then would we be able to cultivate a culture in which
no individual would tolerate the subjugation of a fellow
human being.

The Maldives hosts a large number of migrant
workers in its workforce. The Government recognizes
the potential vulnerabilities of individual members
of the expatriate community to the predatory designs
of transnational human trafficking syndicates and
the importance of protecting their rights. The very
first legislation that President Abdulla Yameen
Abdul Gayoom signed into law was the Anti-Human
Trafficking Act, in December 2013. To strengthen the
implementation of that Act, the Government adopted
a five-year national action plan to combat human
trafficking nationwide.

At the international level, the Maldives joined
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime in February 2013. And in 2016, the
Maldives acceded to the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children.

But we recognize that the implementation of
international treaties requires more than the plans;
it requires the highest level of political will and a
range of measures. Above all, it requires stronger
global cooperation and coordination and the sharing
of information and best practices. The Maldives will
always remain an active partner in crafting shared
solutions for a world free of human trafficking, a
world free of every kind of slavery, and a world where
every nation and every society has a say in shaping our
shared destiny.

