Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Sir, for having convened this meeting and for inviting
us to participate in the Security Council's discussion of
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, following the issuance of the
report of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on
the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/ 12/48).

We welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Palestinian National Authority, Mr. Riad Al-Malki,
and thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing.

The destructive invasion of Gaza, the policy of
blockade that has deprived its people of their basic
necessities, and the violation of their basic rights
guaranteed under international treaties and instruments
prompted the international community to send the
Fact-Finding Mission to Gaza, under the chairmanship
of Judge Goldstone. The Mission was inspired by
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, as well as by the commitment of States,
especially those occupying other countries, to the
principle that occupying authorities bear responsibility
for violations against civilian populations. The report
concluded that Israel deliberately targeted civilians in
Gaza during its invasion, using them as human shields.

These practices constitute war crimes under the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). The use of disproportionate force, acts of
aggression against civilians, the destruction of private
property and civilian infrastructure are all forms of
illegal behaviour, and such acts run counter to
international law as well as the Charter of the United
Nations.

Every time a decision is taken or a report is
drawn up on its practices, Israel behaves as if it were
above the law. This situation of unaccountability
unfortunately allows impunity to prevail and
undermines the credibility of the United Nations. It is
high time for the Security Council to put an end to this
culture of protecting Israel from the consequences of
its actions in the region, and it is high time to bring to
justice the perpetrators of violations of the provisions
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in order to put an end to Israel's
impunity.

The Fact-Finding Mission concluded that the
grave violations of international humanitarian law fall
within the remit of the ICC and underscored its belief
that there was a need to take specific measures to end
impunity, which would stand as guarantees against the
repetition of such practices in the future, contribute to
putting an end to violence against civilians and
promote and maintain peace. The objective of the
report is to ensure that the perpetrators of war crimes
are brought to justice, and such an objective does not
hinder efforts to make peace.

Respect for international humanitarian law cannot
serve as an obstacle to peace, and peace cannot run
counter to the respect of the rights of the Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territories. We thus
call for the implementation of the recommendations of
the report.

In addition to its aggression against Gaza, Israel
continues its policy aimed at Judaizing Jerusalem by
confiscating land, expelling its inhabitants, isolating
the city, stepping up settlement activity in and around
Jerusalem and building a separation wall.

Israeli practices in the Holy City continue,
excavation work is under way and the Arabic-Islamic
character of Jerusalem is being changed. Jerusalem and
Al-Aqsa are of special importance and significance to
all Arabs and Muslims, and they form a red line that
cannot be stepped over.

We are stunned by the silence of the Security
Council in the face of Israel's behaviour and its actions
against the city in violating its Holy Sites and in
attempting to Judaize it. We ask the Security Council to
respect its obligations and put a freeze on Israel's
settlement policy and its policy to Judaize Jerusalem.

The Fourth Geneva Convention is applicable to
both Jerusalem and all of the occupied Palestinian
territories. The core of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
lies in the occupation by Israel of Palestinian and Arab
territories. As a result of this occupation, our region
has suffered a number of wars and a number of
tragedies and crises. All attempts to find peace in
previous years have failed owing to the intransigent
position of Israel and the fact that it does not take the
peace process seriously.

The situation in the Middle East is in a critical
phase. Efforts are under way to restore peace through
negotiations and to find a just and lasting solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian and Arab-Israeli conflicts, in
accordance with international law and the Arab Peace
Initiative. If these efforts are not successful, the
impasse could lead to a deterioration of the situation, a
resumption of violence and instability in the region.

