The President: I thank Ambassador Hilale for
his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the Central African
Republic.

I have the honour to brief the members of the
Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the Central African
Republic. In my statement, I intend to reflect on my
role as Chair since I last briefed the Council on 8 July
2016 (see S/PV.7734), and in doing so highlight the
work of the Committee and the Panel of Experts.

There have been a number ofpositive developments
in the Central African Republic, many of which have
already been mentioned by Mr. Ladsous, including
progress in disarmament and demobilization and
security sector reform, the improvement in the security
situation in Bangui, and the successful Brussels
Conference in November. However, despite those
developments, renewed violence in the central and
northern parts of the country, as documented by the
Panel of Experts, has reached a scale and intensity
that has not been witnessed since early 2014, with the
civilian population bearing the brunt of the upsurge
in fighting.

On 5 August 2016, the Committee heard a
presentation from the Coordinator of the Panel of
Experts in connection with the Panel's midterm report.
The Coordinator observed that ex-Seleka armed
groups remained in control of key parts of central and
eastern Central African Republic and that the rivalry
between the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique armed group of sanctioned individual
Nourredine Adam on one side, and by the Union pour la
paix en Centrafrique (UPC) ofAli Darassa on the other,
have negatively affected the humanitarian situation in
the country. According to the Panel, arms-smuggling
had continued in eastern part of the country through
two routes: Am Dafok, north of Birao bordering the
Sudan; and Berna, south-east of Bangassou bordering
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

On 5 August, Committee members also heard
a briefing from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, who observed that, throughout the
conflict, sexual violence had been systematically used
by the armed groups in a climate of total impunity. She
underlined the importance of the timely establishment
of the special criminal court as an accountability
measure in the fight against impunity. The Special
Representative also encouraged delegations to consider
adding names of individuals responsible for acts of
sexual violence to the Committee's sanctions list.

On 23 August 2016, the Committee added two
individuals to its sanctions list, Ali Kony and Salim
Kony, whose father is sanctioned Lord's Resistance
Army leader Joseph Kony. In that connection, I wish
to thank the Panel of Experts for having submitted
to the Committee four statements of case in 2016 for
possible sanctions designation. Since its establishment,
the Panel has submitted a total of 29 statements of
case. The Committee also has before it the proposed
designations of two individuals which are currently
on hold. I hope that we can move forward on these
proposals in due course.

On 9 September, the Committee held its sixth
formal meeting, convened with the representatives of
the Central African Republic and the regional States
Chad, Ethiopia, South Africa, the Sudan and Uganda,
in connection with the Panel's midterm report. The
Coordinator underlined that the violent incidents
of June 2016 in Bangui and north-eastern Central
African Republic were a reminder that the security
situation remained fragile. In the north, the violence
was motivated by the desire of various Se'le'ka groups
to control not only transhumance routes and mining
zones, but also oil concessions and related employment
opportunities in private security. The Panel reported
that sanctioned Nourredine Adam's efforts to reunify
ex-Seleka factions had been unsuccessful, and that
Adam's FPRC fighters were engaged against the
UPC of Ali Darassa. On the arms embargo, the Panel
encouraged regional States to cooperate with the
Central African Republic authorities on submitting
exemption requests to repatriate military equipment
in their possession that belongs to the Central African
Armed Forces, the Forces armees centrafricaines
(FACA). The Coordinator also highlighted the issue of
reported travel ban violations by sanctioned individuals
Nourredine Adam and Francois Bozize, and reminded
regional States to use relevant exemption procedures to
ensure compliance with the sanctions regime.

On 2 December 2016, the Coordinator presented
an overview of the findings and recommendations
contained in the Panel's final report, noting that
while progress had been made on disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration and
security sector reform, renewed violence in the central
and northern Central African Republic harkened back
to the atrocities of early 2014. Anti-balaka groups
had first moved to Kaga Bandoro and Bambari to
confront ex-Seleka, but lately some had started
cooperating with ex-Sele'ka in fighting against the
UPC. Inter-Seleka rivalries had further intensified in
Bria and its surroundings. In connection with calls by
several Central African Republic Government officials
to lift the arms embargo, the Panel expressed the view
that the restoration of a single chain of command of
FACA and effective control over national stockpiles
were a precondition to allowing the rearming of
FACA. Furthermore, the Panel reported that weapons
continued to pour into the country via arms trafficking
supply routes from the neighbouring States to the west,
south and northeast.

On 25 January 2017, the Committee held its seventh
formal meeting of the representatives of the Central
African Republic and the regional States - Cameroon,
Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Republic of the Congo - as well as fellow Committee
members Ethiopia, Kenya, South Africa, the Sudan
and Uganda, convened in connection with the Panel's
final report. The Coordinator highlighted a number
of recent alleged travel ban violations by sanctioned
individuals Nourredine Adam and Francois Bozize,
namely, Bozize's travel through Kenya on 18 November
2016, and Adam's travel from the Central African
Republic to Sido, southern Chad, on 30 October 2016,
and from Moundou in southern Chad to Luanda on
14 December 2016. The delegation of South Africa also
provided additional information in connection with its
post-facto travel ban exemption request regarding the
October 2015 travel of Bozize.

Several of the participating regional States
underlined their inability to control their vast and
porous borders, and encouraged the international
community to provide assistance in order to prevent
the illicit trafficking of arms and ammunition. For
my part, I conveyed appreciation to the delegations of
Ethiopia, the Sudan and Uganda for having hosted visits
by the Panel in October 2016, and reiterated my call on
all regional States to continue further strengthening
cooperation with the Panel, in particular as regards the
Panel's visits to Chad and the Republic of the Congo
in the first half of this year. I also encouraged regional
States to consider returning lethal and non-lethal
equipment to FACA and conveyed my readiness to
assist States in preparing the relevant exemption
requests to the Committee. The Committee looks
forward to further information from the delegation of
Cameroon in that regard.

During the reporting period, the Committee
continued to provide guidance to the Central African
Republic authorities and regional States concerning the
implementation of the arms embargo and, in particular,
by providing detailed information on the relevant
exemptions procedures and the information requested
in the Committee's guidelines. Let me also note that the
Committee has been actively working with the Panel
of Experts and other stakeholders, and is committed
to continuing the dialogue and discussions with the
Central African Republic Government in the future. I
am convinced that the current security situation in the
centre and north of the Central African Republic, as
well as the abundance of arms in the country, oblige
the Committee and the Security Council to continue
closely monitoring the situation on the ground. In that
respect, I wish to reiterate that the embargo must be
implemented in order to protect the civilian population
from continuing to bear the brunt of the conflict. In
order to do that, we need to have better cooperation
among regional States to effectively counter illegal
arms trafficking and the recruitment of foreign fighters
by armed groups.

Concerning the travel ban, the Committee and
I myself, in my capacity as Chair, have continued
to actively engage with concerned regional
States - namely, Chad, Kenya, Ethiopia and South
Africa - via letters and during formal meetings,
advising of the crucial importance of ensuring that
all mediation initiatives be conducted in conformity
with sanctions measures, by using appropriate travel
ban exemption procedures in pursuance of resolution
2339 (2017) and the Committee guidelines. Also, as no
feedback was forthcoming, my representative and the
representative of the Security Council presidency for
the month of September engaged bilaterally with the
delegation of Kenya to seek pertinent information with
regard to alleged travel ban violations by sanctioned
individual Francois Bozize' to Nairobi.

Similarly, the Panel has been actively engaging
with concerned States by providing information on
reported violations of the travel ban and advising on
relevant exemption procedures. I would like to assure
colleagues that the Committee will continue to work
on the matter to ensure the effective implementation
of the travel ban, and in that regard I would like to
echo paragraph 8 of resolution 2339 (2017), urging the
Central African Republic authorities to ensure that
fraudulent, counterfeit, stolen and lost passports, as
well as invalidated diplomatic passports, are removed
from circulation.

Concerning the asset freeze, the Panel reiterated in
its final report that the sanctioned individual, Alfred
Yekatom, has continued to receive his salary as a
Member of Parliament, in violation of the asset freeze.
The Panel also emphasized that after having been
listed, Eugene Ngakosset has continued to receive his
salary as an army officer, which constitutes another
violation of the asset freeze. During my visit to the
Central African Republic in May 2016, I outlined the
relevant exemptions procedures to the asset freeze and
underscored the importance of the Central African
Republic authorities working with the Committee, the
Panel and the Secretariat, in that regard. In connection
with paragraph 48 of the Panel's final report, it is
very important that the Central African Republic's
Ministry of Finance and Budget issue a directive to
banks operating in the country to freeze the assets of
sanctioned individuals.

In conclusion, I firmly believe that the sanctions
measures continue to be of relevance to the dynamics
on the ground in the Central African Republic. As
Chair, I will do my utmost to ensure that the Committee
continues to be fully engaged in providing guidance with
regard to the implementation of sanctions measures,
including through the consideration of new sanctions
designations. In the Committee's meetings with
regional States, Ihave encouraged their representatives
to turn to their capitals to seek confirmation that the
Committee's sanctions list has been made available
at airports, ports and border crossings, at State and
commercial banks or other financial institutions
and to national and commercial airlines. I will also
work to ensure that the Panel of Experts receives the
information that has been requested from Member
States, particularly the regional States and the relevant
Central African Republic authorities. I am convinced
that cooperation between the regional States and the
Panel is of crucial importance, particularly following
the adoption of resolution 2339 (2017), by which the
Council extended the arms embargo, travel ban and
asset freeze until 31 January 2018, and the Panel's
mandate until 28 February 2018.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Uruguay.
