Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by welcoming Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone, to the
Council and by expressing appreciation for her
comments. I also would like to thank Executive
Representative Von der Schulenburg, for his report and
Ambassador McNee, Chairman of the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for his
briefing.

The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) was launched in
October 2008 as a pilot programme that reflected
evolving international community thinking about how
best to facilitate the transition from a successful
peacekeeping operation - in this case, the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone - to peacebuilding.
UNIPSIL and Sierra Leone have faced serious
challenges. Political intolerance, youth unemployment
and drug trafficking have combined in an explosive
mix in Sierra Leone. But the country is weathering
those challenges and continuing to consolidate the
peace that has endured these seven years since the end
of the conflict. UNIPSIL has proved to be an important
facilitator of Sierra Leone's democratic transition, most
recently in its support of the national authorities
working to end political violence and in its mediation
between the two major parties that led to the joint
communique.

The United States congratulates Mr. Von der
Schulenburg for the contribution that he and his team
are making in Sierra Leone and for the value that that
contribution will have in informing the larger
international community's effort to develop best
practices along the peacekeeping/peacebuilding
continuum. We also wish to express our strong support
for Ambassador McNee and for the efforts of the
Peacebuilding Commission in Sierra Leone.

I would like to make a few further points
regarding the situation in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations role there. First, even as we commend all
parties for achieving the 2 April joint communique and
endorse UNIPSIL's ongoing facilitation of the dialogue
envisioned, we remind the two major political parties
involved, the All People's Congress and the Sierra
Leone People's Party, that the international community
looks to them to implement the communique. We are
encouraged by the response of Sierra Leone's political
leaders and we welcome the goodwill gestures of
President Koroma and opposition leader John

Benjamin. Such measures are important to achieving
long-term reconciliation. We are also encouraged by
the comprehensive vision for Sierra Leone's future
contained in President Koroma's Agenda for Change
poverty-reduction strategy.

Secondly, we would like to acknowledge the
work of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. As the
Court looks to the conclusion of the Charles Taylor
trial and to the final disposition of appeals for all cases,
the United States fully supports the Court's efforts to
transfer its institutional knowledge to the Sierra Leone
authorities, as described in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2009/267). We believe it important to Sierra
Leone's ongoing democratic maturation that all lessons
of the past be fully absorbed, and the Special Court has
much to offer in that regard.

Thirdly, I would like to refer to one aspect of
UNIPSIL's mandate laid out in Security Council
resolution 1829 (2008), which emphasizes the need for
the United Nations system to support and cooperate
fully with UNIPSIL. We welcome in that regard the
finalization of the UNIPSIL and United Nations
country team's Joint Vision strategy as a proposed
blueprint for the United Nations family's future
involvement in peacebuilding in Sierra Leone. We look
forward to its careful consideration by the
Peacebuilding Commission on 10 June.

We are well aware of the many risks that face
Sierra Leone as it works towards lasting peace. In
conclusion, I wish to touch on one in particular -
drug-trafficking. We note with concern the increasing
reports of West Africa being used as a trans-shipment
route for the illegal narcotics trade. In that regard, we
welcome the important steps that the Government of
Sierra Leone has made to combat drug trafficking in its
territory. The recent convictions of 18 people for
smuggling more than 700 kilograms of cocaine into the
country send a strong message to drug traffickers.
Sierra Leoneans will not permit their country to be a
haven for drug criminals. We also welcome UNIPSIL's
work to strengthen the Joint Drug Interdiction Task
Force.

