Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I would first like to
thank Ambassador Sharma, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing.

The Government of Japan is pleased to note that
much has been achieved in the areas of public
administration, combating serious crimes, internal
security and Timor-Leste's relationship with Indonesia,
including progress on border-control issues. I am also
pleased to note, in checking the budget of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), that it has implemented its work in a very
cost-effective manner.

The report of the Secretary-General, however,
states that serious challenges still remain in such areas
as public administration, the judiciary, policing and
national security. It is the firm intention of my
Government to continue to support the effort by
UNMISET to consolidate what has been achieved so
far on as solid a base as possible within the short
period remaining until the end of the mandate of
UNMISET.

We also share the view of the Secretary-General
in his report, which states that support from the
international community will continue to be required
even after the expiration of the UNMISET mandate.
We simply cannot accept a situation in which the fruits
of the activities of UNMISET might be ignored, so that
as a result Timor-Leste could return to its prior state of
confusion and disorder after the expiration of the
mandate.

We hope that the Secretary-General will provide
us with detailed proposals for the post-UNMISET stage
as early and in as specific a form as possible. Japan
will also seriously consider what will be the most
appropriate support for Timor-Leste, while listening to
the views of the Government of Timor-Leste, the
United Nations and other countries that have been
supportive of Timor-Leste.

Consolidating and building peace are big
challenges faced by the international community. It is
crucially important for the United Nations and the
international community to make certain that those
valuable initial achievements such as peace, the rule of
law, respect for human rights and development take
root and are long-lasting. Japan will unhesitatingly
provide appropriate support for peace-building as well
as for the consolidation of peace and for the
enhancement of human security in Timor-Leste. We
also call upon the international community to continue
to extend its valuable support to this young republic.

In support of building a self-sustaining Timor-
Leste, Japan has pledged, and has been steadily
implementing, assistance of up to $60 million over the
period of three years following its independence, with
a focus on peace-building as well as on reconstruction
in three key areas: agriculture, infrastructure and
human resources development. We are pleased to learn
that the roads and bridges which the engineering group
of our Self-Defence Forces has constructed and
repaired for the activities of UNMISET also benefit the
people of Timor-Leste. We believe that such support is
in line with the needs of Timor-Leste as described in
the report of the Secretary-General.

I wish to reiterate how important it is for the
leaders of Timor-Leste to be united in governing their
country, for the people of Timor-Leste to participate in
the nation-building efforts as a matter of their own
responsibility and for the international community to
continue to extend its support.

