Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate on an issue
to which we attach great importance. We thank the
Japanese presidency for the concept paper
(S/2010/ 165) and for its continued stewardship since
2009 of the Council's Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

The very fact that the Security Council is holding
an open debate on the issue of its working methods is
in and of itself of some significance. While we
acknowledge the prerogative of the Council to set its
own working methods, we have always argued that,
since the Council acts on behalf of the United Nations
membership, it is both natural and legitimate for the
latter to discuss the Council's working methods.

India associates itself with the growing clamour
for early reform of the working methods of the
Council, which is an integral part of the broader
imperative of the comprehensive reform and expansion
of the membership of the Council in both the
permanent and non-permanent categories. The
overwhelming majority of the membership of the
United Nations has already reiterated its support for
such reforms.

The Council will render great service to the cause
of maintaining international peace and security by
deepening and enriching its consultations with troop-
and police-contributing countries in the devising,
revision and implementation of the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. In
addition, such constructive consultations can and will
have a salutary impact on the ongoing efforts to
enhance the transparency and effectiveness of the
Council's work.

Another area that cries out for urgent reforms
relates to the Council's annual report to the General
Assembly. At present, the annual report continues to be
a statistical compilation of events - a bland summary
and listing of meetings and outcome documents. It is
important that the General Assembly be aware not only
of what decisions were taken, but also of the rationale,
efficacy and impact of the Council's decisions in terms
of crystallized take-aways for the membership of the
General Assembly. Further, it is important for the
Council to submit, when necessary, special reports to
the General Assembly, in accordance with Article 24 (3)
of the Charter, for the consideration of the Assembly in
accordance with Article 15 (l) of the Charter.

Apart from the specific areas of reform that I
have already mentioned, my delegation believes that
the Council should urgently undertake the following
measures.

First, as a general rule, the Council must meet in
meetings open to all United Nations Member States.

Secondly, it must implement Articles 31 and 32
of the Charter by consulting on a regular basis with
non-members, especially those with a special interest
in the substantive matter under consideration by the
Council.

Thirdly, it must grant non-members access to its
subsidiary organs, including the right to participate as
appropriate.

Fourthly, it should make available to
non-members draft resolutions and presidential
statements, as well as other draft documents that are
submitted at the Council's informal consultations of the
whole for action on its agenda items, as soon as such
documents are submitted or earlier, if so authorized by
the author of the draft.

Fifthly, it must hold frequent, timely and
substantive briefings for non-members on the matters
discussed in the Council and its subsidiary organs,
including briefings on its ad hoc missions, their terms
of reference and the findings of such missions.
Sixthly, it should hold regular consultations with
the Presidents of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council.

My delegation is supportive of the ongoing
efforts, including and particularly those of the group of
five small countries (S-5), to bring about
improvements in the Council's working methods. Such
efforts have succeeded in keeping the issue of working
methods high on the reform agenda.

Yet we must acknowledge that real progress has
been minimal, despite years of efforts. Some
permanent members continue to argue that the reform
of the working methods cannot be discussed by
non-members. Even many of the decisions adopted by
the Council in the note contained in document
S/2006/507 remain unimplemented, and there appears
to be little appetite for the far-reaching reforms that the
large majority is demanding. This only strengthens our
view that the many flaws in the Council's working
methods are merely symptoms of a deeper malaise
rooted in its structure and composition.

Clearly, genuine and lasting improvement of the
working methods of the Council can be possible only
as part of a comprehensive process of Security Council
reform, based on both the reform and expansion of its
composition in the permanent and non-permanent
categories. Until there is a change in the real power
structure of the Council - its permanent membership -
we cannot realistically expect the deep-seated changes
that the large majority seeks.

We invite the 8-5 and others to work closely,
actively and in lock-step with the wider international
community seeking comprehensive reforms of the
Council. In the absence of such comprehensive reform,
a fundamental improvement in the working methods
will either elude us, as it has for more than 60 years,
or, even if miraculously achieved, would not last
without the institutional memory, continuing
commitment and peer example of new permanent
members.

