Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We would like to
thank Mr. Said Djinnit, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing today, as well as for
his untiring commitment to seeing stability in the Great
Lakes region.

Kazakhstan commends the ongoing efforts of the
signatory countries to implement the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, which is vital
to achieving stability in the Great Lakes. We welcome
the signatories' growing ownership of the efforts to
implement the Framework and realize the ongoing
reforms. Any prolongation of the political impasse in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi
could turn the acute tensions into full-fledged conflict.

Maintaining the momentum and positive dynamics
of the current political processes will be crucial to
stabilizing the situation in the region. That depends
on the political will of the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi. We
note the recent appointment of a new Prime Minister
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However,
it has led to a swift reaction from the opposition, and
the consultations between President Kabila and the
Rassemblement should therefore continue. Where
Burundi is concerned, we believe it should continue its
dialogue with the opposition through the good offices
of the East African Community-led dialogue facilitator
and with the broad engagement of the European Union
and the United Nations.

The growing violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo caused by the incursions into the country
of former elements of the Mouvement du 23 mars and
by clashes in the Kasai and Tanganyika regions, as
well as the presence of illegal armed groups. These
remain the chief threats to the security not only of
the country but of the entire region. We hope that the
recent priorities introduced into the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
reforms of the Mission itself, will help to improve the
security situation on the ground, especially in the light
of the country's upcoming elections.

The humanitarian situation on the ground is dire
and closely tied to the area's political and security
instability and prevailing lack of development. We
commend the efforts of the Governments and their
peoples in the region in hosting refugees and internally
displaced persons, and encourage the international
community and regional and subregional organizations
to increase their support to those host countries.
Kazakhstan supports the countries of the region
in organizing the forthcoming African Great Lakes
Conference in Uganda. It is clear that a shared,
comprehensive approach involving political dialogue
and close cooperation among all the States ofthe region
is the only way to achieve peace and security in the
Great Lakes.

