Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): The Malaysian delegation
wishes to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We also
wish to extend our sincere appreciation to Ambassador
Mahugu, Permanent Representative of Kenya, for the skilful
manner in which he presided over the work of the Council
last month. We are pleased to have this opportunity to
participate in a formal meeting of the Council on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina to join members and
other non-members of the Council in demonstrating the
commitment of the international community to peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Substantial progress has indeed been achieved in
implementing several aspects of the 1995 General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Important efforts aimed at building a unified
Bosnia and Herzegovina have also begun to take root.
However, much more still needs to be done to resolve the
remaining critical problems if peace is to endure in that
country. Malaysia joins the rest of the international
community in continuing to be actively and persistently
engaged in ensuring the full implementation of the 1995
Peace Agreement.

My delegation welcomes the decision to be taken by
the Council today to authorize the continued presence of the
multinational Stabilization Force (SFOR) for a further
period of 12 months and to extend for another year the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), which includes the International
Police Task Force (IPTF). We take this opportunity to
express our sincere appreciation to all those involved in
SFOR, UNMIBH, the IPTF and other international
organizations which are actively engaged in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, especially to the men and women serving on
the ground. Malaysia has played its role in contributing to
SFOR. Although our troop contribution has had to be
scaled down, we remain committed to contributing, within
our means, to the pursuit of peace and security and to
reconstruction efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We will
continue to contribute police personnel to serve with the
ITPF.

While the continuing commitment and active
involvement of the international community is important
and very much needed at this critical juncture, the main
responsibility for achieving peace and national
reconciliation ultimately lies with the Bosnians
themselves. The parties should work harder to build upon
the achievements made so far. There is no alternative but
for them to remain fully committed to the Peace
Agreement, which serves as the foundation for building
lasting peace and stability and for providing a viable route
to prosperity in a multiethnic, multicultural and multi-
religious Bosnia and Herzegovina. We call upon the
leaders to work strenuously towards establishing an
integrated, independent and peaceful Bosnia and
Herzegovina within its internationally recognized borders.
They must make serious efforts to resolve the outstanding
problems, in particular the issue of the return of refugees
and displaced persons. We will support and encourage
them.

In assessing the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
we should be mindful also of the important work of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991. The work of the Tribunal
is another crucial element in securing not only justice but
also reconciliation in the context of the broader
implementation of the Peace Agreement. The climate of
hatred and mistrust cannot be easily replaced by one of
confidence and cooperation if the perpetrators of the
horrendous crimes against humanity in Bosnia are not
brought to face the consequences of their past actions. My
delegation is seriously concerned that despite the efforts
of the international community, and particularly those of
the Tribunal itself, the major indicted war criminals
remain at large. This calls for appropriate action. While
the cooperation of the Bosnian authorities and the
Governments of neighbouring countries is needed in
arresting these criminals, we also believe that SFOR has
a critical role to play in apprehending them. We
commend SFOR for its past accomplishments in this area,
but we hope that more serious efforts will be made. My
delegation welcomes the Council decision taken on 13

 

May, as contained in resolution 1166 (1998), to establish a
third Trial Chamber of the Tribunal. We would like to take
this opportunity to express our sincere appreciation to all
those who have made various contributions to facilitate the
work of the Tribunal as it discharges its crucial mandate as
set out in resolution 827 (1993).

The Council has determined that the situation in the
region continues to constitute a threat to international peace
and security. Recent and current events in the neighbouring
areas, in particular in Kosovo, are a cause for concern. My
delegation therefore believes that the international
community must maintain its strong resolve and
commitment to promote and build lasting peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to ensure that a situation similar to
that which occurred there does not happen elsewhere in the
region. We have full trust in the Security Council playing
its appropriate role in this regard.

