Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you on your
election to the presidency of the Security Council. We are
all aware of your sagacity and of your great leadership
skills which are the best guarantee that the Council's
activities will be successful under your presidency. We
also extend our thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador
Salim Al-Khussaiby, the Permanent Representative of
Oman, on his constructive efforts during his presidency of
the Council.

Today we witness the beginnings of a turning point
in the direction of events in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
throughout the region of the former Yugoslavia. This
takes place after a four-year armed conflict that ravaged
the region and brought suffering to the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is high time that people enjoyed a life
of safety in a climate of peace, stability and sound
democracy.

 

In this context, we welcome the Dayton Agreement
and the results of the Peace Conference that was held in
Paris yesterday and in which the parties signed the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. By the same token, we welcome the
resolution just adopted unanimously by the Security
Council.

The agreements reached thus far constitute a major
historic achievement. The delegation of Egypt is pleased to
express great appreciation for the sustained efforts that led
to this achievement, and in particular applauds the efforts
of the Contact Group and of the United States of America.
At the same time, we must stress the fact that the efficacy
of the agreements and the credibility of the international
Contact Group, under whose auspices the Agreement was
reached, will depend entirely on the effective
implementation, in good faith, on the ground, by all parties,
of all the provisions and the measures embodied in the
General Framework Agreement. It goes without saying that
only if all sides scrupulously abide by those agreements in
good faith can the desired stability be restored to the
region.

In this respect, Egypt affirms its support for the
diplomatic efforts deployed in the framework of the London
Conference on the former Yugoslavia. We hope that a
negotiated settlement will be reached by all the parties
concerned with the issues relating to the succession of
States within the former Yugoslavia so that the successor
States may resume the international role that the Federated
Republic of Yugoslavia played in the past. We hope also
that all the peoples of those successor States will be able to
live in safety, security and dignity in the context of mutual
friendly relations amongst all the successor States with
which, without exception, we have ties of profound
friendship that, we hope, will grow warmer and stronger
and develop further in the future.

It is time for the international community to focus its
efforts on dealing with the disastrous consequences of the
armed conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We should like
here and now to recall the need for us to come to grips
with urgent questions, including the following:

First, to guarantee the voluntary return, in secure
conditions, of all refugees and displaced persons forcibly
expelled, and in particular the victims of the hateful policy
of "ethnic cleansing", while providing the necessary
international protection for their reintegration and their
reinstallation in the homes they were expelled from.

 

Secondly, the international Tribunal responsible for
bringing to justice war criminals, as well as those
responsible for flagrant Violations of international
humanitarian law, must be supported. The necessary
human and material resources must be provided to the
Tribunal in order for it to be able to pursue its efforts; the
fact being that the Tribunal is at present the only
international competent body entrusted with the task of
restoring the credibility of international law and of
deterring those who would Violate it. All States must
cooperate in enforcing the Tribunal's judgments.

The multinational implementation force (IFOR) led
by NATO, which will be deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will, in actual fact, act in the context of a
Security Council resolution. This is a point we wish to
stress: this is a force that acts on behalf of the
international community. Proceeding from this, it is
important that all geographical regions and all the groups
concerned should be represented in the composition of the
force.

In this regard, I wish to point out that Egypt, which
actually participates in the UNPROFOR, has offered,
officially, to participate in IFOR with a contingent of
700 troops.

In conclusion, I must state that the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina look up with hope to the international
community and expect generous support from the
international parties as proof of international credibility in
caring for this people. This is expected in the form of
resources that would be provided and efforts that would
be deployed towards the comprehensive reconstruction
that would restore to Bosnia and Herzegovina and, in
particular, to the city of Sarajevo, its historic status as a
symbol of peaceful coexistence amongst cultures,
religions and ethnicities in Central Europe.

In this context, Egypt will pursue its efforts in
participation with the States of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, striving one and all to rebuild Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

