I too thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti, Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her extremely comprehensive and enlightening briefing. Haiti is currently going through a crisis that is above all political. We observe with great concern the continued deterioration of the institutional situation. Indeed, I recall that, due to the lack of elections, the Parliament has not been able to sit since January and the Government appointed in March has not been installed. We deplore the fact that all dialogue initiatives have failed over the past two years. Yet, as we all know, the resolution of this crisis can be achieved only through an inclusive national dialogue among all political forces in the country, including the opposition, civil society and the private sector. That dialogue is essential to ensure the credible and transparent organization of the upcoming elections and the revision of the Constitution, if that is what Haitians indeed want. France urges President Jovenel Moise to put an end to the deadlock. This call for political responsibility is all the more necessary since the credibility of the institutions has been deeply undermined in Haiti by cases of corruption. Haitian civil society has for many years demanded transparency in the face of such cases, which destroy the confidence of the population in their institutions. Taking such demands into account is an essential condition for rebuilding trust with the Haitian population. That is why the fight against corruption must be the top priority of the Haitian political class. Haitian society has quite legitimate demands in terms of security and respect for human rights, which must be heard by the authorities. We strongly condemn the assassination of Maitre Dorval, President of the Port-au-Prince Bar Association, on 28 August. That murder is an extremely disturbing sign of the increasing insecurity since the beginning of the year and of the violence by gangs that are operating with impunity. I am also thinking of the massacres at La Saline and Bel Air, which have given rise to damning reports by the United Nations. Given that situation, it is essential that the Haitian State ensure the security of its citizens and guarantee that those responsible for such violence are brought to justice. The Haitian National Police is mobilizing to address the situation; it must be beyond reproach to ensure respect for the rule of law. In addition, as we know, the coronavirus disease pandemic has weighed heavily on an already extremely deteriorated economic, humanitarian and social situation. Millions of Haitians are living in a very vulnerable situation, and that trend is increasing. France and the European Union will continue to mobilize to provide all the humanitarian assistance needed to meet the most urgent needs. We are all aware that the multidimensional nature of the crisis in Haiti makes its resolution particularly complex. One year after its establishment, the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) has mobilized tirelessly, under the leadership of Ms. Meagher La Lime, to support Haiti. The work that BINUH is carrying out in support of political dialogue and governance and the strengthening of the rule of law is absolutely essential. It must be continued and BINUH must be given every means to fully implement its mandate.The Security Council will continue to maintain full vigilance and take appropriate measures, particularly if the situation in Haiti should continue to deteriorate. Finally, I wish to reaffirm that France stands more than ever alongside Haiti and the Haitians to meet the challenges of the current crisis and build the environment of stability and prosperity to which they quite legitimately aspire.
