Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank Robert
Serry for his very comprehensive and useful briefing,
as well as the representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.

Portugal naturally aligns itself with the statement
that will be delivered later by the observer of the
European Union.

The situation in the Middle East remains of the
highest concern. A traditionally volatile region is again
facing increasingly grave risks as the bloody conflict in
Syria rages and the Middle East peace process remains
in a protracted impasse, stubbornly oblivious to the
changes and shifting dynamics underway. Violence
and terrorism continue to maim and claim innocent
lives. Portugal condemns in the strongest terms the
terrorist attack in Bulgaria, on 18 July, which caused
the death of a Bulgarian and several Israeli citizens and
gravely injured many others. We present our sincere
condolences to the families ofthe victims. Likewise, we
condemn the ongoing firing of rockets into Israel from
Gaza against innocent civilians. All acts of terrorism
are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation wherever, whenever and by whomever they
are committed.

Last Thursday I expressed in this Chamber my
country's views on the deteriorating situation in Syria
(see S/PV.6810), so today I will refer to it only briefly.

Eighteen months into that deadly conflict, the
country continues to slip into civil war, destabilizing
neighbouring countries and threatening the integrity
of Syria itself with grave and unforeseeable risks for
regional peace and security. Resolution 2059 (2012)
allows the Syrian authorities a final chance to match
deeds with words, reverse the situation and prevent
the country's descent into absolute chaos. The Syrian
Government must immediately cease the use of heavy
weapons in populated centres. That is the first minimal
step needed for the establishment of an environment
conducive to a cessation of violence and a Syrian-led
political transition.

We also call upon all parties to engage constructively
with the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States on Syria and to commit to
a sustained cessation of all armed violence in all its
forms, as well as to the implementation of the six-point

plan and the political transition set forth by the Action
Group for Syria in Geneva. Portugal highly values
the role of the League of Arab States and its efforts
in seeking a peaceful solution to the conflict, and we
commend the assistance that neighbouring countries
continue to provide those persons fleeing violence and
persecution in Syria.
As has been repeatedly stated, developments in the
Arab world render a final settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict ever more urgent. However, comprehensive
and enduring regional peace will remain elusive
as long as the Palestinian question, the core of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, stays unresolved. Nevertheless,
the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations continue to be at a
dangerous standstill, and actions on the ground render
the resumption of the dialogue between the parties
increasingly difficult. Most troublesome, in that regard,
is Israel's continued and intensified settlement activity;
its ongoing policies in Area C and East Jerusalem of
evictions, confiscations and demolitions of Palestinian
housing and infrastructure; and its forced transfer
of populations. Just a couple of days ago the Israeli
Government requested the Israeli Supreme Court to
allow the demolition of Palestinian hamlets in the South
Hebron Hills to enable the area to be used for military
training. All those acts are illegal under international
law and must be clearly condemned as such. Moreover,
they undermine any possibility of a two-State solution
based on the internationally endorsed parameters as
colonization erodes the territorial basis of any such
solution. Soon there will be no land to exchange for
peace. The political credibility of the whole process is
at stake, and the disingenuous report of Justice Levy
further undermines it.

Also, the human rights and humanitarian situation
of Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territory is
deplorable, as we heard from Mr. Serry and Ambassador
Mansour. Settler violence and vandalism, including
attacks on religious sites, excessive restrictions on
movement, deliberate humiliations, arbitrary and
administrative detentions without formal charge, and
the use of disproportionate force by the Israeli security
forces continue to take a heavy toll on Palestinian daily
life.

In Gaza, the blockade, which is now entering its
sixth year, has created an aid-dependant economy
and reinforced extremism. Fundamental change of
the situation in the Gaza Strip and lasting recovery
will require the full implementation of resolution
1860 (2009). We urge Israel to cooperate full with the
relevant humanitarian actors in the occupied Palestinian
territory, namely, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, and to ensure full and
unimpeded humanitarian access, as is its obligation as
an occupying Power.

The parties must undertake all efforts to engage
in credible direct negotiations. They must take steps
that foster mutual confidence. In that context, Portugal
welcomes the second visit by families from the Gaza
Strip to see relatives in Israeli detention, as we welcome
the transfer by the Israeli Government to the Palestinian
Authority of 180,000,000 shekels advance on tax revenue
transfers. A reliable and predictable transfer of revenues
is essential for the economic and fiscal sustainability of
the Palestinian Authority. But Palestinian access and
use of their resources in Area C are also key for the
economic viability of the Palestinian Authority, without
which it would be increasingly difficult to sustain and
build upon the Palestinian State-building achievements
carried out by Prime Minister Fayyad, under the
direction of President Abbas, whose endeavours we
commend and encourage.

The resumption of a meaningful negotiation process
based on the well-known parameters and on the Quartet
statement of 23 September 2011 remains an utmost
priority. We all know that direct negotiations are the
only way to settle all final status issues, but the window
for a negotiated solution is closing quickly. Israelis and
Palestinians - and all in the region - can only gain
from the establishment of a sovereign, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State committed to
peace and security and Israel's full integration into its
regional environment on the basis of the Arab Peace
Initiative. The parties simply cannot afford to miss this
historic opportunity.

Time is running out, as Mr. Serry said. Now is
the moment for Israelis and Palestinians to re-engage
seriously and courageously. It is the time to take the
risks that a just and durable peace necessarily entails.
It is not the time for yet more procrastination. It is an
illusion for either party to think that time and the status
quo are on their side. If there is one thing the past year
and a half has shown us, it is that history will wait for
no one. It will proceed at its own pace, and it will follow
its own course.

