Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is very gratified to be here in the
Security Council at this extremely important moment
in the history of East Timor. Allow me to thank the
Secretary-General for having addressed us on this
historic occasion as we welcome Mr. Xanana Gusmao,
President-elect of East Timor, and thank him and Chief
Minister Mari Alkatiri for their enlightening
statements.

We anticipate with great enthusiasm the company
of East Timor as a State Member of the United Nations.
We are grateful to the Secretariat for the report and to
Mr. Annabi for his introduction.

Today's meeting is particularly meaningful. We
are celebrating the culmination of a historic process
that began over two years ago in great uncertainty and
amid multiple political difficulties. We are now seeing
the onset of a new phase that will be equally decisive
for East Timor's history, but that can be launched
without the fears of the past. On 20 May, the date of
independence for that new country and of the
installation of the new Government, the Timorese and
the international community will set out on a path that
can be successfully completed only if we jointly
reaffirm our decisive support.

Colombia welcomes the independence of East
Timor. This has crystallized the supreme exercise of
the right of the Timorese to self-determination, a
fundamental principle for peaceful coexistence among
peoples. We recognize the transcendent importance of
this moment, and we expect to participate in the
ceremonies planned in Dili on 19 and 20 May.

On earlier occasions we examined in some detail
the Secretary-General's proposals to define the United
Nations presence after independence. We agree with
the guidelines presented in the report being considered
today, including the mandate for the new United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). We would like to make a few general
comments on areas of particular interest to Colombia.

First, we are in favour of the gradual manner in
which the transition from the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
to UNMISET has been planned. This is a fundamental
element in guaranteeing that the new Timorese State is
economically and politically sustainable in the long
term.

Secondly, we believe that the structure that has
been planned for bringing about security and stability
in the new country is appropriate. We feel that the
planned linkage between UNMISET and the United
Nations Resident Coordinator and Representative of
the United Nations Development Programme is a
positive element and will make it possible to
harmonize and unify the United Nations contribution to
the new Government's development plans, bearing in
mind security aspects.

Thirdly, we would like to emphasize that starting
on 20 May, the Security Council will have a different
role to play in determining East Timor's path. From
now on, aside from the Timorese, of course, the most
active role will be taken by other agencies of the
United Nations system, including the Bretton Woods
institutions, and bilateral donors that decide to commit
resources to the new country. The challenge for the
new actors will be to provide the Government of East
Timor with a sustainable, genuine, harmonized,
coordinated and coherent contribution to development.

We would like to commend particularly the
countries that have played a fundamental part in the
recent history of this new country. I am referring, for
instance, to the Governments of Portugal and Australia,
and others whose direct participation has had a decisive
impact in installing democracy in East Timor in safe
conditions. We would also like to recognize the
Government of Indonesia for having shown positive
political will in cooperating with programmes for
border security, humanitarian assistance and refugee
return.

In conclusion, I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Sergio Vieira de Mello, the
outgoing Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his contribution to the Timorese people
and for having shown that the United Nations can be
successful when the right conditions and sufficient
political will exist. I would also like to congratulate
Mr. Kamalesh Sharma on his appointment to lead the
new Mission of Support. We are all familiar with his
intellectual and professional abilities, and that is why
we are sure that his management will be very
successful.

