Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you
very much, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. In view of the time constraints you just
mentioned, my full statement will be available through
Twitter.

I align my statement with that delivered just now by
the observer of the European Union.

My Government is deeply concerned about the
impact of the Ebola outbreak, especially in Guinea,
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Our hearts and minds are
with all those who suffer. It is tragic that women are
particularly affected, owing to their role as caregivers.
We pay tribute to the courageous health workers in the
field in the very difficult circumstances under which
they do their difficult jobs. We deeply appreciate the
work of Director-General Chan and Dr. Nabarro for
the important roles they are playing. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands also welcomes the establishment of
the new United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response to fight the outbreak. Now more than ever,
a single United Nations approach is needed to counter
the epidemic. That is literally a matter of life and
death. The relevant United Nations agencies should
work together to be more effective. The Netherlands, of
course, is a key partner of all those agencies, including
the World Health Organization, UNICEF and the World
Food Programme.

Additional humanitarian aid in the form of funds,
medical supplies and health workers is needed. So
far, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has contributed
to the fight against Ebola with financial means, both
through the European Union and our contributions to
the United Nations system. Tomorrow my Government
will announce major new contributions to combating
the Ebola crisis. We are a sponsor of resolution 2177
(2014) and welcome its adoption today. We encourage
the joint effort to support the affected States and
welcome the call on the private sector to maintain trade
and transport links.

The international community must remain
committed as long as necessary to supporting the
affected countries in the region. We also need a long-
term commitment on the part of the private sector to
doing its part in combating the disease and sustaining
businesses and people. To quote Director-General
Chan, Ebola is not just a public health crisis; it is also
a social, humanitarian and political crisis, and if we
do not act now, people not dying of Ebola may die of
starvation. It has the potential to destabilize entire
countries and regions, compromising national, regional
and international security. This is a global crisis that
requires every one of our nations to act, and to act now.
My Government is committed to taking further action.

