Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. The candidate country Montenegro; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement.

To save time, I will deliver a shortened version of
my statement. The full text is being circulated in the
Chamber and will be posted on our website.

The European Union is extremely concerned over
recent developments related to the peace process that
are putting into question the continued negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians beyond the original
deadline of 29 April. The European Union reiterates
its full support for the peace efforts brokered by the
United States of America, and calls on both parties to
remain focused on negotiations and the unprecedented
benefits that peace can bring. Negotiations are the best
way forward. The extensive efforts deployed in recent
months must not go to waste. We call on all sides to
exercise maximum restraint and to avoid any action that
may further undermine peace efforts and the viability
of a two-State solution.

The European Union has consistently supported
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, but on clear and
certain terms. We reiterate that such reconciliation
should take place behind President Abbas and in line
with the principles set out in his speech of4 May 2011.
The European Union expects any new Government
to uphold the principle of non-violence and to remain
committed to achieving a two-State solution and a
negotiated, peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, and to accepting previous agreements and
obligations, including Israel's legitimate right to exist.
Reconciliation on those terms is an important element
for the unity of a future Palestinian State and for
reaching a two-State solution and a lasting peace.

The European Union welcomes the prospect of
genuine democratic elections for all Palestinians.
The fact that President Abbas will remain fully in
charge of the negotiation process and have a mandate
to negotiate in the name of all Palestinians provides
further assurance that the peace negotiations can and
must proceed.

The European Union is convinced that there can
only be a political solution to the conflict in Syria.
The regime's constant obstruction led to the failure of
the first two first rounds of the Geneva negotiations,
which need to be resumed without delay. We call on
the Syrian regime to accept the Geneva communique
(S/2012/523, annex) and to show a clear commitment
to the negotiation agenda and the method of work, in
particular treating in parallel the issues of terrorism and
transition. We recall that the opposition delegation, led
by the Syrian National Coalition, has already accepted
those conditions.

The European Union deeply regrets the declaration
by the Syrian regime that it will organize presidential
elections on 3 June. Any election in Syria should
take place only within the framework of the Geneva
communique of 2012. Elections organized by the
regime outside that framework would be a parody
of democracy, have no credibility whatsoever and
undermine efforts to reach a political solution.

The European Union is gravely concerned about
the disastrous and deteriorating human rights situation
in Syria and strongly condemns all violations and
abuses of human rights, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The European Union calls on the Security
Council to urgently address the prevailing culture
of impunity and refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.

The European Union deplores the lack of progress
on the implementation ofresolution 2139 (2014). We call
on all parties to comply with the resolution immediately
and without further delay. The continued withholding
of consent to basic relief operations, across borders and
across the lines of conflict, is arbitrary and unjustified.
The European Union calls upon the Security Council
to take further measures if non-compliance continues.

The European Union reiterates the call on the
Syrian regime to fulfil its obligations to have its
chemical weapons arsenal, including production
facilities, destroyed by the end of June. All outstanding
questions surrounding Syria's declaration must be
addressed. Those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons in Rif Damascus on 21 August 2013 must be
held accountable.

The European Union is deeply concerned about
recent media reports alleging the use of chlorine gas
against the Syrian population. Any use of a toxic
chemical for purposes other than those explicitly
permitted under the Chemical Weapons Convention
constitutes a violation of article I of the Convention.
The perpetrators of any such breach must be held
accountable.
The European Union commends once again those
neighbouring countries, notably Lebanon and Jordan,
that continue to keep their borders open and provide safe
haven for refugees from Syria, including Palestinians.
We will continue to support them. The European Union
is committed to the unity, stability, independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon and
reiterates its continued commitment to contributing
to meeting Lebanon's growing needs. We welcome all
such efforts of the international community, including
the International Support Group for Lebanon, in which
the European Union and some of its member States
play an active role. We also welcome the formation of
the new Government, led by Prime Minister Salam,
and encourage it to act without delay in tackling the
existing challenges for Lebanon.

