Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I am compelled to state that Georgia is
continuing its treacherous attack on South Ossetia.
That is occurring despite the appeal of the Russian
leadership for an immediate ceasefire, an end to this
fratricidal conflict and a resumption of the negotiating
process. This situation has become possible as a result
of, inter alia, the connivance of a number of Security
Council members, which blocked last night's
assessment of the ongoing tragedy, provided in the
document submitted by Russia.

The aggression has been carried out in violation
of the fundamental principle of the Charter of the
United Nations concerning the non-use of force. The
1996 Memorandum on Measures to Provide Security
and Strengthen Mutual Trust between the Parties to the
Georgian-Ossetian Conflict - signed by the Georgian
and South Ossetian parties with the participation of not
only the Russian Federation and the Republic of North
Ossetia, but also the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) - as well as the basic
agreement signed in 1992 between the Russian
Federation and the Republic of Georgia on the
principles of settlement of the Georgian-Ossetian
conflict, obliged the belligerent parties to take
measures to halt the military confrontation, to observe
a ceasefire and to withdraw all armed units from the
corridor along the line of contiguity. Under the
agreement, a demilitarized zone was established.

The 1996 Memorandum states, in its paragraph 1,
"The parties to the conflict shall renounce the use or
threat of use of force". That document was signed by
the High Representative of Georgia and the
representative of the OSCE. I wish to refer to the
particular political responsibility of OSCE member
States to comply with the Memorandum. Georgia has
used force and thus has violated the Memorandum and
the demilitarized zone established under the 1992
agreement.

As all of us could see on our television screens
today, Tbilisi is using heavy artillery and heavy
materiel and, in essence, has launched an aggressive
action against the people of South Ossetia. What is
occurring is a massive bombardment of residential
areas in Tskhinvali and in towns outside the South
Ossetian zone of conflict. In Tskhinvali, schools, the
university, the Ministry of Culture and the parliament
have been set ablaze. The town where the peacekeepers
have been living has been destroyed. Targeted bombing
has been carried out against a Russian convoy carrying
humanitarian assistance, and there are reports of ethnic
cleansing in villages in South Ossetia.

The population is panicking, and there are a
growing number of refugees, who are attempting to
flee in order to save their lives and those of their
children and other loved ones. A humanitarian
catastrophe is in the making. Tbilisi is using scorched-
earth tactics: a number of towns in South Ossetia have
been totally destroyed. According to some reports,
Georgian snipers are not allowing ambulances to go
through and are preventing medical personnel from
doing their life-saving work. The situation is so
catastrophic that the International Committee of the
Red Cross has requested a humanitarian corridor for
emergency evacuation of the wounded. According to
reports from the South Ossetian side, more than 1,400
people have died as a result of the fighting in
Tskhinvali alone.

This cannot be described as anything other than a
gross violation of international law, in particular the
obligation to protect civilians from dangers related to
military operations. We must not forget that, in cases
not covered by international agreements carrying
international humanitarian law, civilians and
combatants remain under the protection and the force
of the principles of international law arising from
customary practices, humanitarian principles and the
requirements of public awareness.

In this situation, the most vulnerable groups are
children, women, the elderly and the disabled, Whose
lives, health and well-being are gravely threatened. Not
only are Georgia's attacks against innocent civilians
and its destruction of schools and hospitals gross
violations of the norms of international humanitarian
law; they also violate fundamental human rights.

Over the past week, the Russian Federation has
continued to receive refugees from South Ossetia.

However, tens of thousands of innocent civilians
remain in the conflict zone. Those circumstances
dictate the logic of the steps to be taken by us now. We
will not allow the deaths of our compatriots to go
unpunished. As Council members are aware, many of
the people living in South Ossetia are citizens of the
Russian Federation, and those who are guilty will be
duly punished. I should also like to report that today,
the President of Russia instructed the Government to
take urgent measures to provide humanitarian
assistance to refugees and other innocent civilians in
desperate situations.

All the points that I have made about what Tbilisi
is doing have been reaffirmed by our often-repeated
warnings to the international community: we must
finally stop turning a blind eye to the massive
acquisition of offensive weapons that Georgia has been
carrying out over the past few years. Now we see that
those weapons and the special commandos who have
been trained by foreign instructors are being put to use
by the Georgian leadership.

Georgia's actions have also caused casualties
among Russian peacekeepers. The situation has even
reached the point where peacekeepers from the
Georgian side have shot at Russian peacekeepers, with
whom they are mandated to carry out their
peacekeeping mission in the region. Today in South
Ossetia, innocent civilians, women, children and the
elderly - many of whom, I repeat, are citizens of the
Russian Federation - are dying. We cannot tolerate a
situation in which Russian citizens and peacekeepers,
who have been risking their lives for years to keep the
peace in the South Ossetian conflict zone, are
suffering. The firepower of tanks, military combat
vehicles and helicopters is being aimed directly at
peacekeepers. As a result, more than 10 peacekeepers
have died, and more than 30 have been injured.

As members of the Council are aware,
peacekeeping forces should not be put at risk as a
result of actions by parties to an armed conflict. We
believe that Georgia, having carried out this attack on
Russian peacekeepers, has demonstrated blatant
disregard for the norms of international law.

Now it is clear why, for many months, Georgia
rejected our urgent proposal that it sign a legally
binding document on the non-use of force to settle the
South Ossetian conflict. Indeed, it has refused and
continues to refuse to sign a similar document
regarding the Abkhaz conflict. The President of
Georgia said that demanding his signature on such a
document was absurd, because Georgia does not use
force against its own people. Now it appears that it
does. How can we not recall the responsibility to
protect that we hear so much about in the United
Nations?

All of this calls into question Georgia's viability
as a State and its viability as responsible member of the
international community. The President of the Russian
Federation today unambiguously emphasized that
Russia will not allow the deaths of our compatriots to
go unpunished, and that the lives and dignity of our
citizens, wherever they are, will be protected, in
accordance with the Constitution of Russia and in
accordance with the laws of the Russian Federation and
international law.

We particularly regret the fact that the President
of Georgia has proclaimed on television his resolve to
continue what he has begun. That is all taking place not
only against the backdrop of the Georgian flag but
against the backdrop of the flag of the European Union
as well.

We hope that our European colleagues and our
American colleagues, who in recent weeks have been
in active contact with us and who apparently were
taking some steps to prevent this situation shifting to a
hot phase, will start to understand what is going on: we
hope that they will draw the right conclusions from
this. We recently heard the a Georgian Government
Minister, Mr. Yakobashvili, say that Russia should
intervene as a real peacekeeper. Well, that is precisely
what we are doing now.

I should like once again to emphasize that Russia
was present and continues to be present on the territory
of Georgia on an absolutely legal basis, pursuant to our
peacekeeping mission in accordance with the
international agreements that were reached. We
continue to deem the main task here to be the
maintenance of peace. Historically, Russia was the
guarantor of the security of the peoples of the
Caucuses, and it will remain so.

