Mr. Goktiirk (Turkey): It gives my delegation
particular satisfaction to see at the helm of the Security
Council the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, a
country with which Turkey maintains the closest of friendly
bonds. We thank Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for
the briefing he has given and welcome in particular the
progress so far achieved in restructuring the police force
and the steps taken to improve judicial practice and
procedure.

The report of the Secretary-General, just summarized,
also provides us with a clearer picture of where the players
in Bosnia and Herzegovina currently stand. Especially
revealing in this respect is the way the efforts of the United
Nations mission to restructure the police force as a truly
multi-ethnic one are treated in certain parts of the
country. Those who persistently attempt to thwart this
process must comprehend that they are in fact
undermining their own security and future.

Implementation of the Dayton/Paris Accords remains
our constant objective. Bosnia and Herzegovina should be
preserved as a multi-ethnic, multicultural, independent and
sovereign State within internationally recognized borders.
High Representative Wolfgang Petritsch enjoys my
Government's full support in his task. Equally, we stand
by the Secretary-General's Special Representative and
Coordinator Jacques Paul Klein, whose forthright
approach to the realities of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
commendable.

But nothing can be effectively achieved or endure
solely on the basis of the perseverance of the international
community; the real actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina
must take charge of the tasks at hand. Among these tasks,
the safe return of refugees and displaced persons remains
an urgent priority. The electoral law, drafted by
international and local experts, needs to be considered and
adopted by the State Parliament without further
procrastination, and the effective functioning of the
common institutions is a prerequisite for their popular
acceptance as credible seats of authority and for the
success of the economic and social recovery programme.

The Government which emerged from the recent
elections in Croatia has taken a step in the right direction
by declaring that the Bosnian Croats should no longer
look to Zagreb for help but to Sarajevo. This is a
welcome development for Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
that declaration is a recognition of the fact that the
peoples of that country have a common destiny. If carried
into effect, this approach will surely facilitate
State-building efforts.

We all admit that building a common future on the
agony and ashes resulting from a brutal war is no easy
undertaking. Against that backdrop, cooperation by all
States with the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia becomes essential not only for serving
justice, but also for helping usher in a new era in which
the sides will no longer feel the urge to demonize each
other. Ms. Carla del Ponte, the Prosecutor of the Tribunal,
was once again assured of Turkey's cooperation during
her recent visit to Ankara.

 

My country rushed to help Bosnia and Herzegovina in
every possible way throughout its years of tragedy. We are
now a prominent supporter of its State-building and
reconstruction efforts. Our contributions to the wider area,
within the context of the Stability Pact, are also substantial.
Effective State institutions and a self-sustaining economy
will enable Bosnia and Herzegovina to benefit more
efficiently from the resources made available to it.

