Ms. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
This year, the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) marks its twenty-fifth anniversary. The member
States of the Commonwealth are committed to the
values that are set out in the Charter of the United
Nations. Cooperation within the CIS is based on respect
for humane and humanitarian values, which provides
the basis for combating the ideological extremism,
intolerance and terrorism that threaten the stability
not only of member States of the Commonwealth of
Independent States but the world as a whole.

Since January 2016, the Kyrgyz Republic has held
the presidency of the Commonwealth of Independent
States. In this period three entities have celebrated
anniversaries: the Council of Heads of State of the
CIS, the Council of Heads of Government and the
Council of Foreign Ministers. At the Bishkek summit
in September 2016, the Heads of State reviewed a
broad range of issues related to intra-CIS cooperation,
including security issues and combating international
terrorism and extremism. The Heads of State adopted
four statements - on the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Commonwealth, on the seventieth anniversary of
the completion of the work of the Nuremberg Tribunal,
on future joint efforts to counteract international
terrorism, and on the outcome of the special session of
the General Assembly on the world drug problem.

It should be pointed out that all of those problems
were given particular attention in a context in which the
international situation is undergoing complex changes
and international security continues to be subject to
various sources of instability, namely, international
terrorism, religious extremism and other contemporary
challenges and threats. We are especially concerned
by the growth in various terrorist and extremist
organizations and the continuing recruitment of CIS
citizens into entities engaged in armed conflicts.

No less grave an external threat for the CIS
continues to be the situation in Afghanistan, where
there has been no drop in the threat of terrorism,
extremism and drug trafficking. Reiterating that there
is no military solution to the Afghan problem, the
CIS States support the settlement of the intra-Afghan
conflict through inclusive national reconciliation. We
believe that these efforts should be undertaken by the
Afghan people themselves and their designated leaders,
without imposing preconditions and with the United
Nations playing the central coordinating role in the
process of international cooperation on Afghanistan.

As the CIS countries contribute to counteracting
new threats and challenges to security, they take into
account the leading role played by the United Nations
and the need to develop constructive partnerships
with other members of international organizations and
specialized agencies, such as the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, INTERPOL, the International Organization
for Migration, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Financial
Action Task Force for combating money-laundering.
CIS States are also parties to all the main international
cooperation agreements on security, disarmament and
counteracting contemporary threats and challenges,
and we make a proper contribution to implementing
them.

Our countries make regular submissions to the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) of information on their efforts
to improve national systems for monitoring the trade
in weapons of mass destruction, the means for their
delivery and related materials, providing the highest
possible respect for standards of nuclear security
and implementing the International Convention for
the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material. All CIS States are parties to the global
initiative on combating acts of nuclear terrorism.

Significant experience has been gained in the areas
of cooperation between the CIS and the United Nations
in the achievement of our goals in the social, economic
and humanitarian spheres. However, enhancing the
cooperation's viability and effectiveness implies
ensuring that there is a solid basis for such cooperation,
which would help us strengthen the links between the
CIS and the specialized agencies and offices of the
United Nations. That would be facilitated by the General
Assembly draft resolution on cooperation between the
United Nations Organization and the Commonwealth
of Independent States, to be adopted in November.

In order to ensure the sustainable socioeconomic
development of CIS countries, member States are
working on enhancing and broadening economic
cooperation. That includes establishing a fully
fledged free trade zone for the Commonwealth,
further upgrading transport and communications and
increasing our humanitarian cooperation, important
components for ensuring stability and security
throughout the CIS area.

In conclusion, allow me to express our gratitude
for the initiative to convene today's debate and our
trust that cooperation between the United Nations and
the CIS will continue to have a positive impact on the
maintenance of international peace and security.

