Mr. Menon (Singapore): Let me first thank
Special Envoy Ian Martin for his update on the
situation in Timor-Leste. I also join other speakers in
commending the troops and police from Australia,
Malaysia, New Zealand and Portugal for their
assistance to Timor-Leste during this difficult period.

About five weeks ago, we deliberated on the
importance of maintaining a continued United Nations
presence in Timor-Leste. My delegation emphasized
then that we should not be "penny wise and pound
foolish". Instead, there was a need to remain engaged
in the work of institution-building for Timor-Leste. I
believe that many delegations shared these sentiments.

It is unfortunate that recent developments seem to
have underlined the need for this approach. Timor-
Leste has slid into instability just days after celebrating
the fourth anniversary of independence. Two key
institutions - the Timorese Armed Forces (F-FDTL)
and the National Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL)
- have unravelled before our eyes. We have seen
appalling images of looting and hostilities. These
events have been a stark reminder of how easily the
peace and serenity of a new country can be shattered.

The deployment of troops and police from
Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand and Portugal has
restored a degree of calm. For this, those countries
deserve much praise. However, massive displacement
of people remains, and law and order has not been fully
restored. Law and order must be re-established. The
armed gangs must be apprehended and disarmed as an
integral step in the restoration of peace and security so
that people can return safely to their homes and jobs.

There is also an urgent need to resolve the
differences among rival factions and to help rebuild
institutions. The United Nations can assist in a
thorough review of the reasons behind the rapid
breakdown of law and order to prevent a recurrence of
the problem, particularly when Timor-Leste holds
elections next year. I call on the leaders and the people
of Timor-Leste to speed up the process of national
reconciliation and to act with the international
community to address the problems at home.

The leaders of Timor-Leste have asked for
assistance, in particular a longer United Nations
presence. I hope that the Security Council will
seriously consider that when it decides on a new
mission mandate. It is important that the Council send
a strong signal of support for the people of Timor-Leste
by establishing an appropriate United Nations mission
after UNOTIL. The successor mission must have a
robust peacekeeping mandate. Peacekeeping under the
leadership of the United Nations offers the best hope of
pulling together the resources of Member States to
address the situation in Timor-Leste in the longer term.

S/l'V.5457

 

