Mrs. Incera (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation views with deep concern the
deterioration of the political and military situation in
Georgia. The renewed tension and the resulting risk of new
clashes call for resolute action on the part of the
international community to reach a political solution to the
conflict.

We would first like to recognize the efforts to
promote peace made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the Russian Federation, the group of
Friends of the Secretary-General and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. We are particularly
pleased by the second meeting of the parties to the
Georgian conflict, which was held in Geneva from 23 to
25 July, and we welcome the reiterated commitment of
the participants to reach a peaceful solution to the
conflict. We nevertheless recognize that these
commitments can be met only if the parties enjoy the full
cooperation of the international community in
implementing them. We therefore support the extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia (UNOMIG).

Moreover, we are alarmed by the fact that both the
civilian population and international personnel, including
the staff of UNOMIG, continue to be subjected to
violence and crime. We consider it indispensable for the
local authorities to meet their obligation to take all
necessary measures to ensure security in the territories
under their control.

In this context, my delegation attaches the greatest
importance to the humanitarian situation of the refugees
and displaced persons. We regret that the current crisis
has worsened their living conditions and is impeding their
return to their homes. We consider that above all, the
parties to the conflict must respect the fundamental rights
of these individuals, including their right to live in
security. We therefore reiterate our appeal to the parties
to respect the fundamental rights of the inhabitants of the
territories under their control, as well as to establish the
necessary security conditions to enable displaced persons
to return to their homes.

We are particularly concerned about the deterioration
of security in the areas where UNOMIG is operating, as
this has an impact on the execution of its mandate and
imperils the lives of its staff. In this context, we condemn
the armed attacks against the Abkhaz authorities and the
peacekeeping forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States, as well as the criminal use of anti-
personnel landmines.

Finally, we reiterate our support for the work of
UNOMIG. In creating a climate of trust and security for
the population of the Gali district, it is an indispensable
factor in ensuring stability in the region.

 

