Mr. Vale de Almeida: Allow me, in my first
intervention before the Council, to salute all of its
members and to say how much I look forward to fruitful
cooperation in the future.

I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as well as
Ukraine and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

We thank the Security Council for adopting
resolution 2247 (2015), renewing the mandate of the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
Operation Althea in Bosnia for one year. Ijoin other
speakers in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko back to the Council, and would like to express
our full and continuous support for him and his role,
as set out in the Council's previous resolutions. I would
also like to welcome the new Permanent Representative
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ambassador Milos
Vukasinovic'. I wish the Ambassador a successful
tenure in New York and thank him for his statement.

The European Union (EU), emphasizing the
importance of Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress
towards Euro-Atlantic integration, continues to work
closely with Bosnia and Herzegovina to advance its
stability, prosperity and European integration. This
year is one of historic anniversaries, and a time when
we are reminded of the country's painful past. It has
also been an important year in terms of progress
achieved. The European Union and the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina have worked together to move
the country forward towards the European Union. We
welcome the progress achieved so far. At the same time,
more needs to be done to ensure that a united, stable
and multi-ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina can move
forward towards prosperity and the European Union.
Fostering good-neighbourly relations with all of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's neighbours and other countries of
the region is of vital importance in that regard.

This year, Bosnia and Herzegovina's EU perspective
was further strengthened. The Stabilization and
Association Agreement between the European Union,
its member States and Bosnia and Herzegovina entered
into force on 1 June. It is an important step forward.
Contractual relations with the European Union have
been reinforced, bringing Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the EU closer together economically, institutionally and
politically. The Agreement opens a binding agenda for
deep reforms that, as experience shows, will improve
people's quality of life and move the country closer to
EU membership. The confidence of investors, domestic
and international, should increase and Bosnia and
Herzegovina's businesses could further improve their
access to the EU's internal market of some 500 million
consumers, thereby providing their services across the
EU and competing for public contracts.

The most comprehensive package of socioeconomic
andjudicial reforms ever in Bosnia and Herzegovina-the
so-called Reform Agenda - was adopted by the political
leadership at the State and Entity levels in July. The
Reform Agenda reflects the collective wish of all
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina for real change,
greater prosperity, stronger rule of law and more
opportunities. The EU and the international financial
institutions will continue to support the implementation
of the Reform Agenda, including by providing €1 billion
over three years, and putting aside another €500 million
for investment. That should encourage more private
investment and boost the overall economy, creating
more jobs and opportunities for everyone.

Meaningful progress in the implementation of the
Reform Agenda, including the Compact for Growth
and Jobs, will be necessary for an EU membership
application by Bosnia and Herzegovina to be considered
by the European Union. When requesting the
Commission's opinion on the membership application,
the Council will ask the Commission to pay particular
attention to the implementation of the Sejdic-Finci
ruling. Furthermore, ensuring efficient coordination
on all EU-relevant matters is one of the main tasks
facing the country. Such coordination should facilitate
the decision-making needed in the EU integration
process and serve as an effective vehicle to ensure
domestic legislation harmonization with the EU acquis.
Moreover, the EU urges Bosnia and Herzegovina to
fully uphold its commitments and obligations under
the Stabilization and Association Agreement, including
those relating to the adaptation of the Agreement.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has made progress in the
last two decades both domestically and in its relations
with neighbouring countries. This year, concrete
progress has been made on the country's EU path after
a prolonged period of stagnation. But that progress must
not be jeopardized by initiatives taken for short-term
political purposes and misleading and harmful political
Visions. We call on the leaders and people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to refrain from divisive rhetoric, pull
together and move forward.

We express our serious concern about the
preparations for holding an Entity-level referendum on
the State-leveljudiciary in Republika Srpska. Holding a
referendum on the State judiciary in Republika Srpska
would challenge the cohesion, sovereignty and integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to which the leaders of all
the main political parties represented in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliaments, including the President of
Republika Srpska, are committed. Holding a referendum
also risks undermining the efforts to make further
progress in EU integration to which all political leaders
are committed. It also distracts attention from the social
and economic problems that people throughout Bosnia
and Herzegovina face on a daily basis. Divisive and
separatist rhetoric remains a cause for serious concern
and is disruptive and a distraction from the reforms
Bosnia and Herzegovina has to go through. Politicians
need to focus their efforts on implementing the Reform
Agenda, which is aimed at stabilizing the economy and
create new jobs, particularly for young people, improve
the rule of law and tackle corruption.

The shortcomings of the judicial system in Bosnia
and Herzegovina should continue to be addressed and
improved through constructive dialogue. The EU works
with all relevant authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the framework of the Structured Dialogue on Justice,
and stands ready to intensify its efforts to improve
the performance and functioning of the legal system.
We also call, on a more general note, on the Bosnia
and Herzegovina authorities to continue to cooperate
fully with all entities involved in the implementation
of the Dayton-Paris Peace Accords, including the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

The European Union's deep engagement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is firmly entrenched
and multidimensional. EU High Representative
Vice-President Mogherini, together with Commissioner
for European Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement
Negotiations Hahn, and in close collaboration with
EU member States, will continue to carry out the
EU commitment in Bosnia and Herzegovina. And
we will also continue working closely with the High
Representative, his Office and our international
partners in our endeavours.

The European Union's strengthened political
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina will remain in
the person of the Head of Delegation/EU Special
Representative, my colleague Ambassador Lars-
Gunnar Wigemark, and his Office with a view to
supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina in all EU-related
matters, including by providing political guidance on
military issues with a local political dimension to the
EU Force Commander.

The European Union will also continue to assist
Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress in the security
field and towards its national ownership. The overall
security situation has remained calm and stable, yet
stability has not been fully entrenched. The European
Union welcomes the continued presence of EUFOR
Althea, which retains the capability to contribute to
the deterrence capacity of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
authorities if the situation so requires, while focusing
on capacity-building and training. In this context,
as part of the overall EU strategy for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the EU confirms its readiness at this
stage to maintain an executive military role to support
Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities in maintaining a
safe and secure environment, under a renewed United
Nations mandate. At the same time, the EU has agreed
to keep Operation Althea under regular review, with a
View to assessing progress on the conditions conducive
to the delivery ofits mandate. In this context, furthering
the efforts of EUFOR Althea in the field of capacity-
building and training could be considered.

In the context of the overall EU strategy for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, we look forward to continuing the
discussion with the international community on the
reconfiguration of the international presence, in the
appropriate forum, and call on the authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to meet without further delay the
outstanding objectives and conditions for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative.

To conclude, 20 years since the Dayton-Paris Peace
Accords, the European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to the stability and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and united
country. We welcome the adoption of an ambitious
Reform Agenda in July, as envisaged in the December
2014 EU Council Conclusions, and the entry into force
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement. This
positive momentum needs to be not only maintained,
but intensified by all political leaders for a prosperous
and European future of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
its citizens. In that context, the EU, being a direct
neighbour of Bosnia and Herzegovina, presents great
opportunities for the country and its citizens. The
European Union stands ready to further assist in this
respect.

