Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).

At the outset, NAM. congratulates you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. My delegation
expresses its appreciation to the Security Council for
giving its consent to NAM. to participate in this
important meeting.

Like the Group of 77 and China, NAM. insists
that the Security Council is not the forum in which to
discuss questions relating to peacekeeping operations
procurement, which is a matter that falls within the
functions and powers of the General Assembly.

The General Assembly is the chief oversight
body of the United Nations. Oversight of procurement,
including for peacekeeping operations, as with other
aspects of management, is the prerogative of the
Assembly. As we all have recognized, the audit in
question is one that was mandated by the Assembly
through its resolution 59/296. In point of fact, the
proposal requesting the Secretary-General to conduct a
comprehensive management audit of risk areas in the
management of peacekeeping operations was introduced
by the developing countries in order to identify possible
instances of fraud and abuse of authority. The outcome
of that audit, which is contained in the draft report of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services, is yet to be
introduced in the Assembly.

Not only is it inappropriate, therefore, for the
Security Council to discuss issues of oversight and
management, which are the functions of the General
Assembly; it is even more inappropriate to have that
discussion based on a report or the salient elements of
a report that was mandated by the Assembly and which
is to be placed before it by the Secretary-General in
due course.

We are all, of course, well aware of the
consequences of the Security Council's involving itself
in the management of United Nations programmes. The
Volcker Committee report and its searing criticism of
the role played by the Security Council are all too fresh
for all of us. We would have preferred that the Security
Council draw its lessons from the consequences
emanating from that report and desist from continuing
its encroachment into areas that are beyond its mandate
and competence.

While mindful of the multifaceted and
multidisciplinary character of the mandates of
peacekeeping operations sanctioned by the Security
Council, and bearing in mind Article 24 of the Charter,
the Non-Aligned Movement strongly affirms that Article
24 and the aforementioned character do not necessarily
provide the Council with the competence to address
issues which fall within the functions and powers of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
In that regard, the Non-Aligned Movement cautions
about the danger of encroachment by the Council on
issues which clearly fall within the functions and
powers of the Assembly and its subsidiary bodies.

While noting that peacekeeping operations
procurement is being discussed by the Council, the
Non-Aligned Movement recalls once again that the
preparation and submission of the reports concerning
those issues were in fact requested by the Assembly
and that those issues are still under its active
consideration. In addition, the Non-Aligned Movement
stresses that the Charter provides the Assembly with
the competence to consider issues relating to the
financial and budgetary arrangements of peacekeeping
operations. On the basis of those arguments, the Non-
Aligned Movement cautions about the danger of the
Council's subsequently adopting an outcome on those
two issues that could prejudge or undermine the
decision or recommendation that would be made by the
Assembly in due course.

The Non-Aligned Movement underscores the
need for full respect for the functions and powers of
the principal organs, in particular the Assembly, and to
maintain the balance among them within their
respective functions and powers in accordance with the
Charter, as well as the need for the States Members of
the Organization, in respecting and upholding the
Charter, to stop any attempt to shift issues on the
agenda of the Assembly - and the Economic and
Social Council, for that matter - to the Security
Council. The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that the
Council must fully observe all provisions of the
Charter as well as all resolutions of the Assembly that
clarify its relationship with the latter organ - the chief
deliberative, policy-making and representative organ of
the United Nations - and other principal organs.

The Non-Aligned Movement remains particularly
concerned over the exercise of norm-setting and
establishing definitions by the Security Council in
areas beyond its mandate and competence. The Non-
Aligned Movement reiterates that, in accordance with
paragraph 1 of Article 13 of the Charter, the General
Assembly, which is the universal and representative
forum comprising all States Members of the
Organization, is primarily tasked with the progressive
development of international law and its codification.
The Non-Aligned Movement supports the ongoing
efforts, under the leadership of the President of the
Assembly, to strengthen the central role and authority
of the Assembly, inspired by the criteria of relevance
and efficiency.

The Non-Aligned Movement has called on the
President of the General Assembly to institute
necessary measures, within his powers and mandate, to
uphold the primacy of and full respect for the Charter
and the Assembly. Similarly, NAM. believes that the
President of the Council should do likewise. In that
connection, the Non-Aligned Movement would
strongly urge the President of the Assembly, the
President of this Council and the President of the
Economic and Social Council, consistent with General
Assembly resolution 58/126, to continue to discuss
among themselves, on a regular basis, the agenda and
programme of work of the respective principal organs
that they represent in order to establish increased
coherence and complementarity among those organs in
a mutually reinforcing manner, respectful of each
other's mandates. In addition, such a discussion could
certainly generate mutual understanding among them,
in whom members of the respective organs that they
represent have in good faith vested their trust and
confidence as regards the need to uphold the sacrosanct
provisions enshrined in the Charter relating to the
functions and powers of each principal organ.

In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement
reaffirms that close cooperation and coordination
among the principal organs of the United Nations, in
conformity with their respective functions and powers
as set out in the Charter, are indispensable in enabling
the United Nations to remain relevant and capable of
meeting the myriad current, emerging and future
threats and challenges in the fields of development and
social advancement, peace and security, human rights
and the rule of law.

