Mr. Djani (Indonesia): As this is the first appearance
of my delegation in the Security Council this year,
allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate the
delegation of Kazakhstan on assuming the presidency
this month and the Council on this open debate on
the situation in the Middle East. I would also like to
welcome the new members of the Security Council,
my brothers from Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea,
Kuwait, Peru, Poland and the Netherlands.

My delegation would also like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
comprehensive briefing.

Since the last quarterly open debate (see S/PV.8072)
of this organ, recent developments in certain parts of
the Middle East have been worrying. Some countries
are still going through war and conflict and hotspot
issues remain complicated and intertwined, with
ramifications on one another, which poses serious
challenges to international peace and security. We hope
to see peace in Syria and Yemen for the benefit of all
the citizens of the region.

Development and prosperity and peace and security
are much needed for peoples who have experienced
conflict for far too long. We hope that maintaining full
commitment to a peaceful political process will help
to continue the secure and dignified return of refugees
and internally displaced persons. We also highlight
the efforts made to bring about stability, promote trust
among the parties involved and, most importantly,
improve the humanitarian situation in the conflict zone.

Nonetheless, in spite of disturbing recent
developments in the Middle East, the international
community must remain committed to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, which has been
successful and constitutes a positive factor in regional
security. Its continued implementation will be of
crucial importance.

On the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da'esh
threat in the region, my delegation believes that terrorists
continue to evolve in their methods, organizational
ability and networks. That is why Indonesia believes
that no single country can deal with this issue by itself,
and that there must be international cooperation.

Turning to the core issue of the Middle East, tension
in the region has been heightened by the recognition by
the United States of America of Jerusalem as the capital
of Israel. The subject and significance of Jerusalem are
widely recognized among the international community
as sensitive and of central importance. That is
certainly the case in the Council and for Palestinians
and Indonesia. The legally binding status of Security
Council resolutions on Jerusalem under the Charter
of the United Nations is unquestionable. Indeed, in
resolution 2334 (2016), adopted just over one year ago,
the Council expresses grave concern about continuing
Israeli settlement activities in Jerusalem, warning that
theyjeopardize the viability of the two-State solution.

For many years, members of the international
community have noted that the growing intensity of
occupation-related activities, such as separation wall,
the blockade of Gaza, the violence of the Israel Defense
Forces and new settlements, indicate that Israel is
striving for a one-State solution while completely
disregarding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. As a result, an act of recognition of Israel's
ownership of Jerusalem is de facto support for the
illegal activities and violations being committed by that
country, and encourages further similar action.

In the search for peace in the Middle East, the
recognition of the special place of Jerusalem in the
peace process has governed the approach of nations
for several decades. As a result, Indonesia expects
all countries to respect the status of Jerusalem and
avoid pronouncements and actions that are capable
of stimulating tensions within the region and in
many other parts of the world, including Indonesia.
We again urge States not to take provocative actions
or to make pronouncements contrary to the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
regarding Jerusalem, as they create more problems than
they resolve.

To that end, my delegation expresses its regret
about the failure of the Council last month (see S/PV.8139) to adopt draft resolution S/2017/1060.
Indonesia appreciates the efforts of the 14 members of
the Council that supported the draft resolution, thereby
demonstrating their commitment to seeking a solution.
The votes of those 14 members and General Assembly
resolution 72/160, which followed, clearly showed the
international consensus on the status of the holy city
and their rejection of the decision. My delegation takes
this opportunity to once again express its appreciation
to those Member States that still uphold and respect
the inviolability of Security Council resolutions and
international law.

As Indonesia has emphasized on many occasions
in previous open debates, Palestine is the litmus test for
the Council. Failure to respond in this case would put
the Council's credibility in grave danger andjeopardize
the trust of the general membership of the Organization.
If we undermine or permit the undermining of
resolutions on Palestine, what stance will the Council
and Members of the United Nations take should there
be similar violations?

In our view, it is also distressing that this latest
disruption to the status quo occurred soon after the
internal reconciliation reached by the Palestinians.
If we want to see peace in Palestine, reconciliation
is and has always been a crucial factor, and should
be taken advantage of. This provocative action is
therefore condemnable, as it may jeopardize internal
reconciliation. We must be careful that, along with
the situation in Gaza, such action is not exploited
by extremists to spread their false ideologies. We
are also concerned about the cutting of financing
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which is of utmost
importance and among the most successful programmes
of the Organization.

Finally, my delegation reiterates its call for the
intensification of international and regional efforts to
achieve ajust and lasting peace that is based on United
Nations resolutions, the Quartet road map, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, so as to end
the Israeli occupation that has persisted since 1967.
We thank the State of Palestine for its good faith in
dealing with the situation, as it truly demonstrates that
Palestine is a peace-loving State despite being faced
with the difficult situation of defending its land and, of
course, its dignity.

