Mr. Nl'lfiez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
It is a great pleasure to see you, Madame President,
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council. I
also congratulate you on the initiative of your
Government to promote this open debate of the
Council on such a relevant and topical issue.

As expressly indicated in the note (S/2011/50)
sent by Her Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil, to all
Member States on 2 February, the provisions of the
Organization's Charter are clear and it is
unquestionably a fact that the responsibilities of the
Security Council lie in, and are limited to, the field of
international peace and security.
It is not the purpose of this debate - nor would
Cuba support it - for the Security Council to deal
with economic and social development issues, which
are the remit of other principal organs of the United
Nations. However, it is important to highlight the
economic and social difficulties that are the root causes
of many conflicts that, regrettably, seem to be either
ignored or disregarded.

In the last two years of the 1980s, when the
bipolar world of international relations that had existed
for many years was about to come to an end, the
Security Council approved five new peacekeeping
operations. However, it is important to recall that the
Council had only established 13 such operations in all
of the preceding 40 years.

That was the trend in the work of the Security
Council as we left behind the bipolar world in order to
enter a new period that we thought would be
characterized by a multipolar approach to international
relations in which all countries, large and small, would
enjoy equal opportunity and have the same say in the
decision-making process. The reality, however, proved
to be otherwise. We all became involved in the current
unipolar global order.

In the 1990s, at the request of the Security
Council, the then Secretary-General introduced his
well-known report entitled "An Agenda for Peace"
(S/24111), which was much discussed at the time, as it
contained proposals and approaches considered by
many to be harmful to the sovereignty of States.
Nevertheless, that document was followed almost to
the letter, and the total budget for peacekeeping
operations now stands at nearly $7.82 billion - that is,
1.35 times the regular budget of the United Nations.

However, "An Agenda for Development"
(A/48/935), which the same Secretary-General
submitted shortly afterwards at the request of the
General Assembly, did not receive the same support,
nor was it defended with the same enthusiasm. On the
contrary, the document has been neglected.

The word "underdevelopment" has virtually
disappeared from the United Nations vocabulary, and
other principal organs that have responsibility for
economic and social development issues, such as the
Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly itself, have seen how the Security Council
has usurped many of their functions, with disastrous
results. It is enough to point out that the United
Nations budget devotes only little more than
$965 million to activities in the economic and social
fields.
That is so, even though more than 1 billion
people worldwide are hungry. Nearly 900 million
cannot read or write, 120 million live in extreme
poverty, and 3 billion suffer water shortages. Among
children, 150 million have a low birth weight,
325 million do not go to school, and every day in
underdeveloped countries 33,000 die from curable
diseases. Food prices significantly rise, and foreign
debt continues to deepen the structural crisis of the
economies of underdeveloped countries.

It is an offence to human sensitivity to know that
infant mortality in poor countries is 12 times higher
than in rich countries. It is simply the consequence of
the unjust international economic order that has been
imposed on us and which must be urgently replaced by
a more just and equitable new international economic
order.

For Third World countries, the neoliberal model
imposed since the late 1980s and early 1990s only
brought about apparent growth, reflected in
macroeconomic figures on paper. However, the
difference between the rich and the poor significantly
grew, just as the vulnerability of States and the
concentration of wealth and privileges increased.
While four decades ago, the first list of least developed
countries included 24 States, today it includes
50 States. Nevertheless, if the commitment undertaken
40 years ago to allocate 0.7 per cent of the gross
domestic product of developed countries to official
development assistance were fulfilled, that assistance
would increase to more than $160 billion - that is,
more than twice its current amount.

The United Nations has put particular emphasis
on its efforts in pursuit of political stability, sometimes
through questionable means that undermine the
principles of the sovereign equality of States and non-
interference in their internal affairs, which are crucial
to the proper functioning of the Organization.
However, it has overlooked the fact that to achieve
political stability, economic and social development
needs must be met.

In that context, it is significant that currently,
world military expenditures exceed the astronomical
figure of $1.4 trillion, which is higher than what was
spent during the so-called cold war era, except that in
today's unipolar world, only one country is responsible
for almost 50 per cent of the expenditure.

That astronomical figure is precisely what should
be the source of resources for development, because
what is the point of us talking about peace and security
for the hundreds of millions of hungry and sick people
in the underdeveloped and marginalized countries of
the South? What sense can that have for them when
their lives are limited to the daily struggle for mere
survival?

There is a close link between disarmament and
development, and peace cannot be achieved without
resources for development. As Fidel Castro pointed out
in his message to the eleventh United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, held in the city
of $510 Paulo in 2004 - in your friendly country,
Madame President - for the first time in history, man
has produced the technical capacity for his complete
self-destruction but, on the other hand, has not been
able to create minimum guarantees for the security and
integrity of all countries equally.

Nuclear weapons are a very serious unresolved
issue. Their possible use would have unimaginable
consequences. The experiences of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki are today a minimum indication of what
could happen, given the infinitely superior destructive
potential of contemporary nuclear weapons. The only
guarantee that nuclear weapons will not be used by
States, or by anyone, would be their destruction, along
with the generation of recently developed conventional
arms that are almost as deadly. The Non-Aligned
Movement proposed a plan to eliminate and ban
nuclear weapons by no later than 2025. Cuba will
redouble its efforts to achieve it.

Barely five months ago, in the General Assembly,
we analysed the state of implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals. Regrettably, it had to
be recognized that only one third of them had been
achieved. With little more than half of what the major
Powers currently allocate to military expenditures, the
Millennium Development Goals could be met and
international peace and security strengthened.

Hence the importance of today's Security Council
debate, which must contribute to creating awareness of
that reality. Economic and social development must be
at the centre of United Nations priorities and cannot
continue to be neglected. This Organization must
develop urgent measures that redress the inequalities
that persist in international economic relations. To that
end, there is a need for complete and structural reform
of the global financial and economic architecture.
Speeches and promises are not enough. Political will is
needed.

