Mr. Galvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, Madam, I should like to congratulate your
country on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September, and also
to thank you for having convened this open debate on
the situation in Haiti. Chile associates itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Uruguay on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti and
reiterates its commitment to the process of stabilization
and peacebuilding in that country.

From the start of the crisis in February 2004,
Chile joined the efforts of the international community
to continue supporting that sister Caribbean nation, as
part of the Multinational Interim Force in Haiti in an
early stage, and later with an active presence in the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Likewise, it has contributed to Haiti's
development through bilateral cooperation, supporting
the generation of national capacities in those less
developed areas where Chile is strong.

This year marks five years of MINUSTAH's
presence in that Caribbean nation. In that regard, we
would like in particular to underscore Latin America's
ongoing commitment to the future of Haiti. The
countries of the region have sought to harmonize
consistent and sustainable strategies to optimize our
support both in the peacekeeping mission and in
training and cooperation programmes with the Haitian
National Police.

We are pleased to see that the security situation in
Haiti is stable, and we welcome MINUSTAH's efforts

in that regard. However, the fragility of the
achievements in that field concerns us, principally
owing to how little progress has been made on social
and economic development. We believe that the link
between security and development is fundamental to
any effort to achieve sustainable peace.

Chile supports and welcomes the appointment of
former President William Clinton as United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti. He will help the Government
and the people of Haiti in their endeavours to create
jobs, improve infrastructure, provide basic services,
enhance disaster readiness and recovery, ensure private
sector investment and attain increased international
support.

We would like to thank former President Clinton
for his briefing at this debate. We are optimistic about
his mission's prospects for success. Given that
peacebuilding efforts require high levels of
coordination between all stakeholders, we believe it
would be worthwhile to consider the participation of
experts from Latin America and the Caribbean,
alongside those from Haiti itself, as part of the Special
Envoy's technical teams.

We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative Hedi Annabi on behalf of
Haiti. We also appreciate the presence and statement of
Her Excellency Mrs. Michele Duvivier Pierre-Louis,
Prime Minister of Haiti.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate Chile's
readiness to continue to cooperate with Haitian
authorities and the international community in the
search for lasting peace in Haiti, while fully observing
and promoting human rights, strengthening the rule of
law and democracy and making real progress in raising
the level of development of its people.

