Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank the Special Envoy, Mr. Geir Pedersen, for his
comprehensive and insightful briefing. I would like to
assure him once again that he has our full support. We
wish him every success in his work.

Letmestartbywelcomingtheannouncementmadeby
the Secretary-General on 23 September on the agreement
on the formation of the Constitutional Committee.
Poland has underlined on many occasions that any
sustainable solution to the conflict requires a genuine
political transition, as outlined in resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) negotiated by the Syrian parties within the
United Nations-led Geneva process. We therefore look
forward to the inaugural meeting of the Committee at
the earliest possible opportunity. That is a definite step
forward and one that is certainly full of potential.

Unfortunately, the escalation of the conflict in
Idlib persists. It is therefore of paramount importance
to ensure positive developments on the ground, in
particular a cessation of hostilities, in parallel with the
work of the Constitutional Committee.

All parties to the conflict need to engage in
confidence-building measures. In that context, let me
stress again the importance of detainees, including
abductees and missing persons in Syria. Eight years
into the war have brought unspeakable suffering to the
once peaceful country. Thousands of people remain
in arbitrary detention, where many are subject to
various forms of ill-treatment, including torture and
rape. At the same time, thousands remain missing,
with their relatives deprived of any information on
their fate. We call for their release, particularly for the
release of children, women and the elderly. Progress in
that area would help to raise the level of confidence
between the parties and greatly contribute to the efforts
aimed at reaching a lasting peace in Syria. That is
one of the most important, if not the most important,
confidence-building measure between parties to
the conflict.

We also underscore the need to ensure humanitarian
access and full respect for international humanitarian
law, as reiterated by the Council in presidential statement
S/PRST/20l9/8, adopted in August on the occasion of
the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions.
Only by ensuring those measures will we be able to
generate the positive atmosphere necessary for the
success of negotiations between the Syrian parties.
In conclusion, I want to recall Poland's position,
as well as the stand of the European Union, on
reconstruction. We will be ready to assist in the
reconstruction of Syria only once a comprehensive,
genuine and inclusive political transition, within the
framework of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
process, is firmly under way.

We fully support the safe return of Syrian refugees
who fled their homes. We believe that a durable solution
should ensure the security of the sustainable, dignified
and voluntary return of Syrians to their country of
origin, in accordance with international law and the
principle of non-refoulement.

Since it is the last meeting of the Security
Council under your presidency, Mr. President, I would
like to congratulate you and the entire team of the
Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation for your
professionalism and the successful way in which the
work of the Security Council was conducted during the
month of September.

