Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Assistant-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Bintou Keita, for
her informative briefing. I also would welcome the
presence at this table of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali, Her Excellency
Ms. Kamissa Camara. Her participation in this meeting
is an important gesture, and we appreciate it.

The implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali must remain the top
priority. It is more than ever our guiding compass.
Resolution 2423 (2018) establishes a clear framework
for this by defining a specific list of measures whose
implementation is expected no later than six months
after the inauguration of the Malian President. That
deadline will fall on 4 March, which is only a few
weeks away. We are all involved in that task, so the
time to act is now.

France welcomes the first concrete progress
that has been made in recent weeks in implementing
the measures identified in resolution 2423 (2018).
I am thinking in particular of the establishment of
new interim authorities; the launch of an accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
for over 1,400 combatants; the holding of a second
high-level workshop towards the establishment of a
reconstituted army, special anti-terrorist units and
territorial police; and the establishment ofa sustainable
development fund to ensure the development of the
northern part of the country. I am also referring to
the establishment of a weekly consultation framework
among the Malian parties, which illustrates the
restoring of a climate of trust and would not have
been possible only a few months ago. Lastly, I am
thinking of the establishment of a working group on
the involvement of women in the peace process, which
demonstrates the increased attention to that important
objective. Those various developments are all signals
that, in our view, reflect a sincere political will to step
up the pace of implementing the agreement. There is
therefore a positive momentum. It is now important to
build on it quickly enough for Mali to be ready for the
March deadline.

However, let us make no mistake. There is still much
progress to be made in order to meet the expectations
established by the Security Council, and there is very
little time left. It is therefore our responsibility to
continue to support the implementation of the agreement
by mobilizing all the tools available to the international
community to encourage the parties to move forward.
That is precisely the purpose of the sanctions adopted
by the Council on 20 December last year. In accordance
with the provisions of the agreement, they seek to show
that there is a specific price to be paid by those who
obstruct the peace process on the ground, in particular
through their links with terrorist groups or trafficking
activities. Such actions have serious consequences
whether in the form of a travel ban or, more broadly,
complete exclusion from the peace process. France has
therefore decided, in coordination with several of its
partners, to suspend all contact with the listed persons
until the measures taken against them are lifted, for
which precise criteria have already been defined. We
are also ready to propose the adoption of new listings
in due course if the Council's expectations are not met.

The continuing deterioration of the situation in the
centre of the country is a source of growing concern.
The almost daily attacks by terrorist groups, as well
as the dangerous increase in intercommunal tensions,
pose a serious threat to the civilian population and the
stability of the region. Restoring a State presence and
authority in that area, in all its forms, is at the heart
of the response to the current crisis. We welcome the
recent visits by President Keita and the Prime Minister
to the region and their hard work in that regard. It is
essential that such efforts continue and increase.
It is also crucial that the international community
provide all necessary support to the Malian Government
in its integrated strategy to regain control of the
centre. In particular, we expect the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) to continue to support the efforts
undertaken within its means and in the context of its
mandate. In that regard, we believe that it is necessary
in the coming weeks to reflect on the appropriate
balance between the resources available to the Mission,
its mandate and the needs that exist in the central part
of Mali.

Finally, France would like to emphasize the fact that
the stabilization of Mali and the region can be achieved
only through the complementary and coordinated
action of the various security forces on the ground,
which all share the same objective of supporting the
implementation of the agreement. The support provided
by Operation Barkhane to MINUSMA during the attack
on the Ber camp, the cooperation among the various
security forces in combating improvised explosive
devices and protecting access and, on another level,
the operational and logistical support regularly shared
among the various actors illustrate the great importance
of that partnership approach. Resolution 2423 (2018)
sent a clear message in that regard: every entity must
play its individual role within the limits of its mandate,
but all must coordinate and support one other on the
ground in the prevailing difficult circumstances. Let us
not forget that the enemies of peace have not waited for
us to start cooperating among themselves.

As we collectively expressed in the adoption of
resolution 2423 (2018), the urgency today is to fully
implement the peace agreement. The six-month period
for implementing the priority measures identified by
the Council will very soon come to an end. Everyone in
Mali must be aware of that and should fully mobilize in
order to succeed. France will issue a press statement to
that effect at the end of this meeting.

