Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): First, I join others in
thanking Mr. Guehenno for his briefing. I also take this
opportunity to welcome Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta
in our midst.

The mandate of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) is due to expire in
three months. And, as the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2004/117) states, formidable challenges
remain as this mandate draws to a close. While we
understand that Timor-Leste will continue to receive
assistance and support from a variety of international
sources, we believe that there will be a need for a
continued United Nations presence beyond May 2004.

As an Asian country, Pakistan has strong
affiliations with the region. As a troop contributor to
both the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) and UNMISET, we regard
ourselves as a stakeholder in the peace and the stability
of Timor-Leste. Our approach to the future of the
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste is guided by
the following principles.

First, no peacekeeping operation should be
terminated or withdrawn without completing the task
assigned to it. As the Ambassador of Algeria has said,
the United Nations must not prematurely disengage
itself from Timor-Leste.

Secondly, while national security, both internal
and external, is the responsibility of every sovereign
State, in post-conflict situations such as that in Timor-
Leste, there is still a need for a continuing, even if
symbolic, United Nations presence to provide a sense
of security to the people and a deterrence against those
who wish to undermine the country's peace and
stability.

Thirdly, we welcome the improvement of
relations between Indonesia and Timor-Leste, and we
think that it is a prerequisite for the success of the
political process in the region. The confidence-building
tasks begun by UNMISET still need to be consolidated.

Fourthly, the safety and security of peacekeepers,
including unarmed military and civilian personnel, is
paramount in any peacekeeping operation. It is our
experience in United Nations peacekeeping missions
that formed military units are best equipped to carry
out that task.

Fifthly, the neutrality and impartiality of United
Nations personnel is paramount and must not be
compromised in any way. At no point can United
Nations peacekeepers, for any reason, be placed even
indirectly at the disposal of a sovereign Government.

Based on the above principles, Pakistan will
support the extension of UNMISET with the reduced
size and the modified mandate proposed by the
Secretary-General. We would also support the
continuation of a United Nations military presence as a
token of our collective commitment to peace and
stability in Timor-Leste for its deterrent value against
any threat, as well as for the protection of remaining
UNMISET personnel.

Pakistan looks forward to working with other
Council members to reach an early agreement on
UNMISET's future composition and mandate.

