Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your leadership and the work you
have done as President of the Council during the month
of January. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing this morning on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

The regular review of the issue of the Middle East
requires us to consider the other issues that concern the
region. That is even more true in the light of the ongoing
challenges that threaten to destabilize it. In that light,
diplomacy and dialogue appear to be the best way to
achieve a long-term solution in each of the conflicts in
the Middle East. Of course, each situation has unique
features that preclude the use of identical formulas in
all situations. In accordance with those ideas, I will
briefly refer to two of the conflicts that we consider to
be of particular importance: the conflict in Syria and
the peace process in the Middle East.

With regard to the conflict in Syria, Guatemala
believes that the first step to move forward any dialogue
should be the cessation of violence, and in the Syrian
conflict that premise is indisputable. For almost three
years, that conflict has destroyed a people, all sense of
the value of human life, and respect for human rights,
all of which underscores the fact that armed struggle
cannot be an option. If what both parties seek is the
welfare of their people - as they have claimed on
several occasions - they must also be willing to engage
in a political dialogue and seek a permanent solution
to their differences, including the establishment of a
transition Government. That is not easy, but there is
no alternative. The international community should
support that commitment.

The delayed call for an international conference
on Syria - which has been announced for
22 January - opens the door for dialogue. In order
to seize that opportunity, however, it is necessary for
both the Government and opposition groups, as well
as other States that have been invited, to participate
constructively. They must see it for what it is - the only
way to end the violence. It is encouraging that both the
Government and the opposition groups have sent signals
that the effects of armed conflict may be mitigated,
including the possibility of opening humanitarian
access to conflict-affected areas. However, even more
important is the effective and responsible participation
of those who can stop the armed struggle.

With regard to the peace process in the Middle East,
recent events make us question the possible outcome.
The rejection of formal negotiations, the refusal to
change traditional positions and, in general, the taking
of unilateral decisions that undermine any progress
suggest that there is little interest in or intention to
reach a solution of two States living in peace under safe
borders. Nevertheless, from our perspective it remains
the only viable option for peace and security.

We are aware of the enormous challenges to
both parties in that process, both nationally and
internationally. We therefore hope that in the remaining
time, the parties can work positively to meet the
established deadlines. We believe that the involvement
of the international community, especially the Quartet
and regional actors, is essential throughout the process.
Similarly, we must call on both parties to avoid all acts
that couldjeopardize the ongoing discussions, including
the expansion of settlements. We hope that the parties
can demonstrate their maturity and commitment to the
principles that unite us, and minimize all the differences
that hinder progress towards a peaceful solution.

In conclusion, in order to reconcile conflicting
positions it is necessary to maintain a constructive
dialogue. That is the only way to avoid greater evils
which, if continued, will eventually undermine the
stability of the entire Middle East.

