Mr. Sumi (Japan): I would like to congratulate
you, Madame President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and to commend the
initiative of Brazil in organizing the present debate.

Japan shares Brazil's interest in focusing on the
interdependence between security and development. It
is our responsibility, as members of the international
community, to establish a system to ensure a seamless
11-23198
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and
development without delay.

Japan recently assumed the chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission's Working Group on
Lessons Learned and has initiated consultations on this
year's work plan. Japan will strive, in cooperation with
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, to ensure
concrete outcomes and pursue clearly defined follow-
up in the Group's work. Through the agenda that we
wish to take up in the Working Group, Japan intends to
respond to some of the questions raised by the Council
President today, including the issue of strengthening
the relationship between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council.

Today, Japan would like to offer some practical
proposals for making progress in three areas.

The first is enhancing coordination. We have
been consistently emphasizing the importance of
ensuring coordination, complementarities and
coherence among diverse actors, such as the entities of
the United Nations system and international financial
institutions. We are happy to hear that integrated
strategic planning is progressing, but more work is
required throughout the United Nations system to
ensure a clear division of labour and allocation of
resources to focused priorities.

To that end, there should be strong leadership on
the ground. The reports of the Secretary-General
should include more extensive analysis of the status of
the integration process and the socio-economic
elements that affect security. That would provide
greater guidance as to how we can refocus our efforts
on fewer priorities and where more resources and
attention need to be invested. Japan intends to take up
the issue in the Working Group on Lessons Learned so
that the Peacebuilding Commission can make a greater
contribution in that area.

Secondly, the peacebuilding tasks carried out by
peacekeepers are often described in three words:
"articulate, enable and implement". Peacekeepers
cannot undertake all peacebuilding tasks. Efforts should
first be made to enable others to implement them.

However, some peacebuilding tasks must be
directly implemented by peacekeepers. At present,
there is insufficient capacity worldwide for typical
peacebuilding mandates of peacekeepers, such as
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
3
security sector reform and establishment of the rule of
law. It is urgent that we accelerate our efforts, on the
basis of the findings of the forthcoming review of
international civilian capacities, to institute a system
for fostering and deploying civilian capacities to that
end.

Furthermore, I would like to underscore the
importance of generating youth employment and
avoiding a vicious circle in which young people
lacking employment resort to arms and conflict. The
peace dividend must include security and jobs. There
are many ways in which peacekeeping missions could
have a positive impact on the local economy through
strengthened collaboration with development actors.
Quick-impact projects and efforts to increase local
procurement of goods and services are examples of
areas in which such cooperation could be pursued. The
missions and the development community should also
develop national staff policies so as to avoid a drain of
talented people away from the local labour market and
to take advantage of opportunities for local institution-
building.

To avoid a relapse into resorting to arms, I would
further point out that there may be cases in which we
could benefit from enhancing cooperation between
peacekeeping missions and the panels of experts that
monitor sanctions. For instance, a peacekeeping
mission could be mandated to monitor sanctions in
cooperation with a given panel of experts.

The third area concerns women's empowerment.
Women are the key to development and security. The
international community has just commemorated the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and
established UN Women. The international community
should make a concerted effort to maximize the current
political momentum so as to bring more attention to the
role of women.

In that regard, Japan welcomes the
recommendations put forward in the recently released
impact study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) on women, peace and security in peacekeeping.
One practical way in which we can make a difference
is to increase the number of female military and police
officers joining peacekeeping missions.

In conclusion, Madame President, I would like to
reiterate Japan's standing commitment to progress in
the peacekeeping and peacebuilding areas and our
readiness to work with the international community

towards the common goal of ensuring a smooth
transition to sustainable peace, security and
development.

