Ms. Bavdaz Kuret (Slovenia): I would like to thank
the Kingdom of the Netherlands for bringing this issue
to the forefront of discussion in the Security Council.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer the European Union and the
statement made on behalf of the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect.

I wish to bring to the Council's attention the
following national views.

Peacekeeping operations have become the most
visible activity of the United Nations over the past
few decades. The global security environment is
ever changing and challenges to it are emerging and
evolving. Such challenges demand new and innovative
approaches and that must be reflected in appropriate
adjustments within international operations and
missions. They are becoming increasingly dynamic,
their mandates are growing in diversity and their
individual tasks are intertwined.

The following principles and values are the basis
of Slovenia's participation in international operations
and missions: strengthening international security,
democracy, the rule of law, respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms and the protection of
particularly vulnerable groups.

In 2017, Slovenia marked the twentieth anniversary
of the deployment of its first contingent of Slovenian
military and police officers to international operations
and missions and the tenth anniversary of the deployment
of civilian functional experts. In those years, more
than 13,500 uniformed and civilian personnel served
in United Nations and other peace support operations
and, throughout that period, Slovenia has continued to
upgrade and enhance its participation in various ways,
such as by specializing in specific tasks and acting in
a more gender-balanced manner. In our view, collective
action to improve United Nations peacekeeping
operations should focus in particular on the following
issues.

First, efforts to improve the security of peacekeepers,
as well as civilians, are our collective responsibility.
We fully agree with the recommendations contained in
the report of Lieutenant General Santos Cruz and we
support the Secretary-General's initiative for immediate
action to address weaknesses and systemic gaps. Close
cooperation among all relevant stakeholders, such as
countries contributing troops and police, the Security
Council, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, key financial contributors and providers
of training and equipment, regional partners and host
countries, is crucial in that regard.
Secondly, we strongly believe that every
peacekeeping mission must be supported by properly
trained, well-equipped and motivated troops. Countries
that contribute troops and police themselves must invest
more in both training and equipment. The analytical
and intelligence skills required to identify threats as
they emerge should also be improved.

Thirdly, we would also stress the importance of
integrating the gender perspective into all phases of
peacekeeping. There is a need to increase the number
of women in international operations and missions
and deployed personnel must receive the best possible
training on women and peace and security issues.

Fourthly, paying due attention to the code of
conduct is another important aspect. The fundamental
role of international operations and missions is to
contribute to peace and security and protect the most
vulnerable on the ground. We would therefore like to
reiterate our support for two important initiatives: first,
the prevention of, and response to, sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations operations, including the
Circle of Leadership, and secondly, the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.

Lastly, Slovenia will continue to participate in
activities led by the United Nations and other relevant
international organizations in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations to
establish and maintain international peace and security.
By committing to solidarity and peace, Slovenia would
like to continue to endeavour to be a reliable member of
the international community.

