Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): You hail,
Sir, from a country with a long and outstanding record
of contribution to United Nations peacekeeping and
peace-building activities. It is therefore no surprise to
my delegation that your presidency saw fit to arrange a
public meeting on a theme of such importance.

Let me also thank you for the background paper
prepared by your delegation on the theme "No exit
without strategy". This debate comes at a time when
we in the United Nations are deliberating on the report
of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations. The
Brahimi report, among others, though not explicitly,
addresses aspects of the theme we are discussing today.
The paper you have distributed as background to
today's discussion not only deals with real situations
by way of drawing conclusions from case studies, but,
in a very courageous manner, actually touches upon
core issues which the Security Council, either through
individual members or collectively as an organ of the
United Nations, needs to consider. It is some of these
issues that my delegation will seek to address briefly.

At the outset, I wish to emphasize that the
Security Council's primary responsibility to maintain
international peace and security is indispensable. An
exit with a strategy is not tantamount to an easy way
out, nor should it be an abdication of the Council's
primary responsibility. We View the objective of this
theme as a way of establishing a continuum of
peacekeeping to peace-building - two sides of the
same coin. We are therefore convinced that this theme
is not about getting out, but about getting it right.
Post-cold-war United Nations peacekeeping is
characterized by successes and failures on the part of
the United Nations. In some instances, the United
Nations has either withdrawn prematurely or reduced
its presence, only to have the situation revert to
violence and descend into subsequent human tragedy.
Thus, in the view of my delegation, the imbalanced
handling and management of present conflicts is indeed
a concern. Some conflicts are left to drag on, breaking
down state institutions, destroying physical
infrastructure and resulting in population
displacements, while other conflict situations are
addressed rapidly and with massive resources. The case
studies provided enable us to draw lessons from our
past undertakings.

In our view, it is the Charter obligation of
collective security, not national interests, that should
dictate and guide United Nations peacekeeping
operation mandates. It has been argued that, in setting
out mandates for peacekeeping, we must plan for
worst-case scenarios, and we agree. In other words,
this is a recognition of inherent difficulties in peace
operations. We also concur, therefore, that when
appropriate resources accompany every peacekeeping
operation, irrespective of its geographical location,
then the eventual difficulties are minimized and the
foundation, from peacekeeping to peace-building, is
assured.

Major conflicts today, especially in Africa, are
economically driven. Conflict diamonds and other
natural resources are cases in point. What is needed,
therefore, is adherence by the international community
to the diamond embargoes in place with regard to
Sierra Leone and Angola, to cite just two examples.
Furthermore, the awaited report by the Secretary-
General on the illegal exploitation of the resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be an added
progressive step.

I mentioned at the beginning of my statement that
today's discussions should not lay ground for the
selective termination of mandates and the abandonment
of missions because of a lack of progress, fatigue or
even fear. In the View of my delegation, the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) should continue. The
problems being experienced with regard to MONUC's
full deployment can be overcome if the Security
Council examines them in the context of its Charter
responsibility and not in terms of individual Council
members' national interests. Objectivity, and not
selectivity, is a real challenge which the Security
Council has to overcome, especially in terms of
conflict situations in Africa.

With regard to case studies, in the case study of
Mozambique, for example - whose findings my
delegation fully agrees with - it should be emphasized
that, in addition to what is entailed in the background
paper which you, Mr. President, made available to us,
the regional context of the conflict situation at the time
needed to be taken into account. In 1992, there were
countries surrounding Mozambique which themselves
were fairly politically stable. The same cannot be said
today about the Democratic Republic of the Congo or
even Sierra Leone. It therefore follows that a
successful United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone or
MONUC also depends on peace and stability in the
neighbouring countries of Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In the case of Namibia, my country, while there
was political will among the parties, the events of 1
April 1989 could have derailed the implementation of
Security Council resolution 435 (1978). It was a fatal
and dangerous situation, but the Security Council took
the right decision by deploying the United Nations
Transition Assistance Group fully. That deployment
was crucial, for it meant either independence for
Namibia or the continuation of apartheid rule.

The poorest countries cannot emerge from
conflict without generous aid from the international
community, especially from donor countries, in laying
the foundations for durable peace and recovery and in
avoiding a relapse into conflict.

Past experience has shown that peace-building is
an important, integral part of peace operations. It is
essential that institution-building be a part of peace-
building operations. Each peacekeeping operation or
mandate should take into account the level of socio-
economic development of the country in question.

Recent experience has shown also that Security
Council missions to conflict areas have enabled
Council members to see first-hand the nature and the
extent of problems. We strongly recommend that the
Security Council continue to carry out such Visits to
assess the situation on the ground and to establish
whether conditions are ripe for peacekeeping and
peace-building.

United Nations peacekeeping has had some
failures and many successes. It is on those successes
that we must build.

