Ms. Wilson (Australia): I would also like to
thank Special Representative Nicholas Haysom for his
briefing and to acknowledge Permanent Representative
Zahir Tanin's continuing contribution.

After nine months in office, the National Unity
Government has committed to an ambitious reform
programme. Its release of the 100-day plans for
ministries has shown the global community and the
Afghan people the scope of the reform agenda. Australia
congratulates Afghanistan and its Government on
that initiative and urges them to continue to display
determination in carrying out reforms. Since taking over
responsibility for providing security for Afghanistan,
we note that the Afghan national defence and security
forces have demonstrated profound courage, resilience
and commitment to the protection of their country
and people. But while they are performing strongly
against a persistent insurgency, we can also expect the
Taliban to continue its campaign of fear. Along with
others before us, we condemn today's attack on the
Parliament in Kabul and reaffirm our strong support
for Afghanistan's legitimate institutions. It is vital that
the national forces continue to build their capabilities,
particularly in provincial areas, and Australia is
providing $300 million between 2015 and 2017 towards
that aim.

Among other things, Afghanistan's economy and
its Government's finances remain key concerns for
Australia. Economic sustainability is key to achieving
self-reliance, and we therefore welcome the Afghan
Government's focus on improving revenue generation,
rationalizing spending and defeating corruption, which
must be a major priority. Everything that can be done
in that area will not only benefit the Afghan economy,
it will also build trust between the Afghan people and
the Government.

We see 2015 as the start of a critical decade for
Afghan women and girls. We support the National Unity
Government's efforts to protect and build on the gains of
the past 14 years, which include the enrolment of more
than 3 million girls in school and women's increased
participation in Afghan political life. Australia also
welcomes the recent appointment of four women to
ministerial roles and the nomination of the first-ever
woman to the Supreme Court. We urge President Ghani
Ahmadzai and Chief Executive Abdullah to continue to
draw women into political life, which will help not only
Afghanistan's women and girls but also the economy
and society as a whole.

As others have noted, achieving apolitical settlement
with the Taliban will be necessary if Afghanistan and
the region are to find lasting peace. The National Unity
Government has made good progress in strengthening
its regional relationships, which is a critical first step.
We urge Afghanistan and its partners to continue to
approach reconciliation with a sense of purpose and
pragmatism and to involve Afghan women in pivotal
discussions on Afghanistan's future.

A sustainable future for Afghanistan must have
strong and sustainable democratic foundations. We
continue to urge the Afghan Government to prioritize
electoral reform so as to ensure that future elections
provide a sound foundation that can enable democracy
to mature.

Australia looks forward to continuing its work with
the Afghan Government, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and our international partners
in order to help the people of Afghanistan deal with
the challenges they face in the areas of security, the
economy, governance, human rights and human
development.

