Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Rassoul, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, for being here today and honouring us
with his presence. We are grateful for his remarks. I
also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his briefing and
his continuing extraordinary service. I hope he will
also convey to the staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) the
enduring gratitude of the United States for the
important work they do every day throughout
Afghanistan, under considerable hardship, for the
benefit of the Afghan people. We are also grateful for
the important contributions of Deputy Special
Representative Martin Kobler, who is on his way to
Iraq to take up the post of Special Representative there.

This morning my remarks will focus on security,
upcoming events that frame the 2014 transition, and
the New Silk Road initiative. As we know, the United
States Embassy compound in Kabul was attacked
earlier this month. The Afghan National Security
Forces have responsibility for Kabul, and they
responded ably. They ended the assault on the
Embassy; there was minimal damage to Embassy
property and the compound, and no United States
personnel were killed. However, the insurgent attack
killed five Afghan National Police and 11 other
Afghans, including children.
While the security situation in Afghanistan
continues to present challenges, notably including the
insurgents' continued targeting of fellow Afghans, our
goal remains to gradually shift to a supporting role as

the Afghan National Security Forces continue to
develop their capabilities. The deployment of
additional United States military service members,
together with additional troops committed by our allies
and partners, has helped stabilize more of the country
and shifted the momentum away from the insurgency.

Together we have made significant progress. The
tragic assassination of Afghanistan's former President
and Chairman of the Afghan High Peace Council,
Mr. Rabbani, has only strengthened our collective
resolve. We will continue to work in support of the
Afghan Government and people to end the insurgency,
pursue justice against those who fund, direct and carry
out the violence, and realize a peaceful future for all
Afghans. President Obama has been clear that the
strong United States relationship with Afghanistan will
extend well beyond 2014. We continue to make
progress on our strategic partnership document, which
outlines our long-term cooperation during the
transition period and beyond. As President Obama and
President Karzai reaffirmed in their meeting last week,
we will have a strategic partnership between our
nations that provides a long-term framework for
bilateral cooperation on security, economic and social
development, and institution-building.

As Afghanistan moves towards the 2014
transition, we know that the Government alone cannot
grow Afghanistan's economy, so we must all continue
to work to create an environment that attracts private-
sector investment. Last week, Foreign Minister
Rassoul, the German Foreign Minister, Mr. Guido
Westerwelle, and Secretary of State Clinton met with
27 of Afghanistan's neighbours and partners to advance
their shared vision of a New Silk Road. The New Silk
Road is an Afghan-led venture, a rallying point for
securing Afghan, regional and international
commitments to support Afghanistan's transition and
develop a sustainable Afghan economy that will benefit
the whole region. The creation of a New Silk Road will
help Afghanistan and its neighbours maximize the
value of their natural resources, build human capacity,
create jobs, generate revenue to pay for needed
services and capitalize on the region's economic
potential. The New Silk Road will also promote
women entrepreneurs, since we know that sustained
and successful development depends on women
becoming equal partners. The international community
has an important role to play in supporting Afghanistan
and the region's efforts to make this vision a reality.
The New Silk Road initiative will reinforce the search
for diplomatic solutions to ending the war in
Afghanistan.

The year 2011 remains a pivotal one. The
international Conference on Afghanistan to be held in
Bonn at the end of the year will be a key opportunity
for the Government of Afghanistan and its neighbours,
as well as the international community, to strengthen
economic cooperation in the region. This will be
complemented by regional efforts to strengthen mutual
confidence and neighbourly relations at the conference
on security and cooperation in Istanbul in November.
We also welcome the start of the comprehensive review
of UNAMA's mandated activities and United Nations
support in Afghanistan.

We reaffirm our gratitude for the crucial and
continued commitment of the United Nations. UNAMA
is working in partnership with the Government of
Afghanistan for the benefit of all Afghans in their quest
for peace, security and stability. We will continue to
support the Afghan Government and people, regional
partners and the international community as we work
to establish stability and prosperity in Afghanistan and
throughout the region.

