Mr. Kobayashi (Japan): My delegation expresses
its appreciation to you, Mr. President, for providing us
with the opportunity to present Japan's views on the
grave situation we face today in the Middle East.
Japan deplores the escalation of violent clashes
between Palestinians and the Israeli authorities in
Jerusalem and other cities, in which more than 60
people, mostly civilians and innocent children, have
been killed. We condemn the acts of provocation and
are concerned at the instances of excessive use of force
that have been observed in the past few days.

I wish, on behalf of the Government and people
of Japan, to extend my sincere condolences to the
bereaved families, and to express the sincere hope that
the wounded will recover quickly.

In the hope of helping the wounded and saving
precious lives, and in response to a request from the
Palestinian Authority, Japan has decided to provide
through the United Nations Development Programme
$500,000 in emergency humanitarian assistance for the
purchase of medical equipment, which is urgently
needed in the West Bank and Gaza at this time of
crisis.

Further casualties must be avoided. The
immediate task is to halt the clashes as soon as
possible. To this end, we strongly urge the parties
concerned to act with utmost restraint and refrain from
any further acts of provocation and violence. Nothing
can be achieved through violence, which only claims
more victims and leaves deeper scars in the hearts of
the people.

In that context, Japan welcomes the diplomatic
efforts that the parties concerned have made in Paris to
reverse the cycle of violence, and we commend the
initiatives taken by the United States, France and Egypt
to facilitate such efforts. We appeal to the parties
concerned to respond to the call of the international
community for the cessation of violence and the
avoidance of further bloodshed.

The current crisis attests most starkly to the need
to realize ajust, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East. This is what the people of the region so
desperately desire and what the international
community is committed to achieving. We must not
allow this crisis to derail the ongoing peace process.
Japan reiterates its support for the efforts of the parties
concerned to achieve peace. Japan remains committed
to assist the peace process through various
international forums and channels.

