Ms. Raz (Afghanistan): I would like to make a
few points in the context of today's extension by the
Security Council of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
Before that, however, let me join previous speakers
in expressing the deepest condolences of the people
and the Government of Afghanistan about yesterday's
terrorist attack in New Zealand. We condemn that
attack in the strongest terms and express our solidarity
with the people and the Government of New Zealand in
the wake of the tragedy.

The adoption of resolution 1401 (2002) marked
the start of a new phase in the engagement of the
United Nations in Afghanistan. It coincided with the
determined efforts by the people ofAfghanistan to shape
my country's future, one that would see all Afghans,
especially youth, taking charge of their destiny. In that
regard, the United Nations and all the members of the
Security Council have played a crucial role in helping
us to achieve many gains that once seemed impossible.
Despite remaining challenges, today Afghanistan's
progress in consolidating those gains continues to
move in a positive direction. That is attributable to
the courage and determination of our people and the
support of the international community. The adoption
of resolution 2460 (2019) today allows the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to continue its mandated activities in support of durable
peace, security and stability in our country, which we
welcome. As always, we are very appreciative of that.

Nonetheless, we regret that the nature of the
negotiations on this year's resolution was such that the
divergence of views among some Council members
led to a situation whereby UNAMA's mandate was
extended for only six months, as opposed to the usual
12-month renewal period. However, we understand
the Council's commitment to a forthcoming 12-month
extension of UNAMA's mandate. We will utilize the
upcoming six months to develop a more comprehensive
and effective mandate and draft resolution to serve the
people of Afghanistan.

Afghanistan stands at a crucial juncture in its
successful transition towards a self-reliant nation
living in peace and prosperity. As we are approaching
presidential elections in July, we are focused on
ensuring a transparent and credible process that is
embraced by our people and marks another important
step in consolidating democracy and the rule of law in
the country.

At the same time, we are also encouraged in
working to advance our Afghan-led and -owned
peace process so as to ensure just, dignified and
sustainable peace for our people as a matter of priority.
The supporting role of the international community
and the United Nations remains of great importance
to those national processes, as well as in other key
areas, including enhancing development, governance
and the rule of law, coordinating the delivery of
international civilian and humanitarian assistance and
promoting human rights. We look forward to - and
we expect - the Security Council's continuing firm
engagement in our stabilization efforts on the way
forward. That will be vitally important to achieving a
fully secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan, which
is a fundamental imperative for advancing international
peace and security.

The meeting rose at 4.05 pm.
