Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (Spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, I join preceding speakers in
congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council and wish you every success. I
also express our thanks and appreciation to my colleague,
the Ambassador and representative of Namibia, for his
guidance of the presidency of the Council last month and
wish him every success also. We thank the Secretary-
General for his valuable statement, and for his report and
the recommendations it contains for the Security Council
concerning the developing situation in Africa, particularly
in respect of the need for peace, security and social and
economic development.

The debate in the Security Council today reflects the
keen interest of the international community in continuing
its efforts to effect positive change in Africa by settling
or containing the current regional and civil conflicts and

 

meeting the humanitarian and development needs of its
peoples and States.

The United Arab Emirates agrees with the Secretary-
General's important analysis and recommendations
contained in his progress report on the situation in Africa.
However, it is concerned about the increasing trend in
weapons acquisitions in conflicts and towards increasing
power struggles between factions over power itself and over
natural resources.

This in turn has led to infrastructure destruction and to
an increase in the number of internally and externally
displaced persons, especially women, children and the
elderly. We therefore believe that the responsibility for
addressing these situations and phenomena falls to the
African countries themselves, especially responsibility for
showing the political will to implement ceasefire measures,
halt the bloodshed and respond to peaceful efforts to
promote security and stability at the national and regional
levels.

We call also upon the international community,
especially the Security Council, to revitalize peacekeeping
operations, preventive diplomacy and post-conflict peace-
building. They must also implement the resolutions under
international law on halting trade and trafficking in small
arms and other materiel to areas of tension, and strengthen
coordination and cooperation mechanisms between the
United Nations and OAU.

We welcome the recommendations and resolutions of
the recent OAU Summit in our sister State, Algeria, which
expressed the desire and resolve of OAU leaders both to
continue efforts towards a peaceful settlement to the current
conflicts and to undertake the necessary reforms of the
social and economic development institutions in their
countries more comprehensively. We also urge the
developed countries and regional and international
development institutions to provide assistance, grants and
loans - official and unofficial - to African countries and
to cancel their external debts, especially those of the
poorest countries, to help them improve their economic,
social and human capacities. We urge also that foreign
investment should be encouraged and that the African
countries should be provided with the facilities and support
they need to export their products to world markets without
constraint.

The United Arab Emirates, which shares bonds of
friendship, history and culture with the countries of Africa,
is keen to strengthening mutual cooperation with many of
those countries, especially in the field of exchange of
information and of experts in all cultural, economic and
social fields. The United Arab Emirates also provides all
manner of support, loans and official and unofficial
humanitarian and development assistance through the Abu
Dhabi and other financial and development funds to
which it contributes. Also, unofficial assistance from
private sector projects and national charitable associations
such as the Red Crescent and the Zayid charitable
association all help enable the countries of Africa to deal
with their current crises and implement major
development projects, especially as part of plans to
rehabilitate national economies in line with the
requirements of globalization, change, trade and economic
relations. Investments and assistance from the United
Arab Emirates to Africa amount to over $5 billion.

We reiterate that the economic sanctions imposed on
our sister country, Libya, must be lifted now that it has
honoured all its obligations in respect of the Lockerbie
issue.

In conclusion, we hope that the Security Council will
come to a consensus on measures to promote international
and regional cooperation to lead Africa into a new era in
which it will play a more significant part in international
relations and in which its peoples will enjoy security,
peace, stability and development.
