Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I hope I can solve
that problem by speaking in English. I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate
and for all the initiatives the presidency has taken so
far, and I also thank the briefers.

As I said during the wrap-up debate in June (see S/PV.7479), I am frequently struck by how formal our
working methods can be. Even in our allegedly informal
meetings there are too many prepared speeches and too
few genuine discussions. So in the spirit of bringing
more interactivity to this meeting, today I am just
going to pose questions, three sets of them in my three
minutes. I hope other speakers will feel free to respond
in their own statements or in person afterwards, or,
indeed, by replying to me on Twitter, where I am
@matthewrycroft1.

For my first set of questions, I would like to ask
for thoughts on improving the day-to-day interactions
of the Council. How can we bring more transparency?
How can we improve participation? And for efficiency,
what more can we do to stick to schedules and keep
our statements to the agreed-on length? Doing so could
lead to more time for horizon-scanning or for hearing
from people on the ground, including through Arria
Formula meetings. Ifwe are given ideas, we will pursue
them next month during our presidency. The Council
has been warned.

For my second set of questions, I would like to ask
what the point is of good working methods if the will
to use them effectively is not there. What is the point
when one member can bring the very best working
methods to a standstill by raising an arm in veto? I
am proud that the United Kingdom has signed up to
the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group. We will never vote against
credible Council action to stop mass atrocities and
crimes against humanity. If other members, permanent
or not, join us, we will send a powerful message that the
Council can really deliver when it matters most. The
same could be said about the appointment of the next
Secretary-General. I welcomed the statement made by
the President of the General Assembly this morning.
Would it not send a very welcome message ifthe United
Nations appointed its most powerful advocate in a fair,
transparent and structured way? Appointing a woman
to the role would be more powerful still. So what should
we do next to maximize the number of credible female
candidates?

Thirdly, what more can we do to ensure that the
Council's work is not just about ending conflicts but
also about avoiding future ones? With Goal 16 of the
Sustainable Development Goals, we have made a good
step forward, but we can do more. That is the United
Kingdom is planning to convene the first ever meeting
of development ministers next month in the Security
Council to discuss the issue. What more can we do to
connect the various parts of the United Nations and link
the development agenda to our work in the Council on
peace and security?

