Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank
our colleague Ambassador Tanin for his very useful
comments. National ownership is at the heart of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, an objective
that Portugal shares in its fullness. Allow me also to
thank the Special Representative and the personnel of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), who face one of the most daunting tasks
that the United Nations has undertaken to this day.
Allow me to express Portugal's appreciation to them
for their commitment, dedication and courage.

Allow me also to recall that at the beginning of
this week, a vile attack once again indiscriminately
took the lives of dozens of civilians in Kanduz. I am
sure that I speak for all of us when I express my
condemnation of such despicable, wanton killing and
maiming, and I ask Ambassador Tanin to convey our
condolences to the victims' families.

Peace and security are Afghanistan's primary
needs and the foremost grounds for United Nations
assistance to the Afghan Government. The task that is
still ahead is vast, and the security progress achieved
over the past year, while significant, is also fragile and
reversible. Ambassador Tanin can rest assured that
Afghanistan's partners are steadfast in their
commitment.

Afghan security forces are expanding, reflecting
growing Afghan ownership of the security situation.
The Afghan national security forces will soon reach
their growth figures for trained and operational
personnel. While this is a fundamental step in order to
attain counter-insurgency goals, we must make sure
that these levels are sustainable and that the safety of
numbers does not affect standards or capacity.

The Declaration approved in Lisbon in November
by the Heads of State and Government of the nations
contributing to the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) represents a pledge with respect to the
long-term nature of the partnership between NATO and
Afghanistan.

Portugal reafflrms its support for President
Karzai's objective to lead and conduct security
operations in all the provinces by the end of 2014, and
we will see Inteqal through as allies and partners, not
only in the area of security but also as regards
governance, development and the rule of law.

Afghanistan is on the threshold of transition, a
process in which we all have a stake and in which we
all must assume our responsibilities. A phase- and
conditions-based transition to Afghan-led security is a
momentous step for the country, and Afghanistan must
be sure of its allies and of the support as laid out at the
London and Kabul Conferences and the Lisbon
summit.

We look forward, therefore, to the Bonn
Conference next December and to the preparatory work
to be done in that connection. Portugal will increase its
contribution to ISAF by 25 per cent, reaching a total of
250 military personnel to help train their Afghan
counterparts. We remain ready to carry out this mission
for peace and freedom in Afghanistan.

Nevertheless, there is much to be done in
Afghanistan beyond the security situation. Important
steps in increasing public trust in institutions, the
Administration and the police are needed, and their
ongoing efforts deserve our support. Tensions between
State branches over the status of Parliament risk
undermining the consolidation of institutions and
discrediting the democratic process in the eyes of the
people.

Finally, electoral reform must be addressed,
bearing in mind the effects it may have on the
transition period and on the stability of Afghanistan.

Portugal is pleased to be working in the Security
Council towards securing a mandate that allows
UNAMA to fulfil its mission, namely, increased
support for the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan to improve governance, the rule of law
and the fight against corruption; better coordination of
support and resources; the delivery of humanitarian
aid; and the monitoring of the situation of civilians and
their protection.

One other fundamental issue is also the
coordination between the United Nations agencies and
programmes, so that resource allocation is improved, in
particular in the areas of counter-narcotics,
reconstruction and development.

I should also like to address the issue of human
rights. It is, as regards Afghanistan, both a tale of
achievement and an enduring concern. Indeed, the
security situation should not be a pretext to
compromise a consolidation of the democratic process
in Afghanistan and the promotion and protection of
human rights. Human rights are indeed one of the
battlegrounds in Afghanistan. We should not be
surprised that the enemies of a democratic and peaceful
Afghanistan are proud to despise the most fundamental
human rights and make it a point to flaunt their
contempt for the country's achievement in this area.

Portugal is particularly encouraged by the
significant steps taken by the Government of
Afghanistan to prevent the recruitment of children and
other commitments to prevent sexual violence. The use
of children by the Taliban forces and the attacks
against schools and health-care facilities are certainly
some of the most dramatic aspects of the current
situation in Afghanistan.

Portugal welcomes the recent steps taken towards
the further promotion and protection of women's
rights, especially as regards the participation of women
in Afghan Government institutions, including the civil
service. The future of Afghanistan should not be built
over the respect of human rights for all and especially
should not be built over the human rights of women or
at the cost of their education or their participation in
public and political life. In this respect, we would
encourage the Government of Afghanistan at the
highest level to publicly emphasize that the promotion
and protection of women's rights is an integral part of
peace, reintegration and reconciliation.

11-2662]

Portugal, as a friend, an ally and a partner of
Afghanistan, hopes that this Afghan New Year will
usher in a clear vision of the path ahead, robust
implementation of the planned transition, increased
institutional capacity to address the people's needs and,
ultimately, a brighter future for Afghanistan.

