Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia welcomes the briefings
provided by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Michel Kafando, and the Ambassador of
Switzerland, Mr. Jiirg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Bolivia commends the mediation carried out by the
former President of Tanzania, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa,
and the President of Uganda, Mr. Yoweri Museveni,
with respect to the Arusha Accords and the Burundian
Constitution. Bolivia once again encourages all parties
to support that mediation process and to work together
to achieve a negotiated political settlement.

We agree with the past statements of Mr. Mkapa to
the effect that, if the peace process is to be successful,
all parties must work on confidence-building measures
and constructive dialogue in good faith. In that respect,
we encourage and acknowledge the efforts of the joint
working group, the East African Community and the
team from the Office of the Special Envoy, and the
work of the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Similarly, we encourage
the parties to implement the road map proposed by
Mr. Mkapa, based on the spirit of peace of the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi.

We welcome the positive outcome of the recent
meeting in Bujumbura convened by the Special Envoy
and the authorities of Burundi, including President
Pierre Nkurunziza, in which they agreed to continue the
inter-Burundian dialogue in an inclusive environment.
We also welcome the decision by the African Union
at its twenty-ninth summit, held 27 June to 4 July in
Addis Ababa, to reaffirm its commitment to a peaceful
settlement of the crisis in Burundi through a swift
resumption of the inter-Burundian dialogue under the
stewardship of the East African Community, with the
support of the African Union.

Likewise, we take note of the retreat on 12 July, in
which the Government met with various international
partners to assess the current challenges facing the
country in the macroeconomic sphere, in agriculture,
health, education, risk prevention and disaster
management, with a view to working on the country's
socioeconomic recovery. We commend the work of the
Government of Burundi and the country's Ombudsman
for their awareness-raising efforts to facilitate refugees
returning to their country, and we encourage them to
pursue that objective.
Bolivia urges that actions in the negotiating process
in future continue to be carried out in a progressive
manner and in coordination with the country's
authorities, including, inter alia, coordination of the
presence of the observers and the United Nations police
component in accordance with resolution 2303 (2016),
if future security conditions so require. We reiterate
that coordination must be carried out in respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of
Burundi, observing the obligation of States to provide
security and protection for their citizens.

Given the complexity of the process, it is our
firm belief that it is vital to continue solidifying the
foundations to ensure definitive stability in Burundi,
through initiatives that may be needed and with the full
and committed support of the international community,
based on the framework of law, justice, reconciliation
and peace.

