Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): I wish
to thank the Chinese presidency for having convened
this timely and important debate.

The recent appalling terrorist attacks in Pakistan
and Belgium were a painful reminder of the deadly
nature of the threat posed by extremist terrorist groups
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
Ten years after the adoption of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the role of the
United Nations in preventing and combating terrorism
remains ever more critical.

In recent years, the Security Council has adopted
a series of resolutions aimed at tackling the dangerous
new trend of the terrorist threat posed by extremist
groups such as ISIL. These resolutions have effectively
bolstered the existing global counter-terrorism
framework by imposing new measures to cut off
financing of terrorists, prohibit terrorist incitement,
stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters and confront
the broader question of preventing violent extremism.
The Republic ofKorea appreciates the active role played
by the Security Council in countering terrorism and
is fully committed to working with the international
community to promote the full implementation of these
resolutions by all Member States.

Recently the Republic of Korea took a significant
step towards strengthening its national counter-
terrorism legislation by enacting a law on the prevention
of terrorism for the protection of the people and public
safety. This new legislation criminalizes a broad range
of terrorist and other related activities, including the act
ofjoining terrorist groups abroad as foreign terrorist
fighters and the financing of terrorist activities. The
new law also contains strong preventive measures,
including information-gathering, immigration-control
measures and the suspension of financial transactions
vis-a-vis high-risk individuals, and envisages the
establishment of a counter-terrorism centre to act as a
control tower for all counter-terrorism measures.

The Republic of Korea is committed to faithfully
implementing Security Council resolutions related
to terrorist financing, including the recent resolution
2253 (2015). Furthermore, the Republic of Korea is
actively taking part in international efforts to combat
the financing of terrorism through its presidency of the
Financial Action Task Force. The Republic of Korea is
also strengthening the monitoring of online terrorist-
related messages and activities with the relevant
agencies. Recently, the Korea Communications
Standards Commission detected several cases of
malicious online content and has taken measures to
mitigate the risk of such content.

Through our past efforts to combat terrorism, it
has become increasingly evident that security-based
measures alone cannot defeat terrorism. A more
comprehensive approach is needed to address the
deeper underlying drivers of violent extremism. In
that regard, the Republic of Korea fully supports the
Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism and stands ready to actively engage with the
international community forits effective implementation
at the global, regional and national levels. The Republic
of Korea also welcomes the adoption by consensus
of General Assembly resolution 70/254 last month,
pledging to give further consideration to the plan and
hopes that it will make a positive contribution to the
upcoming United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy Review in June.

On a final note, as our delegation emphasized
the importance of youth and education in countering
terrorism and preventing violent extremism at the
Geneva Conference on Preventing Violent Extremism
on 8 April, I would like to point out the fact that a large
majority of foreign terrorist fighters joining extremist
groups are young people, many of them teenagers. If we
are to ultimately defeat violent extremism and prevent
these young people from falling prey to the poisonous
ideologies and propaganda, it is crucially important to
teach them the values of human dignity, peace, diversity
and tolerance, as emphasized in the concept of global
citizenship education. Through such global citizenship
education on our universal values and ideas, we should
be able to convince our young generation that it is
our free and diverse societies, not hate and violence
preached by the extremists, that will offer the lofty
path to true dignity, hope and happiness for all. The
Republic of Korea will continue its efforts to promote
global citizenship education as a fundamental solution
to the phenomenon of violent extremism.

