Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by thanking Mr. Herve Ladsous and Ms. Hilde
Johnson for their statements and the information they
have provided.

I shall comment in detail on those statements by
summarizing each piece of information that has been
provided. However, I would first like to recall a fact
that - with all due respect - all members of the
Secretariat seem to ignore. From the very beginning of
the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, the Sudan and its Government have
underscored their commitment to a political settlement
to the conflict between the north and the south. Today,
I would like to reiterate here in the Council that we are
committed to finding a peaceful solution to pending
issues that divide the north and South Sudan.

It is clear to everyone that the establishment of
the State in the south was an honest effort undertaken
by the Government and leadership of the north, as
represented by President Al-Bashir. The Council may
not be aware of this but, following independence, the
President visited the capital of South Sudan and
reiterated his desire to cooperate with its Government.
We had hoped those goodwill efforts would at least
have been praised, or even welcomed.

We have no doubt about our unchanging position
on finding a peaceful political settlement to all pending
issues. Nevertheless, there are always two sides to a
coin. Unfortunately, there has been little enthusiasm

among our brothers to the south since independence, as
there should have been in order to strengthen efforts to
build a modern and prosperous State in line with the
aspirations of South Sudan for many decades. No
member of the Council has called upon the Republic of
South Sudan to concentrate its efforts on those
endeavours, rather than embarking on stirring up
tension and new wars. An example is the well-known
meeting in Kauda that brought together the
Government of the South and rebels in Southern
Kordofan, Blue Nile and Darfur, which led to a
political statement calling for military action aimed at
undermining the Khartoum regime. Let us recognize
these truths, which I have simply highlighted.

Tuning now to the briefing by Mr. Ladsous,
before briefly commenting on it, allow me to reiterate
our commitment to cooperating with the United
Nations without conditions, first and foremost with the
Security Council and the Secretariat, but also with
peacekeeping missions. Not only did I personally
supervise Mr. Ladsous's visit to South Sudan, but I also
facilitated a meeting between Mr. Ladsous and the
highest authority of the country, President Al-Bashir,
who gave Mr. Ladsous a very warm welcome and
recalled the information that I presented at the
beginning of my statement.

With regard to Mr. Ladsous's statement about
Mr. Salva Kiir's statement yesterday denying that the
Government of South Sudan was supporting rebels in
the north, Mr. Ladsous spoke in detail about the
subject. In fact, I would have preferred for the detailed
statement to have been made not by a representative of
the Secretariat but by a representative of South Sudan.

Allow me to share three pieces of information
with the Council about the Sudanese Government's
implication in incidents in Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile. The fourth battalion of the Sudan People's
Liberation Army is fighting with all its equipment in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. That battalion has
deployed many tanks when the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan was in the area. That information can
be found in the Joint Military Commission's
documents. That is clear proof of the support by the
Government of South Sudan for the rebels and of the
presence of its troops and military hardware in those
areas.
Turning now to Ms. Johnson's statement, we
thank her for her efforts in the recent past when she

was part of a group that established the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. However, it seems that time changes
everything. I listened to her detailed and focused
statement, which made it seem as if she were
advocating for the actions of the Government of South
Sudan, as if air bombardments and military actions by
the Government of the Sudan were being carried out
against South Sudan. I would instead have preferred
her to speak in the way she has in the past, when she
behaved as a mediator who contributed to the
conclusion of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. I
would have preferred her to speak in a completely
impartial manner, providing information - as it is her
duty to do in the service of the United Nations - on
the movement of the forces of the south and the
military support of the south to rebel movements. She
gave no information on that topic. Where is the
credibility she has had in the past? I hope that time will
not erode it.

Let me turn now to Abyei. Mr. Ladsous briefed us
on the topic, providing true information about the
numerous leaders of the south who refuse to facilitate
the movement of the Misseriya tribe, who have lived in
the region for thousands of years. That is another
example of lack of cooperation on the part of the
Government of South Sudan in averting military
clashes.

With regard to mediation, let me note that we
have always demonstrated our commitment to
mediation under the leadership of Mr. Thabo Mbeki,
our brother from South Africa, and he can confirm that.
We participated in all meetings and workshops,
whereas the other party was not always present and,
when it was, did not always show moderation. We are
ready to continue efforts under the mechanism led by
one of our brothers on the continent to achieve
effective solutions.

I now turn to developments in Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan. We have provided the Council
with many documents and letters that give a detailed
description of the root causes of the violence. The
violence consists entirely of incitements on the part of
the Government of South Sudan. In the Blue Nile
region, elected Governor Malik Aggar has initiated the
rebellion and taken up weapons, thereby destabilizing
the State, which after intervention by Sudanese forces,
is today returning to normal life, stability and security.

In conclusion, we affirm that the situation in Blue
Nile state is entirely stable. We do not expect that the
Sudanese Armed Forces will have to take military
action, including aerial bombing, to deal with acts
perpetrated by rebel movements, which have been
contained in the past few days. In addition, as far as
bombings are concerned, there have been no bombings
on the refugee camps on the border between North and
South. We are dealing here with half-truths - indeed,
truths fabricated by the media across the board. We
hope that the Council will not base its decisions on
false information spread by the media, since it has
mandated a mission in the Sudan capable of verifying
such information.

