Mr. Windsor (Australia): Where we cannot
prevent armed conflict, the protection of civilians is
and must remain an absolute priority. Australia
therefore welcomes the attention the Security Council
has rightly focused on this issue. I wish to express my
thanks to the United Kingdom for convening this
important debate and to the Emergency Relief
Coordinator for his update briefing earlier this
morning.

It is clearly apparent that the plight of civilians in
modern conflict remains dire. They continue to account
for the vast majority of casualties. The situation must
be addressed as part of any comprehensive
international response to conflict.

United Nations peacekeeping is one tool we can
use to address that situation, but it is important that we
use it wisely and effectively. Protection of civilians
tasks are now mandated in eight of the 20 peace
operations led by the Department of Peacekeeping

08-3528]
Operations (DPKO), but there is a need to develop
clear guidance to implement them. We must bridge the
gap between our words and our deeds, and we call
upon the Council to implement paragraph 16 of
resolution 1674 (2006) fully to ensure the provision of
clear guidelines regarding what missions can and
should do to achieve protection goals. Australia also
calls upon the broader membership to ensure that
United Nations peace operations are properly resourced
to carry out their mandates.

We look forward to the outcome of the joint study
being undertaken by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and DPKO on the
implementation of protection tasks, and we would also
welcome an update of the aide memoire to reflect the
increasing focus on physical protection.

Some armed conflicts witness the perpetration of
heinous mass atrocity crimes. In 2005, world leaders
recognized the responsibility we all share to protect
vulnerable communities from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. While it
is the primary role of States to protect their own
populations from those evils, the international
community has a responsibility to assist States to
exercise that responsibility and, in appropriate
circumstances, to take collective action, consistent with
the Charter, to prevent such mass atrocity crimes.

More must be done to develop a practical
approach for implementation of the responsibility to
protect principle. We welcome the Secretary-General's
appointment of Mr. Edward Luck as his Special
Adviser to focus on the conceptual development of the
principle. Australia looks forward to working with
Member States to continue our consideration of the
principle and to give effect to it in appropriate
circumstances.

Just as the international community has a
responsibility to protect communities from such mass
atrocity crimes, so too do we have a responsibility to
bring those who abuse fundamental principles of
international law to justice. We must renew our
commitment to end impunity for those who commit
mass atrocity crimes and to increase accountability for
crimes against civilians.

In conclusion, Australia remains committed to
working with partners in the international community
to translate our words into action in an effort to protect
civilians in armed conflict. Australia will work to

08-3528]

ensure that United Nations missions on the ground are
provided with clear guidance and adequate resources to
fulfil their mandates. We will work to prevent the
commission of mass atrocity crimes, and we will work
to ensure that perpetrators of abuse are held
accountable for their actions.

