Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Like others, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
meeting to discuss the activities of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and the
threat posed by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). I
also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Abou Moussa, for his comprehensive
briefings, and Ambassador Tete Antonio and General
Louis Sylvain-Goma for their presentations.

After decades of instability and conflict, the
countries in the Central African region have now
embarked on a process of moving towards democracy
and development. The Governments have shown
tremendous resolve and determination to handle their
problems, individually and collectively, through
regional cooperation and with the assistance of the
international community, led by the United Nations.
Several countries are conducting democratic elections
largely on their own. They have undertaken economic
reforms and initiated measures to improve the capacity
of their security and police forces.

In this transition process, it is natural that
countries are faced with many challenges, including
from the remnants of past conflicts. It is critical that
the international community continues to assist the
nation-building efforts of the Central African countries.
It is also important that international assistance not
impinge on national ownership and the sovereign
functions of States.

With its mandate to help prevent conflict and
consolidate peace in Central Africa, UNOCA has
started its work on a positive note. The countries in the
region, as stated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/704), have warmly welcomed the
establishment of UNOCA and have started taking
active interest in its work. UNOCA's activities during
the past six months have been able to create a positive
environment, paving the way for regional cooperation
on important issues.

The region faces several challenges, such as the
proliferation of small arms, organized crime, drug
trafficking, illegal exploitation of mineral resources,
governance issues, high unemployment, internally
displaced persons and refugees and of course, the
problems associated with the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA). As stated in the report of the Secretary-
General, the conflict in Libya has exacerbated some of
those problems.

The effective functioning of UNOCA would
greatly help the United Nations, including this Council,
in assisting the countries to address those issues, many
of which have a regional dimension and require a
regional approach for their lasting resolution. The
focus should be on finding local solutions to problems
involving governance, capacity-building, security and
transnational crime.

Towards that end, creating synergy with other
United Nations offices, such as the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the United Nations Office to
the African Union, would greatly benefit UNOCA's
work. Those United Nations offices should work
closely with the African Union (AU) and subregional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of
Central African States, and channel regional initiatives
more effectively into their programmes. It is necessary
that the United Nations offices and missions, including
UNOCA, be adequately staffed and resourced if they
are to effectively and efficiently implement their
mandates.

Given the adverse impact of past conflicts on the
social fabric of the countries in the region, the threat of
the LRA cannot be neglected. The measures taken by
Uganda in cooperation with its neighbours have helped
to contain the problem. Nevertheless, the LRA, with its
leadership at large, continues to pose a serious threat to
peace and security, particularly for innocent civilians,
given its ability to move freely and carry out
operations across borders in several countries of the
region. The inhuman acts inflicted by the LRA on local
communities have resulted in the large-scale
displacement and uprooting of communities. While
long-term solutions to this problem are to extend the
reach of the law enforcement agencies of States and
focus on socio-economic development in the affected
areas, it is important that serious efforts be made to
eliminate the remaining active groups and bring the
leadership of the LRA to justice.

While UNOCA has a critical role to play in
coordinating United Nations efforts to assist national
Governments in their fight against armed groups,
including the LRA, it is necessary for the international
community to strengthen the capacity of the countries
in the region, particularly that of their armed forces
and other law enforcement agencies, to take the lead in
combating the LRA. In that connection, we welcome
the initiatives of the AU to appoint a special envoy for
the LM. and establish a regional intervention force. We
have already seen in the African Union Mission in
Somalia that the AU is capable of mounting such a
force with the assistance of the international
community, and hope that those initiatives will bear
fruit soon.

We have also taken note of the individual efforts
of several countries to assist the countries in the region
in building capacity to fight the LRA. Such assistance

should be apolitical in nature and respect national
sovereignty and policy, as well as operational matters.
In addition, helping the affected communities to
overcome the trauma of displacement and social stigma
should also become an immediate priority. It is
important that the affected communities be reintegrated
through the provision of necessary resources.

In conclusion, let me state that long-term
socio-economic development and broad-based
inclusive political systems are the key to addressing the
threat posed by armed groups including the LRA.
Towards that end, India is committed to enhancing
cooperation with its African partners, including
through the African Union and other regional and
subregional organizations. We have announced credit
lines of $5 billion for the next three years, as well as a
number of projects designed for human resource
development in African countries, including the Pan-
African e-Network Project. These projects will
strengthen national capacities to meet the development
needs and aspirations that would also help address
security problems, including the LRA.

Finally, we will support the draft presidential
statement that has been proposed.

