Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) (interpretation from Arabic): My delegation takes this opportunity to
congratulate you, Sir, on your delegation's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month. I also
wish to thank your predecessor, the representative of
Gabon, who did a remarkable job of presiding over the
Council last month.

We associate ourselves with previous speakers in
stressing the importance of this meeting to debate a very
important issue; important because it affects the security
and interests of an entire people and is linked to the
principles of international law and justice, which are the
underpinnings of the Charter. This issue also involves the
suffering of the families of the innocent victims who lost
their lives in the Lockerbie disaster.

Lebanon has suffered greatly and continues to suffer
daily from State-sponsored terrorism carried out by Israel
on Lebanon's territory against its people. Hence our
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms, including State-
sponsored terrorism.

Today we must ensure that claims are examined in the
light of law. The dispute involving Libya has nothing to do
with opposition to the principle of the primacy of law.
Indeed, Libya has embraced this principle. Rather, this
dispute has to do with procedural aspects which, as we
have always maintained, could have been quickly settled
had the necessary spirit of cooperation prevailed among the
parties concerned. When there is uncertainty or doubt, an
investigation must be carried out in accordance with the
norms of international law. If the State in question refuses
to bend to these norms, appropriate measures can then be
considered in accordance with international law so that
justice is done.

In this specific case, the Libyan Government has
emphasized since the outset of the crisis that it is ready to
cooperate so that justice is respected within the context of
established legal norms, and it has proposed that the
stipulations of the 1971 Montreal Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Civilian Aviation be applied. Libya has even gone so far
as to take its case to the International Court of Justice, in
accordance with article 14 of the Montreal Convention.
Thus, Libya has turned to the supreme judicial authority
for a ruling on this legal dispute.

We have always considered that sanctions are a
measure of last resort for the Council, to be considered
only when all peaceful means for settling a dispute have
been exhausted. Sanctions harm an entire people, and they
have repercussions on many different peoples because of
their adverse consequences on third parties. During the
discussions in various bodies of the United Nations, we
have noted a burning desire on the part of the
overwhelming majority of the members of the
international community to treat sanctions as an
exceptional measure resorted to only in extreme
circumstances.

As far as Libya is concerned, the problem is that of
a dispute concerning the appropriate jurisdiction for trying
the two suspects. If the political will exists, it is possible
to resolve the dispute in a peaceful manner. Lebanon
supports the positions of the League of Arab States, the
Organization of African Unity, the Movement of Non-
Aligned Countries and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference in this regard. All these organizations have
recommended the need to show restraint and allow justice
to take its course in accordance with the provisions of
international law. They have also recommended the need
for the sanctions imposed on Libya to be re-examined,
because that country has not been convicted of any
wrongdoing.

All of these organizations have recommended that
justice be allowed to take its course in accordance with
the norms of international law. They have also recognized
the need for the sanctions imposed on Libya to be
reexamined, because that country is not under sentence.
We believe that the two Judgments of the International
Court of Justice send a message embodying the
 

international understanding of the law in this case. They
should open the way to a peaceful settlement of the dispute.

We hope that this new information will allow progress
to be made and international justice to be done. The point
is not for this or that political party to the dispute to win a
victory; the point is to see to ensure the triumph of
international law through the peaceful resolution of
disputes.

