Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Beginning four months ago, the Ivorian post-electoral
crisis, provoked by the refusal of the former President,
Mr. Gbagbo, to accept the verdict of the ballot box,
reached a critical point when he was arrested by the
Forces republicaines de C6te d'Ivoire (FRCI) on
Monday, 11 April. This event is a turning point in the
resolution of the Ivorian post-electoral crisis inasmuch
as the legitimately elected President of Cote d'Ivoire,
His Excellency Alassane Ouattara, has now assumed
the full range of powers, in line with resolution 1962
(2010).

All of the generals, in particular General Mangou,
Chief of Staff of the armed forces, General Kassarate,
Commander of the gendarmerie, General Detoh Letoh,
Commander of the ground forces, and General
Brindou, Director-General of the national police, have
sworn allegiance to President Alassane Ouattara. In
addition, civilian populations in Cote d'Ivoire have
been effectively protected from massacres carried out
with heavy weaponry after such weapons were
destroyed by the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and Operation Licorne pursuant to
resolution 1975 (2011).

At this stage, my delegation would like to
express, on behalf of President Ouattara, the
Government and the people of Cote d'Ivoire, our
deepest gratitude to the Security Council for the
responsible approach that the Council adopted in
responding to the distress calls by civilian populations
living in Cote d'Ivoire and for coming to their aid. My
delegation would also like to pay tribute to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his leadership and decisive
commitment, which allowed us to save countless lives
caught up in the killing spree initiated by the former
President of Cote d'Ivoire. We also thank the Under-
Secretaries-General of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support and
their respective colleagues, without forgetting the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Cote d'lvoire, his team and all of UNOCI's staff on the
ground.

Several very significant challenges await
President Alassane Ouattara and the Government of
Cote d'Ivoire, and they are all urgent. First of all, the
President has given the necessary instructions to the
various force commanders to immediately take
appropriate measures to restore public order and
security. Therefore, starting today, all of the security
corridors will once again be operational, and patrols
will be reactivated and will include elements from the
FRCI, UNOCI and impartial forces. Six police sectors,
including the anti-riot squad and the Companies
re'publicaines de securite 1 and 2, are already
operational while awaiting the gradual reopening of
police stations. The gendarmerie brigades will also
gradually be reopened. We note that the Sassandra
Brigade, in the south-west of the country, is already
reactivated.

A general appeal has been launched to the entire
population for individuals who are not in the regular
forces of the FRCI, and who still have arms, to deliver
them to police stations or any law enforcement venue.

All generals and commanders of the various units
have officially proclaimed the end of hostilities. They
have called for coordination and synergy among the
various components of the army, which will need to be

strengthened rather quickly to allow the forces of law
and order to more effectively protect people and
property, guarantee free movement and pacify lawless
zones.

With respect to the humanitarian situation, the
re-establishment of water and electricity delivery is
now allowing for the satisfactory operation of health
centres, which will continue to be strengthened. The
reopening of the ports of Abidjan and San-Pedro, as
well as the Felix Houphouet Boigny International
Airport in Abidjan, has allowed the large-scale delivery
of required humanitarian assistance, especially
medicine.

As part of the presidential emergency
programme, public health activities, particularly the
removal of bodies abandoned out of doors, have begun.
Household garbage removal and the cleaning of roads
are to take place without delay. The health alert is high
with respect to the risk of cholera and meningitis
epidemics, but these are being closely monitored.
Displaced persons are also beginning to return home.

With respect to the human rights situation, the
protection of civilian populations was at the heart of
the post-electoral crisis. It was to protect civilian
populations that resolution 1975 (2011) was
implemented to destroy Mr. Gbagbo's heavy weapons.
It was also to protect civilian populations that the
Forces republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire launched the
offensive that led to the arrest of Mr. Gbagbo.

Indeed, civilians living in C6te d'Ivoire were
killed throughout the country by mercenary militias and
forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo seeking to maintain his reign
by terror. The situation was of grave concern in western
Cote d'Ivoire, particularly in Duekoue, Guiglo,
Blolequin and Bangolo, due to the presence of numerous
mercenaries from Liberia recruited by pro-Gbagbo
political leaders in the region, who perpetrated large-
scale killings against non-native populations. These
mercenaries were criminally associated with local
militias armed by local politicians of Mr. Gbagbo's
party, who fomented recurrent land problems in those
areas in order to ignite hatred and inter-ethnic conflict.

The Forces republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire
successfully fought the mercenaries and militias and
saved many lives. Their actions allowed for the return
into those areas of UNOCI and humanitarian
associations, which had abandoned them because of
excessive insecurity. Grave allegations of human rights

violations have been made in these regions of western
Cote d'Ivoire, with the alleged involvement of the
Forces republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire. My delegation
expresses its deep concern about these allegations and
hopes that light will be shed upon these events through
investigations, inquiries and the appropriate judicial
procedures, including international procedures. N0
crime should go unpunished.

The President of the Republic, Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, is the President of all Ivorians. He respects
the lives and well-being of all people living in Cote
d'lvoire. Respect for human rights and the rule of law
are at the heart of his Government's agenda. He has
therefore instructed the Public Prosecutor of Daloa to
launch judicial investigations to establish the facts and
bring the perpetrators to justice.

My delegation welcomes the recent visit to Cote
d'lvoire of the Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, Mr. Simonovic', and the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Ms. Valerie Amos. We hope that
their reports will help to shed light on human rights
violations in Duekoue.

The statement of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, was very
important and fully in line with our expectations.
Similarly, my delegation welcomes the nomination of
three commissioners to the international commission of
inquiry established on 25 March by the United Nations
Human Rights Council

"to investigate the allegations of serious abuses
and Violations of human rights committed in Cote
d'Ivoire following the 28 November polls in
order to identify those responsible for those acts
and bring them to justice" (S/ZOH/ZH, para. 59).

During his various broadcast statements and
telephone conversations with Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and with his counterpart Heads of State,
President Ouattara has always and unambiguously
reaffirmed his will to an end all violence and to open
transparent investigations leading to fair trials and
assigning responsibility to all the perpetrators of
violence, whatever their camp. President Ouattara calls
for the immediate establishment of a truth, justice and
reconciliation commission in order to mend the fabric
of Ivorian human relations, which has been
considerably damaged by 10 years of painful conflict,
and to thereby restore social cohesion in the context of
a process of collective soul-searching and internal
healing in truth, justice and forgiveness.

That is the price we must pay for the challenge
and success of national reconstruction. The President
of the Republic, as he promised during the electoral
campaign - a promise that has assumed its full
meaning at these critical times in our country - will
very soon put together a broad-based and inclusive
Government that will draw on the competencies of all
political forces of the country in such a way that all the
sons and daughters of Cote d'Ivoire will own the vast
reconstruction process in the post-crisis phase,
allowing our country to enter an era of peace, stability
and prosperity. To that end, we will continue to rely on
the invaluable assistance of the United Nations, not
only in the immediate task of restoring law and order,
security and humanitarian assistance to refugees and
displaced persons, but above all with respect to longer-
term challenges, which will require the conversion of
UNOCI from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
11-29790
From this standpoint, my delegation welcomes
the good news that public assistance is to be restored to
Cote d'lvoire. We express our thanks to France, which
has allocated €400 million on an emergency basis; to
the European Union, which has allocated €180 million;
and to the World Bank, whose President, Mr. Zoellick,
has said that his institution will resume activities in
Cote d'Ivoire. My delegation therefore calls on all our
traditional partners and invites new and potential
partners to mobilize to give substance to the hope of
what the emergence of democracy in our country could
represent and achieve for the rapid development of our
continent. Yes, support for ensuring that the will of the
people of Cote d'Ivoire is respected will help to
strengthen democracy on the African continent and the
well-being of our peoples, and especially a well-trained
younger generation, which, even more than our natural
resources, remains the true wealth of our continent.

