Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his briefing. We
acknowledge the complexity of his mandate and we
would like to once again assure him of our full support
for his work.

Since Bolivia assumed its seat as an elected
member of the Security Council, we have of course
shown our support for the various meetings held in
different contexts and at various levels. Each of those
meetings provided an opportunity for the establishment
of de-escalation zones, a cessation of hostilities and the
provision of humanitarian access. For example, the
work done in Astana, the meetings in Moscow, Cairo
and Riyadh and the agreements on de-escalation zones
between Jordan, the United States and Russia and
between Russia, Iran and Turkey are signs of progress.

Clearly, our primary concern remains the urgent
need to make progress in a political process that allows
for a resolution of the conflict in Syria so that the
population can regain peace. We believe that there has
been a significant step forward. My delegation wishes to
highlight the commitments made at the Syrian National
Dialogue Congress, held in Sochi on 30 January, since
those commitments focus on strengthening the political
process led by the United Nations in the context of
resolution 2254 (2015), particularly through the drafting
of a new constitution by a constitutional committee. We
commend and acknowledge the efforts of the Russian
Federation in that regard.

We also highlight the principles agreed at the
Congress to strengthen the political process. Such
principles would be directly linked to the commitment
of the parties to respect the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria in the context of its right
to choose its own political, economic and social system
without pressure or external interference, as well
as to unify their armed forces in order to defend and
ensure the rule oflaw and respect for the rights of their
population and to combat the threat of terrorism and
violent extremism conducive to terrorism.

A clear sign of the readiness to encourage that
process is the establishment of the constitutional
committee, composed of a delegation of the Syrian
Government and a diverse delegation of the opposition,
broadly represented by civil society, women and tribal,
ethnic and religious leaders. Together, they cover and
represent in an inclusive way most sectors of Syrian
society in order to debate the drafting of constitutional
reform. We emphasize that part of that agreement has
provided that the mandate, the terms of reference,
powers, the rules of procedure and the selection criteria
for the composition of the constitutional committee
should be arrived at through talks conducted by the
United Nations in Geneva.

We believe that that is a significant step in the
political process, and the results of the meetings held in
Vienna and Sochi make it possible for us to acknowledge
it as such. However, we regret the fact that the critical
situation that the Syrian people are still experiencing
with the latest escalation of tensions in recent weeks
shows us that there is still a long way to go. In that
regard, we echo the words of the Secretary-General
when he said: "We must never forget that progress
towards a political settlement needs to be accompanied
by progress on the ground."

The Security Council now has the challenge of
urgently calling on the parties involved to unite their
efforts and to continue the momentum provided by
the political process in order to promote dialogue and
consensus that facilitate common ground so as to reduce
the violence and allow the humanitarian access that is
so greatly needed at this time. For that, the willingness
of the parties is essential to finding a way out of the
conflict, which, as we know, has continued for more
than seven years.

Finally, we reiterate that the only option for
resolving the conflict is through an inclusive, negotiated
and agreed political process, led by and for the Syrian
people, that allows a peaceful solution among all parties.
