The Secretary-General: Three weeks ago, I
briefed the Security Council on the situation in the
Middle East. I warned then that we were nearing the
abyss. Since that day, the toll of the dead and wounded,
particularly among innocent civilians, has risen to
levels that can be described, without exaggeration, as
appalling.

Israeli-Palestinian tensions are at boiling point.
The situation is the worst in 10 years. Escalation has
been met with escalation with little and, in some cases,
no regard for innocent civilian lives. Acts that are
disproportionate in scale and indiscriminate in their
effect are occurring on an almost daily basis.

The scale of the carnage is horrifying. Since the
beginning of the current crisis in September 2000,
there have been some 1,200 fatalities among the
Palestinians. More than 180 of them have occurred in
the last 10 days. On the Israeli side, out of some 350
fatalities, well over 50 have occurred in the same 10
days. I grieve, as we all must, for the families of those
who have lost their lives or have been maimed or
wounded. I grieve for Israel and Palestine.

In giving the Council my assessment of the
situation on the ground, I would like to start by saying
that I am profoundly disturbed by the increasing use of
heavy weaponry by Israel in civilian areas. It has made
life even more difficult and precarious for Palestinian
civilians, who were already subjected to severe
physical and economic hardships.

Large-scale military operations in pursuit of
Palestinian militants - involving ground troops, attack
helicopters, tanks and F-l6s - have taken place
throughout civilian areas and refugee camps in the
West Bank and Gaza, causing large-scale loss of life.
In addition, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and other agencies are reporting growing
disregard on the part of the Israeli Defence Forces
(IDF) for the safety of medical and ambulance
personnel who are attempting to treat and evacuate
wounded from conflict zones. Only last week, a United
Nations staff member was killed in a clearly marked
ambulance of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

On the other side, the Palestinians have played
their full part in the escalating cycle of violence,
counter-violence and revenge. Palestinian groups have
carried out a series of attacks on Israeli military and
civilian targets. They have attacked IDF checkpoints

S/PvtMSS

 

and settlements in the West Bank and Gaza. Kassam II
rockets have been launched against civilian areas in
Israeli towns. I am particularly disturbed by suicide
attacks which deliberately target civilians, spreading
fear and anxiety throughout the general population.

Against this backdrop, I very much welcome the
decision of the United States to send General Zinni
back to the region. Both Chairman Arafat and Prime
Minister Sharon have taken steps to facilitate his
efforts. Mr. Arafat has finally arrested all those
suspected of involvement in the assassination of
Rehavam Zeevi, the Israeli Tourism Minister.
Mr. Sharon has wisely given up his demand for seven
days of calm before beginning negotiations.

I hope both leaders will engage constructively
with General Zinni in a renewed and intensified
dialogue on the political, security and economic
dimensions of the peace process. The alternative for
both sides is continued bloodshed, delaying even
further the prospects for an end to the occupation and
the violence.

At this time, I feel I must speak directly to the
people and leaders of both sides.

To the Palestinians I say: you have the inalienable
right to a viable State within secure, internationally
recognized borders, but you must stop all acts of terror
and all suicide bombings. The deliberate and
indiscriminate targeting of civilians is morally
repugnant. It is doing immense harm to your cause by
weakening international support and making Israelis
believe that it is their existence as a State, and not the
occupation, that is being opposed.

To the Israelis I say: you have the right to live in
peace and security within secure, internationally
recognized borders, but you must end the illegal
occupation. More urgently, you must stop the bombing
of civilian areas, the assassinations, the unnecessary
use of lethal force, the demolitions and the daily
humiliation of ordinary Palestinians. Such actions
gravely erode Israel's standing in the international
community and further fuel the fires of hatred, despair
and extremism among Palestinians.

To the leaders on both sides - Prime Minister
Sharon and Chairman Arafat in particular - I say: you
can still lead your peoples away from disaster. You
have accepted the Tenet understandings and the
Mitchell recommendations as the basis for
negotiations. Today, more than ever, you must
recognize that security and a political settlement are
indivisible. One cannot exist without the other. Many
of your friends stand ready to support you if you seize
this opportunity.

In closing, let me say that the recent initiative by
Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia sets out a clear
and compelling vision for peace in the Middle East
based on the bedrock of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). I appeal to the leaders of
the Arab world not to give up on the search for peace,
but rather to unite in support of this vision, showing
the world and the parties that there is an alternative to
war.

I call on Mr. Arafat and Mr. Sharon immediately
to take the necessary political, security and economic
steps on the ground that can help realize this vision.
Finally, I call on the Security Council to lend its full
authority and influence to the vital cause of peace.

