Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia,
and Slovenia, the associated countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey and the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) countries Iceland and Norway,
members of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.

Since this is the first time that I am taking the
floor under your presidency, allow me to congratulate
you on your effective leadership of the Council during
the month of November. The initiative of this morning
shows how well you are leading the Council.

I thank you for giving us an opportunity to debate
this important issue.

The European Union is convinced that the
fundamental problems affecting the Great Lakes region
require a regional approach. For the first time since
1994, positive developments in the concerned countries
have created concrete prospects for lasting political
stability in the area and have allowed for realistic steps
forward in the organization of an international
conference on peace, security, democracy and
development for the Great Lakes. As the Secretary-
General said this morning, there is a new dynamic in
the region. The European Union supports the initiative
for such a conference under the auspices of the United
Nations and the African Union and commends the
efforts of the involved countries and of the Secretary-
General to this end. As has been noted before, it is long
overdue.

Allow me to share a few points with you as the
European Union's contribution to today's debate.

We are fully aware of the importance of African
ownership in this process, as Minister Madeira and
others have emphasized. The success of the conference
will depend primarily on the common political will of
the countries involved in achieving shared objectives,
and we welcome the emergence of a positive attitude
towards the conference in the countries of the region.

The European Union sees the conference as the
beginning of a process of normalization rather than a
one-time event. We believe it is important to establish
clear and realistic objectives that can be attained in the
agreed time frame. The conference should not stop at
establishing principles, but should ideally result in
concrete operational agreements or projects.
Coordination, coherence and consistency with other
existing processes, such as the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD), is also important, as
is the need to avoid duplication with other forums.
The full and effective participation of all
countries in the region, including all the countries
neighbouring the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and South Africa, is also crucial, as well as the
involvement of subregional organizations, international
financial institutions, observer countries and the
European Union. In addition, the establishment of a
group of friends will provide a valuable forum for
discussion and coordination of international support for
the conference.

Among the issues to be addressed, peace and
security are clearly central. We welcome the
declaration of Principles on Good-Neighbourly
Relations and Cooperation, signed in New York on 25
September of this year by some of the countries of the
region, which already identify the main principles to be
applied, namely: respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of each State; non-interference in
neighbours' internal affairs; and control of arms
trafficking and supplies directed to other countries.
Breaking the cycle of conflict, arms trade and illegal
exploitation is one of the main issues that the
conference should address.

We also expect the conference to play an
important role in promoting trade, investment and
economic cooperation and integration within the
region. The challenge ahead is that of ensuring that the
immense natural resources of the region are exploited
for the social and economic development of the entire
population. The active participation of the private
sector and regional organizations in this regard is also
welcomed.

Finally, the conference provides an opportunity
for the countries of the region to address crucial issues,
such as good governance, democracy, human rights and
the rule of law, the advancement of which may help to
restore confidence between Governments and their
respective populations. The African Union and NEPAD
already provide a valid and agreed framework for
tackling those issues. A thorough discussion on
transitional justice and the need to end impunity may
also contribute to the regional reconciliation process.
In addition, the strong involvement of civil society will
be welcomed.

Consolidating the peace processes in the region
will be a fundamental element in the success of the
conference. The European Union, along the lines
indicated by the United Nations and the African Union,
has played an important role in this, as demonstrated
recently by the European Union-led operation
"Artemis", which provided immediate relief for the
civilian population and was an example of successful
crisis management.

Today the European Union is strongly committed
to supporting the new Congolese institutions through a
major post-conflict programme of assistance. Our focus
is on demobilization, disarmament and reintegration of
ex-combatants, the creation of an integrated police unit
and the preparation for elections by the year 2005. The
preparation for elections could prove a very difficult
task in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
support the efforts of United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
this regard and hope that it will be possible to draw on
its logistics, since the success of the electoral process
will depend largely on the availability of adequate
transport and communication facilities.

As for Burundi, we congratulate South Africa, the
Governments of the Regional Initiative and the African
Union for brokering an agreement between the
transitional Government and the group, Forces pour la
defense de la democratie. We urge the group Forces
nationales de liberation to join the political process and
we encourage the Government of Burundi to keep the
door open to the negotiations.

The European Union and its member States will
continue to support the African Mission in Burundi,
deployed by the African Union. However, the long-
term sustainability of this African-led force is seriously
open to question. We believe that the option for a
transfer of authority to the United Nations will need to
be considered in due course to ensure peacekeeping in
Burundi.

The elections in Rwanda also represent a key
factor in the prevailing situation in the Great Lakes, as
they are an important step towards national
reconciliation and the consolidation of viable
democratic institutions.

The Great Lakes area has become a major focus
of European Union foreign policy, as it is a test case of
the ability of Africa, with our support, to become
master of its own destiny. The proposed conference
could provide the right framework for ensuring that our
support is based on a regional approach. We welcome
the steps already taken in that direction and we pledge
our continued support to the consolidation of peace and
development in the region.

In concluding, I would like to add a few words
in my national capacity. I see that on many of these
issues - background issues, the hard issues of peace
and security and the soft issues of development and
good governance - were to be addressed by the
President of the Republic of Italy, President Ciampi,
the day before yesterday. Unfortunately, in the event,
he was not able to attend. But I think it would be
appropriate, without taking up more time, for me to
supply the text of the President's statement for the
Security Council records.

