Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
underline the United Kingdom's deep regret that it has
not been possible for the Council to find an agreed way
forward on Iraq. The United Kingdom tried as hard as
any member of the Security Council to achieve that. In
spite of that regret, which I know we all share, we
should not forget what brought us to this point: the
fundamental failure of Iraq to disarm in the face of 12
years of demands, pressure and pleas from the Security
Council and from virtually the whole of the
international community. If Iraq had made a genuine
effort - that indispensable factor - to close
outstanding issues of substance at any time in the past
decade, particularly after resolution 1441 (2002)
afforded it the final opportunity to do so, and if Iraq
had respected the United Nations, we would not be
where we are. I repeat what British ministers have
made clear: any action which the United Kingdom has
to take in this matter will be in accordance with
international law and based on relevant resolutions of
the Security Council.

Whatever the present divisions and resentments,
we the Security Council, we the United Nations, have a
central role to play on Iraq and on the wider issues
associated with it. In that regard, on 17 March the
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs expressed the interest of the United Kingdom in
Security Council action affirming Iraq's territorial
integrity, ensuring rapid delivery of humanitarian
relief, allowing for the earliest possible lifting of
United Nations sanctions, promoting an international
reconstruction programme and allocating the use of all
oil revenues for the benefit of the people of Iraq. These
are issues on which members of the Council have
voiced similar concerns. We will share our ideas on
continuing the oil for food programme in the interests
of the people of Iraq and on ensuring rapid
humanitarian provision. I hope that, together, and with
the active contribution of the Secretary-General, we
can make rapid progress on this crucial area. The
Secretary of State for International Development of the
United Kingdom is visiting New York today, at the
request of the Prime Minister, to discuss these issues
with the Secretary-General. The British Government
has already set aside about $110 million for immediate
humanitarian provision if there is a conflict, and is
likely to announce further funding.

The United Kingdom continues to see an
important role for the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
verifying the disarmament of Iraq and in carrying out
longer-term monitoring. We warmly commend the
inspectors for their professional work in Iraq since the
passage of resolution 1441 (2002). They bear none of
the responsibility for the evolution of events. We note
the respective work programmes and the key tasks
which Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei have put before us.
Equally, we note that without a cooperating Iraqi
Government, as resolution 1284 (1999) and resolution
1441 (2002) make abundantly clear, it would never be
possible to be confident of the key tasks or of making
progress on them. We should encourage UNMOVIC
and the IAEA to keep both documents under review. A
more definitive work programme will be possible when
there is an administration in Iraq which is prepared to
cooperate fully, actively and unconditionally and when
there is a secure situation on the ground.

