Mr. Danon (Israel): Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and welcome the new members to the Council.Today I would like to address a people with an incredibly rich history and heritage, whom Israel considers a partner in building a better future in the Middle East - the Iranian people. Unfortunately, the Iranian people are ruled by a regime that remains the biggest threat to peace and security in the region. The regime has proudly announced that it is enriching more uranium than before the disastrous Iran deal. It supports and funds terror, instead of investing in its own people. Its forces shoot live ammunition at protesters. The regime outright lied to the international community to cover up its fatal actions that took the lives of 176 passengers and crew aboard a Ukrainian aircraft. It is encouraging to see that more and more countries are taking steps to hold the regime accountable, but there is still much more than can and must be done. It is inspiring to witness the brave Iranian people, who have been oppressed by their own Government for decades, fight back. The Iranian people are risking their lives by taking to the streets and demanding their rights. I would like to take this opportunity to speak to the Iranian people directly. Our Persian neighbours have a tremendously rich heritage of which they should be proud. Since the time of the Achaemenid Empire in 550 BCE, the Persian people have made vital contributions. They gave the world its first declaration of human rights and racial equality, which freed slaves and gave people the right to choose their own religion. They created the world's first taxation system and postal service. They invented the world's first water supply system, refrigerator, algebra, animation, chess and the list goes on. It is incredible to think of the great contrast between their rich history and the current regime. It is absurd that the people who invented human rights and protected the freedom of religion are ruled by a regime that tramples both. That absurdity has brought them to stand up for their heritage and their country's rich history and, while the Islamic Republic is doing all that it can to silence their voice, they stand strong and proud. They are not deterred by violence or by the threat of imprisonment. They do not allow the violation of their freedom of speech to prevent them from spreading their message. I say today to the Iranian people, Israel is on their side. They are protesting because they are tired of being lied to by their Government. Allow me to share with the Council the story of one brave Iranian. Nikta Esfandani had the courage to join the protests in November and fight for her future. Tragically, during one of the protests, she was shot and killed by the regime. She was 14 years old. As if that was not enough of a tragedy, the regime then tried to cover up her death. At first, it announced that her death had been caused by something else and then it forced her parents to say that she died from poisoning. It appears that all options are on the table for the regime, except taking responsibility. The recent cover- up of the downing of the Ukrainian passenger airplane is just the tip of the iceberg, but it was enough to chip away at the regime's propaganda machine. Gelare Jabbari was an anchor for Islamic Republic of Iran broadcasting television and radio company, whose head is appointed directly by the Supreme Leader. Jabbari resigned following the Ukrainian airline incident. After announcing her resignation, she wrote to the Iranian people, asking them to forgive her for the 13 years she had told them lies. The Iranian regime lies to its people and to the international community. It lies about its nuclear programme and about its terror-driven regional ambitions. The Iranian people know that it is time for the international community to recognize that the Iranian regime is deceitful and cannot be trusted. The Iranian people are protesting because they are tired of the regime neglecting the economy and, instead, spending billions on its proxies. Iran suffers from serious infrastructure problems, a weak banking sector and widespread corruption. It is expected that by March of this year, 57 million Iranians will be living below the absolute poverty line. As a result, Iran is experiencing the world's greatest brain drain. Some 150,000 of Iran's best engineers, pilots, doctors and other highly sought-after professionals leave the country every year in search of a place where they can walk and live in freedom from the fear of the Islamic Republic. Yet the regime continues to neglect its people and waste money on violence and terror. Since the outbreak of the conflict in Syria, Iran has spent at least $30 billion to support Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad. Every year, it transfers $700 million to Hizbullah and $100 million to Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad. Those amounts pale in comparison to the estimated $100 billion that the regime has spent on its nuclear programme. There is no doubt that that money could be better spent domestically, but we all know that the regime does not care about the Iranian people.The Iranian people are protesting because they are tired of the violence and of being shot at by their own Government. Owing to the Iranian regime's attempts to cover up its crimes, the number of civilians who have lost their lives in protests since November 2018 is unclear, but some reports indicate as many as 1,500 - 1,500 Iranians killed by their Government for exercising their right to freedom of expression. The Islamic Republic's violence is not contained to Iran and neither is the criticism against it. The regime has used its proxies to spread violence and terror throughout the region. At the recent Security Council debate on the implementation of the Charter of the United Nations, we all heard from our colleague, the representative of Yemen, that his county is experiencing the world's worst humanitarian crisis. He blamed the war there on "Houthi militias, supported by the Iranian regime" (S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1), p. 5). He spoke out against the regime. The Islamic Republic spreads violence within and outside its borders, and its people have had enough. The Islamic revolution stripped the Iranian people of their rights and turned them into pawns in the regime's plan for regional domination. They are victims of the regime. Let us be clear. The campaign against Iran's nuclear aspirations, ballistic missile programme and regional agenda is a campaign against the Iranian regime not the Iranian people. We must empower the Iranian people. Israel sees the Iranian people as a partner in achieving a better, safer and more prosperous future in the Middle East. What the Iranian people are telling us now is that they see us as partners as well. The Iranian people deserve a Government that respects them and protects them, not one that kills and abuses them. The international community must support the Iranian people. We must not allow their voices to be silenced by internet shutdowns, imprisonment or death. More pressure must be applied on the regime. Now is the time to make sure that all sanctions and embargoes continue and to put new ones in place. It is the only way to keep the Iranian people and the entire world safe.
