Mr. Baali (Algeria) (interpretation from French): First
of all, Sir, I would like to say how delighted I am at seeing
you preside over the work of this important body and to
congratulate you warmly. Your great professional and
personal skills strengthen my conviction that you will
successfully discharge the responsibilities entrusted to you.

I would also like to pay a well-deserved tribute to
your predecessor, Ambassador Alfredo Lopes Cabral,
Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau, who so
brilliantly and effectively steered the work of the Council
in a particularly busy month.

This meeting of the Security Council on Angola,
enhanced today by the presence and participation of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), is taking place at a
crucial time in which the process of consolidating peace in
that country, devastated by many years of war, requires
greater mobilization from the international community to
complement the praiseworthy efforts of Angola and the
other countries of the region to establish a lasting peace that
can open the door to national reconciliation and harmony.

Algeria, which has always supported these efforts,
firmly supports the initiative taken by the SADC member
countries to bring this matter before the body responsible

 

for the maintenance of international peace and security,
and endorses their assessments, proposals and
recommendations aimed at ensuring a return to peace and
stability in that brother country.

The positive developments of the last two years have
created, with the support and encouragement of the
United Nations, the conditions necessary for an end to the
crisis. The Lusaka Protocol, signed on 20 November
1994, opened real and promising prospects for lasting
peace in Angola, and, through agreed arrangements,
provides an appropriate framework for the Angolan
people to transcend the causes of a particularly
devastating and ravaging conflict and to devote
themselves finally to the immense task of national
reconstruction.

Today, unfortunately, it seems that the progress that
has been achieved could be gravely jeopardized by
continuous delays and repeated postponements in the
implementation of the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol,
as the Secretary-General so clearly indicated in his recent
report. Suddenly, political prospects are becoming
uncertain as doubts and mistrust daily emerge about the
real intentions of UNITA leaders concerning their
commitments under the peace accords.

Therefore, as the Secretary-General notes in his
report, the challenges now facing the peace process in
Angola, essentially boil down to unkept promises on the
part of UNITA concerning implementing the successive
timetables for the implementation of provisions regarding
political and military questions and of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

Given the extremely slow pace of the peace process,
my delegation can only express its regret and its fears at
seeing the efforts made and the sacrifices offered to lay
the foundations for a final political settlement called into
question because of the persistence of a situation of
neither war nor peace in the country, the responsibility for
which can be attributed to the UNITA leaders.

My delegation would like to express its full
solidarity with the people and the Government of Angola
and its firm conviction that they will be able to overcome
the difficult trial facing their country.

In the past few years, the United Nations has
continuously made considerable efforts to foster a
peaceful settlement in Angola through sustained action
aimed at establishing a lasting peace, ensuring a return to

 

stability and preserving the unity of the country, and at the
same time meeting the conditions for national reconciliation
in strict observance of commitments entered into and
democratic principles. The great architect of these efforts
undertaken on behalf of the Secretary-General is
Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, who deserves recognition for
his tireless efforts and remarkable devotion in the service
of peace in Angola. I wish also to pay tribute to UNAVEM
III, in which my country participates, which discharges its
lofty mission for peace under often difficult conditions.

The signing of the Lusaka Protocol marked the end of
a long, laborious and delicate process aimed at establishing
peace in Angola and consolidating stability and security
throughout the entire region. The Security Council must
therefore act with diligence and determination in
considering pending issues and take the measures which are
required by the gravity of the situation and which Angola
and the other SADC member countries would like to see it
adopt.

I must recall that national reconstruction, an essential
element of the peace process, requires the mobilization of
considerable financial and other resources, which the
international community should provide to Angola for the
greater good of that country, the region, and world peace
and security.

