Mrs. Abdul Hamid (Malaysia): At the outset,
I wish, on behalf of the Government of Malaysia, to
extend our deepest condolences to the Government and
the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation, as
well as to the family of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin, on
his sudden passing. Our Mission had the opportunity to
work closely with him, especially during the past two
years during Malaysia's membership in the Council, and
we will miss his presence and friendship tremendously.

My delegation is grateful to Ukraine for organizing
this timely open debate and to the distinguished briefers
for their insightful briefings.

Over the past century, we have witnessed how
European security is very much intertwined with the
peace and security of the rest of the world. The two
world wars had, in fact, started in Europe, and the very
existence ofthe United Nations was a direct consequence
of the Second World War. More than seven decades
later, fortunately, we have not have seen conflicts in
Europe to the scale and level as in the previous world
wars. However, the prolonged frozen conflicts and the
recent emergence of crises in the region are no less
worrying, especially when major Powers are involved.

The conflicts in eastern Ukraine and Crimea, in
particular, constitute a direct challenge to the very
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. It is difficult to imagine that, in this day and
age, one could blatantly disregard the fundamental
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and the
independence of States and gain territory by the illegal
use of force with little consequence. Furthermore,
what started off as a conflict in Europe later escalated
and affected far-flung countries, including Malaysia,
with the shocking downing of Malaysian Airlines
flight MH17 in July 2014 - a tragic consequence of
the Ukrainian crisis. Similarly, the so-called frozen
conflicts in the southern Caucasus and the Transnistrian
conflict continue to be a source of instability in the
region and may spark bigger crises that could threaten
international peace and security.

Malaysia believes that there is no lack of
mechanisms - whether regional or international - to
address the conflicts in Europe. Instead, what is lacking
is political will by the conflicting parties to adhere to
the Charter of the United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act
and various United Nations resolutions. The protracted

conflicts in Europe have also exposed the inherent
structural weakness of the Security Council, especially
with regard to the veto power. This predicament will
remain unless the Council takes responsibility to
engage in reform, in the interest of global security and
the common good, instead of narrow self-interest.

Malaysia believes that the international community
has an important role to play to make it costly for the
conflicting parties in Europe to use military means to
achieve their political ends. We also need to support
the parties to engage in dialogue, the de-escalation of
conflict, confidence-building measures and mediation
for a peaceful resolution of conflict. Malaysia welcomes
the call by Secretary-General Guterres to intensify
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations to work closely together in preventing,
managing and resolving crises under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. We commend the
great stabilizing role played by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
European Union (EU) in bringing peace and stability
to the region.

With regard to the conflict in Ukraine, we call on
the parties to fully implement the Minsk agreements
in order to facilitate a final, political solution to the
conflict. We also urge all parties to fully cooperate
with the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to enable it
to carry out its mandate.

Meanwhile, in the western Balkans, we fully
support the crucial role played by the EU and the OSCE
in further strengthening democratic institutions, the
rule of law and the process of reconciliation, especially
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Kosovo. Learning
from the traumatic experience of the Second World
War, Malaysia believes that Europe has a lot to offer
to the post-conflict countries in the Western Balkans,
especially on the need to acknowledge atrocities
committed in the past and to ensure accountability, in
order to make progress towards reconciliation.

Malaysia also views the increasing isolationism,
xenophobia and revisionism in Europe with great
concern. Based on past experiences, the international
community has good reason to be alarmed when
European countries turn inward. We, therefore,
sincerely hope that the countries in the region will
remain united in their common values based on
respect for human dignity and human rights, freedom,
democracy, equality and the rule of law in order to
ensure peace, stability and prosperity in the region
and beyond.

