The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Colombia.

We have taken careful note of the briefing of
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe, for which we
thank him.

Colombia expresses its concern over the
deterioration of the situation in Syria and deplores the
violent repression to which demonstrators have been
subject, as well as the deaths of many civilians. We
believe that it is unacceptable to use disproportionate
force against the civilian population and therefore call
for the immediate cessation of all acts of violence as an
indispensable element of a solution to the crisis.

It is the responsibility of the Syrian Government
to respect and protect the individual freedoms and
fundamental rights of the entire population. In order to
restore peace and order, the Government must
guarantee all citizens the right to life and the full
exercise of their freedom of expression and right to
peaceful assembly, in strict compliance with its
international obligations and the provisions of
international human rights law.

We note the lifting of the state of emergency and
the programme of reforms announced by President
Bashar al-Assad, and hope that, through an inclusive
dialogue and the effective application of these reforms,
progress can be made towards social peace and order.

Colombia urges the civil authorities and the
demonstrators to find a way to build channels of social
and political dialogue that respond effectively to the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people to a just,
equitable and democratic society in which citizens can
freely exercise their fundamental rights and freedoms.
Colombia reiterates the urgent need to end the violence
and calls strongly for the respect of human rights of
Syrian citizens. We look forward to an independent and
transparent investigation into the killings, and support
initiatives to find a political solution that will bring the
parties closer together and contribute to an end to the
violence.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

