Mr. Owada (Japan): With the assistance and support
provided by the United Nations civilian police element,
including the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti
(UNTMIH), certain improvements have been made in the
professionalization of the Haitian National Police. I wish to
take this opportunity to express the appreciation of the
Government of Japan for the contributions which this
international effort has made to the rehabilitation process in
Haiti.

Despite these improvements, Japan recognizes that the
international community must continue to support the
training and professionalization of the Haitian National
Police to ensure that it is capable of maintaining law and
order throughout society and to nurture the democratization
process. Japan thus supports the establishment of a United
Nations police mission in Haiti, or MIPONUH, as referred
to in the addendum to the Secretary-General's report. We
owe a special debt of gratitude to those countries that have
contributed to UNTMIH for their willingness to make their
personnel, equipment and other supplies available to this
new follow-on force.

The role of a civilian police force can be truly
effective only if there is a credible judicial system in place.
In this context, the delay in the establishment of such a
judicial system in Haiti is a matter of acute concern. Japan
calls upon the Government of Haiti to work in good faith
to revitalize the system of justice as expeditiously as
possible.

Other grave problems remain. In particular, my
delegation cannot but express its grave concern about the
fact that the country has been without a functioning
Government since the Prime Minister resigned in June. For
the democratization process to proceed, it is essential that
the political parties put aside their differences and agree to
engage in cooperation for an effective Government without
further delay.

Recognizing that the stability of Haiti is important to
the stability of the Caribbean region and, indeed, to the
Latin American region as a whole, Japan contributed $3
million dollars in March 1995 to the United Nations trust
fund for the establishment of the Haitian police. This is
in addition to the cooperation it has extended to Haiti in
the three years since the democratic Government was
established. It has been providing this cooperation,
amounting to more than $50 million dollars, in such
forms as assistance for economic structural reform, food
aid, assistance for food production and planning and
technical assistance for road construction. In extending
this assistance, it has been Japan's intention to assist in
the process of economic development and democratization
to be promoted by the Government and people of Haiti.
This is an endeavor that must remain a matter of great
interest to all of us in the international community.

For all these reasons, Japan will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before us.

