I am honoured to join this open debate of the Security Council on climate and security. Today's discussion shows that this vital issue is at the heart of the international community's concerns. I commend the Federal Republic of Germany and its predecessor, France, for taking the initiative of convening this open debate. I would like to thank the briefers for their presentations, which have helped us to define the context of our dialogue. We believe that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is the optimal United Nations forum for discussing such issues. Nevertheless, we regard this debate on the risks of climate change as an international responsibility and a preventive measure necessary to avert such risks and crises at the national, regional and international levels. The debate will increase our awareness of the perils of climate change, which poses a challenge for the United Nations, whose role is based on the three pillars of peace, development and human rights. We believe that climate change can adversely affect those three pillars. The increasing temperatures at the Earth's surface, even if not a direct or tangible threat in and of themselves, will certainly exacerbate other well-known risks. Such threats are more complex in certain regions of the world, including our own, as they hinder the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in our countries, in particular Goals 2, 6, 13 and 15. The lack of rainfall and the unsustainable use of water resources exacerbate the problem of water scarcity and further deplete the land's vital resources, provoking displacement and migration. The United Nations knows of the alarming statistics on the number of people who are displaced or forced to migrate for economic and environmental reasons. Although the exact number of people who have met their fate at sea is unknown, the reasons for their migration are known to everyone at this virtual meeting and beyond. While we believe that climate change is a topic of interest to all countries, and one usually discussed from a global perspective, we wish to highlight the most important repercussions of climate change for the Middle East in general, and for Iraq in particular. It is alarming that the major river basins, especially in the Middle East, are subjected to great pressure and strain as a result of competition for use and control of shared water resources, in the absence of effective bilateral or multilateral conventions or regional frameworks governing the fair and reasonable use of shared water. This situation results primarily from an indifference to the principles of international law and its recognized terms of reference, which safeguard the rights of all coastal States. Climate change also plays a role. It would be fair for the international community to carry out a positive, preventive intervention in order to enhance viability and stability and to counter extreme changes in normal life in fragile ecosystems or areas vulnerable to climate change - that is, to support climate-change adaptation programmes. Such a step is not only necessary; from an environmental or an economic standpoint, it is less costly than attempts to settle migrants or to rehabilitate their abandoned land. By way of example, allow me to mention the grave deterioration of the environment of the Iraqi delta at the mouth of the Gulf, the famous waterway known as Shatt Al-Arab, which is portrayed as the historical location of the legend of Sinbad and, according to certain holy books and religions, was the site of the Garden of Eden. Owing to the decline in fresh water coming from its tributaries, it is a striking example of forced transformation, from a freshwater ecosystem characterized by biodiversity, fertile soil and dense forests of palm trees, into a predominantly saltwater environment. We cannot ignore the destruction by terrorists of civilian and water facilities in particular; terrorism is a global phenomenon, not a local one. Regardless of the different theories regarding the root causes of terrorism in many regions, the fact is that instability and economic and social fragility contribute to the spread of extremism, bigotry and vindictiveness. As a result, different approaches are needed to defuse tensions in volatile areas that are on the verge of an eruption. We therefore call for climate change adaptation measures to be integrated into efforts to address economic, social and political problems. Iraq commends the international community for taking a stand alongside it and helping to defeat terrorism on its territory. At the same time, it forcefully calls for its water rights to be respected and for the Tigris and Euphrates tributaries to be protected from annihilation; such efforts that would contribute in important ways to fostering security, peace and stability. On a related note, allow me to mention resolution 2421 (2018), in which the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) is renewed and in which, for the first time, the issue of water and the environment was included in the mission's mandate. In that connection, on 21 February 2018, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General mentioned the issue of joint management of transboundary water resources. Accordingly, we hope that UNAMI will, first, monitor climate-related security risks and include them in the periodic briefings to the Security Council; secondly, organize workshops aimed at building Iraqi capacity so that climate-related security risks can be understood in the short and medium terms; thirdly, provide the support necessary to facilitate regional dialogue aimed at resolving water-related and environmental challenges; and fourthly, help the Iraqi authorities deal with climate- related displacement, economic vulnerability and social instability in the plan to rehabilitate areas liberated from the terrorist organization Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. To conclude, my Government wishes to relay the message that Iraq is seeking peace, security and development with neighbouring countries, and that it hopes to adopt an approach of joint cooperation among riparian States to share both the benefits and the burdens in a just and reasonable manner. Climate change is a global phenomenon that knows no political borders. Tension and instability can therefore be prevented through comprehensive regional approaches grounded in the provisions of international law; initiatives based on diplomacy among riparian States, such as water diplomacy and global security initiatives; and environmentally smart programmes. Such measures would create an environment conducive to defeating terrorism, accelerate the rebuilding of infrastructure in various sectors, and promote climate change adaptation measures and the sustainable management and use of natural resources.
