Mr. Kalomoh (Namibia): Madam President, this
is the third time in less than two weeks under your
presidency that an African issue has been discussed by
the Security Council. It is our fervent hope and
expectation that when the Council next meets, it will be
to consider tangible progress on any of the issues
discussed in the last two weeks.

My delegation appreciates the prominence that
you, Madam President, are giving to the situations
threatening international peace and security in Africa.
This approach is testimony to the excellent historical
relationship between your country and Africa, and to
your stated objective to give special attention to the
conflicts besetting our continent.

The situation in Angola is naturally of deep
concern to Namibia. The people of Angola have
endured a brutal, vicious and devastating war for more
than a quarter of a century. Just a few days ago, they
celebrated 26 years of their independence - 26 years
of pain, suffering and tears. They have suffered
horrendous terrorist attacks at the hands of UNITA, led
by Mr. Jonas Savimbi. UNITA's acts of banditry have
also assumed cross-border dimensions, involving
neighbouring countries including Namibia.

It is not my intention to bore the members of the
Security Council with the tortuous history of the many
failed attempts by the international community to help
the people of Angola find a lasting and broadly
acceptable political solution to the problems of that
country. However, to put the current situation in
Angola in context, I wish to draw the attention of the
Council to the following events, which preceded the
situation we are in today.

We all recall that in 1992, the people of Angola
and the international community were both frustrated
and deeply disappointed when, after losing the
elections, which were observed by the international
community and organized and supervised by the United
Nations, UNITA rejected the results and resumed full-
scale war. That is a matter of historical record.

In 1997, the people of Angola and, again, the
international community were indignant when UNITA
abandoned the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol,
which had been painstakingly negotiated and
completed in 1994 by the Government of Angola and
UNITA under the active mediation of the Special
Representative of the United Nations Secretary-
General, the late Maitre Blondin Beye. Again, UNITA
failed to comply with the conditions of the Lusaka
Protocol, to which they are a signatory.

Today, there are some who think that somehow
Mr. Jonas Savimbi is now so transformed as to be
interested in genuine negotiations, and that he can be
trusted to honour any commitment that will emerge. If
history is any guide, however, this judgement is clearly
mistaken. It is crystal-clear that Mr. Savimbi continues
to defy the will of the international community, as well
as its repeated demands, that he return to the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. Mr. Savimbi
must not be allowed to engage in further deceit and
subterfuge by always appearing to be interested in a
peaceful solution while preparing for war. His latest
suggestion for a revision of the Lusaka Protocol should
be rejected.

Mr. Jose Eduardo dos Santos of the Republic of
Angola, as well as other leaders in the region, have
repeatedly invited Mr. Savimbi to resume the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. Instead,
however, he has opted to continue his brutal and
mindless war against the people of Angola. Faced with
this situation, the Security Council has no other option
but to continue to exert maximum pressure to compel
UNITA and Mr. Savimbi to return to the peace process.

My delegation commends the efforts of the
Government of Angola to implement the Lusaka
Protocol, including through the Fund for Peace and
National Reconciliation. We call on the international
community to lend whatever assistance it can provide,
both financial and technical, to the people of Angola to
enable them to carry out the arduous task of organizing
free and fair elections. We remain deeply concerned
about the humanitarian situation in the country, and we
call on the international community to increase
assistance to the Government of Angola to address this
situation.

While it is clear that the military offensive by the
Angolan armed forces and the sanctions imposed by
the Security Council have substantially diminished the
ability of UNITA to wage a serious conventional war,
the last report of the Monitoring Mechanism still shows
that UNITA operations continue in many areas.

Many UNITA representatives abroad continue to
perform their activities in a number of countries
without any impediment, mostly in Europe and North
America but also in Africa. Furthermore, operations
with regard to arms and diamond transactions, as well
as support for UNITA's finances and propaganda
machinery, continue unabated. It is particularly
disturbing that the Mechanism reports that while it has
raised some of these issues with the authorities of the
countries concerned, nothing has been done to put an
end to violations of the letter, and indeed the spirit, of
the sanctions resolutions against UNITA.

One of the methods used by UNITA to conduct its
propaganda is electronic technology. We trust that
countries where its web sites and other electronic
propaganda tools are situated will take urgent, concrete
steps to correct the situation. My delegation would
support a further strengthening of sanctions, in
particular through measures in the telecommunications
area.

The report correctly summarized the efforts in the
region of the Southern African Development
Community to collectively and individually implement
and further strengthen the sanctions regime, in
particular through the strengthening of air traffic
control systems and the prevention of the diversion of
petroleum and diamond smuggling. Some progress has
been made in all these areas, and efforts are continuing
to be made to close all loopholes used by UNITA to
further its terrorist activities against the Angolan
people. Furthermore, countries in the region are fully
participating in the Kimberly Process, and my
delegation is confident that work on a certification
scheme for rough diamonds will be finalized as soon as
possible.

We welcome the extension of the mandate of the
Monitoring Mechanism until April 2002. The
Mechanism must now use this period to get
explanations from those countries it has cited as still
harbouring UNITA elements, facilitating the
organization's funds and assets and providing it with
facilities as well as technical and other support,
directly and indirectly. It should, on the basis of that
information, make recommendations to the Security
Council for appropriate action. For its part, the Council
should ensure that its resolutions and the
recommendations of the Monitoring Mechanism are
fully implemented.

Among the issues raised in the report of the
Monitoring Mechanism is the freezing of UNITA assets
and bank accounts. We believe that, given the capacity
and political will, this will further diminish UNITA's
capability to continue to finance its war effort.

The last report of the Monitoring Mechanism is
before the Council. It is comprehensive and detailed
and contains important recommendations. It is thus
incumbent upon the Council to consider the report and
to take appropriate and effective action on the
recommendations contained therein.

In conclusion, my delegation would once again
wish to thank the Security Council sanctions
Committee, under the able leadership of Ambassador
Ryan of Ireland, as well as the Monitoring Mechanism
for its important work. We look forward to receiving its
recommendations in its next report. We would also like
to take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General
and his able Special Adviser for Africa, Under-
Secretary-General Ambassador Ibrahim Gambari, for
their efforts to bring peace to the sisterly country of
Angola. The United Nations Office in Angola greatly
facilitates their work, and we welcome the recent
extension of its mandate.

