Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I wish
to extend my thanks to Alan Doss for his briefing and
for the report of the Secretary-General (S/2005/186),
whose presence among us at this meeting is
particularly welcome. If I may, I would also like to
recall our appreciation for the work of the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Albert
Tevoedjre, and for all that he did.

The magnitude of the difficulties we face in C6te
d'Ivoire is quite clear. Today we owe a particular debt
to Minister Pahad and to President Mbeki. I very much
welcome the minister's commitment to an inclusive
mediation process. It is important that the African
Union (AU) work very closely with the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) in everything that
is done. Like other Council members, the United
Kingdom supports President Mbeki's mediation efforts
aimed at putting the peace process back on track. But
also like other delegations, we are most concerned
about the current situation in Cote d'Ivoire: the
deteriorating security climate, uncontrolled militias,
the continued abuse of human rights, the serious
judicial vacuum in the zone of confidence and the
pervasive sense of impunity.

Therefore, in considering how the Council can
now most effectively tackle those challenges, I would
like to concentrate on just two issues. The first is how
to ensure that all the Ivorian parties live up to their
commitments under the Linas-Marcoussis and Accra
III Agreements. That is essential if we are to achieve
the goal of free and fair elections this October. It is
important that we prepare well for those elections. The
United Kingdom would support an increased role for
the United Nations, if that is requested by all the
Ivorian parties. Resolution 1572 (2004) made it clear
that the Council holds all the parties in Cote d'Ivoire
individually responsible for their actions and that we
will take measures against those who fail to live up to
their obligations. It seems to me, therefore, that it is
time now for the Council to accelerate its preparation
for such measures so that we are ready to act rapidly at
the right moment against those who continue to
obstruct the peace process.

Secondly, with respect to the role of UNOCI, the
Secretary-General has underlined the strain on the
Operation's present capacity and has asked for more
resources, particularly given UNOCI's increased
mandate. We must ensure that the Council's strategy in
Cote d'Ivoire, the number of troops and civilian police
comprising UNOCI and the mandate, the rules of
engagement and the tasks given to the mission are all
fully consistent with one another. In my view, we shall
have to look closely at how those requirements fit
together as we consider how to extend UNOCI's
mandate. In the meantime, I think it is sensible that we
support Ambassador De La Sabliere's proposal for a
one-month rollover.

If I may, I should like to end simply by thanking
France for its continued commitment to cote d'Ivoire
and for the essential contribution that the Licorne
forces are making to supporting the United Nations
mission and to preserving stability in that troubled
country.

