Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by extending my thanks to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Mr. Louis Moreno-Ocampo, for his third report on the
implementation of the relevant part of resolution 1970
(2011) and for the additional information that he has
provided the Council today. I would also like to take
advantage of the opportunity to commend him for his
dedication and untiring work for justice.

This report is a valuable updating on the state of
the prosecution and proceedings, which started by
means of the Council's referral to the Court pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011). We also appreciate the
information that we have received on ongoing
investigations that might lead to the opening of a
second case with charges of gender crimes.

My delegation believes that a fundamental aspect
at this stage is the provision of the necessary
cooperation with the International Criminal Court by
all actors involved, in compliance with the relevant
provisions of resolution 1970 (2011). The Prosecutor's
third report makes encouraging references to the
positive attitude taken in that regard by States, be they
parties or not to the Rome Statute, and by certain
international bodies, such as INTERPOL and the
United Nations Commission of Inquiry.

We note specifically that, with regard to the two
sets of legal proceedings for crimes of murder and
persecution on political grounds - the case against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and the one against Abdullah
Al-Senussi - the Libyan Government has acted to
show its resolve to cooperate with the Court.
Moreover, on several occasions, it has emphasized its
intention to pursue fair and impartial national
investigations and proceedings that meet the
admissibility requirements of the Rome Statute.

The Government of Libya has also shown special
diligence in the difficult task of the preservation of
evidence, which is of vital importance at the trial stage,
be that for national courts or the International Criminal
Court. We commend that attitude. It is also our belief
that the support of the international community and the
provision of cooperation are essential for the Libyan

authorities to remain on the established course, which
would ensure that the serious crimes committed in
Libya will not go unpunished.

With regard to the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, we are following with great interest the
development of the admissibility challenge that has
been brought before the Court, which should be
decided upon soon by a chamber of the Court. It is for
that chamber to decide if the Libyan authorities are
indeed investigating with due process and diligence the
crimes against humanity of which Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi stands accused. Regardless of the decision
taken by the Court, in handing down its decision the
Court will be acting in compliance with the principle of
complementarity, which is the backbone of the criminal
justice system embodied in the Rome Statute.

