Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Egypt for convening
today's timely debate on United Nations peacekeeping.
I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, Ambassador Gert Rosenthal and
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud for their briefings.

At the outset, Japan commends all troop-contributing
countries, police-contributing countries and certainly
mission personnel themselves for their commitment to
maintaining peace and security. Situations that require
United Nations peacekeeping operations are becoming
ever more complex. The review of the United Nations
peace and security architecture is also under way. It is
clear that improvements are needed in United Nations
peacekeeping. Our question should be: how can we
fundamentally strengthen the impact of peacekeeping
on the ground?

It is the responsibility of the Security Council to
ensure that peacekeeping contributes to durable peace.
The Council should assess how to achieve more efficient
and better-performing missions as well as better-
defined mandates and appropriate mandate reviews.
Today's peacekeepers must be sufficiently prepared
to respond to today's challenges. How can we achieve
this? I would like to touch upon several priority areas.

The first is capacity-building. Troop-contributing
countries have the obligation to send personnel with the
training and ability to meet United Nations standards
and effectively do their jobs. But the reality is that we
continue to see gaps and capacity shortfalls. These gaps
have implications for the Security Council's credibility

in enforcing its mandates and for the ability of missions
to succeed. They also directly affect populations that
depend on the United Nations to restore peace and
stability. Force generation and capacity-building are
therefore crucial and interlinked.

During the April briefing on peacekeeping
organized by the United States (see S/PV.7918), the
Secretary-General encouraged trilateral arrangements
under which countries provide additional training and
support to peacekeeping personnel under the auspices
of the United Nations. Japan strongly encourages
expanded discussion in the Council on trilateral
capacity-building efforts between the United Nations,
troop-contributing countries and third countries.

Even capable and well-prepared troops cannot
perform without realistic mandates that meet current
needs. The role of the Council in this context is of
vital importance. During the briefing in April, Japan
noted that we must engage in more serious discussions
on concise and strategically prioritized mandates that
give missions the tools to succeed. Recycled language
and ballooning resolution lengths cannot substitute
for frank assessments of what is needed on the ground
today. Clearer benchmarks will go a long way towards
meeting and adapting both short- and longer-term
mission tasks.

Peacebuilding and local reconciliation efforts
should also receive increasing attention as part of a
comprehensive effort to sustain peace. Within missions,
this requires closer collaboration between civil and
political affairs teams to ensure that localized conflicts
do not spread or derail nationwide reform efforts and
also that local reconciliation efforts be positively linked
to the overall political process.

There is room for enhanced mission support to local
reconciliation work, in close cooperation with United
Nations agencies and programmes, including through
the Peacebuilding Fund. Japan supports developing
the practice of regularly drawing upon the advice of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) throughout the
mission life cycle, including during mission formation,
review and drawdown. At the drawdown stage, the
advice of the PBC could support smoother transitions
between missions and the United Nations country team.

Nearly 70 years since the deployment of its first
operation, United Nations peacekeeping remains more
important than ever. Conflicts have become more
complex, and sustaining peace is a persistent challenge.
Peacekeepers require both the capacity and mandates
to undertake their difficult and expanding work. The
Council has the responsibility to regularly and more
thoroughly discuss these matters to make sure that
every mandate authorization and renewal counts.

