Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Sir, for convening today's debate on
the situation in Afghanistan. We are also grateful to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report,
as well as to my good friend, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
for his comprehensive briefing. We also thank United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Executive Director
Yury Fedotov and Ms. Wazhma Frogh for joining us
here today.

As always, these debates provide an opportunity
to take stock of the situation in Afghanistan, progress
in related fields and challenges that remain. But above
all, it provides a clear reminder of the symbiotic
link between peace and stability in Afghanistan and
security in the global arena. We are pleased with
the new counter-terrorism focus on condition-based
support to Afghanistan and addressing regional
terrorist safe havens. That has brought new momentum
and, more broadly, an opportunity for key regional
and international partners to combat terrorism
more decisively.

As we speak, the so-called fighting season of the
Taliban and other terrorist groups has nearly ended.
Terrorists have failed to make any notable gains on
the ground and have suffered heavy losses in terms of
manpower and morale. Pressured militarily, they have
desperately resorted to soft-target attacks in urban areas.
Our security forces have proven their effectiveness
in countering terrorist elements in independently
conducted operations. We continue to clear territory in
different parts of Afghanistan from the presence of the
Taliban, Da'esh and other terrorist groups.

As of late, a significant number of senior Taliban
and Da'esh figures have been eliminated and captured,
including financiers, planners and recruiters, while
scores of attacks have been prevented and subverted.
Alongside those gains, we are now working to double
the size of our special forces and triple the size of our
airforce, with support from our international partners.

Consolidating our gains and achieving sustainable
peace requires a revamped diplomatic effort at the
regional and global levels and an inclusive process of
democratization domestically, leading our country in
the right direction. To accomplish these tasks, there is
a growing need to increase dialogue among regional
and global Powers, leading to enhanced regional
cooperation in developing mechanisms of verification
and coordination to eliminate threats arising from
terrorism and violent extremists.

In that context, Afghanistan welcomes recent
expressions of readiness on the part of President
Vladimir Putin of the Russian Federation to cooperate
with the United States in Afghanistan in the areas
of counter-terrorism and narcotics. We have always
deemed such cooperation to provide win-win
opportunities to overcome shared challenges and
achieve common gains. We hope that this development
will help generate a new spirit of cooperation among
all regional countries, free from rivalry and competing
interests. It is our earnest hope that Afghanistan will
be seen by all partner countries outside the prism of
regional and international tensions. Let me assure the
Council of Afghanistan's sincere intent to be a platform
of cordiality and fellowship for all.

Substantial improvements in the context
of Afghanistan-Pakistan bilateral relations and
cooperation remain an issue of crucial importance.
Recent collaborative measures, including the visit of
a senior military delegation to Pakistan and the visit
of a Pakistani parliamentary delegation to Kabul are
noteworthy developments. We are awaiting positive
outcomes on various outstanding issues, including
violations across the Durand Line, which is currently
a key hindrance to improving relations between our
two countries. Under the pretext of receiving fire
from our side, Pakistan's violations across the Durand
Line, including indiscriminate artillery shelling,
have continued unabated throughout 2017, resulting
in the loss of innocent lives and the destruction of
villages. Our proposal for engagement and operational
coordination towards addressing those concerns has
not yet seen any response.

At the same time, Afghanistan has the will and
capacity to defend its territory and our patience should
not be tested. We believe that confidence-building
measures can be successful only when violations of that
nature come to a complete halt. In a similar vein, we are
also in communication on the imperative of addressing
terrorists' regional safe havens, and hope to see positive
developments on that front soon. We look forward to
the upcoming trilateral meeting in Beijing next week
between the Foreign Ministers ofAfghanistan, Pakistan
and China.

In the area of peace efforts, we remain focused on
providing a peaceful, dignified and fulfilling life to
all Afghans, free of conflict and insecurity. The Kabul
process, now fully operational, provides an overarching
framework to harmonize international and regional
efforts to help advance peace efforts. We look forward
to the next meeting of the process in February, at
which we will outline our renewed strategy to counter
terrorism and extremism and promote peace. That will
be an opportune moment for the Taliban to change
course, denounce violence andjoin the peace process.

Aside from regional dynamics and peace efforts,

we know that sustaining and consolidating past
achievements requires steady progress in advancing our
reform agenda and in strengthening political consensus
and national unity. To that end, the comprehensive
dialogue under way is geared towards ensuring the
credibility and transparency of future elections and
achieving common understanding on a number of
other pressing national issues, all of which bear crucial
importance for long-term stability in Afghanistan.
Success in that endeavour will require collective
efforts on the part of the Afghan Government and the
international community.

In recent times, we have seen a more proactive and
productive engagement at the highest level between
the United Nations and Afghanistan. We welcome
the Security Council's Arria Formula meeting held
in November, held under the theme "Partners for
Afghanistan: linking security, development and peace
in the Central Asian region", and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate's joint meeting with
donor countries and Afghanistan, which underscored
enhanced development and counter-terrorism measures.

In the broader context of the United Nations
engagement in Afghanistan, the one United Nations
vision is steadily progressing, in collaboration with the
United Nations team on the ground. An adjusted United
Nations role will go a long way towards ensuring greater
coordination, coherence and efficiency among relevant
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, in
accordance with the reform agenda of our Government
and that of the Secretary-General.

Moreover, the adoption in November of General
Assembly resolution 72/10, on Afghanistan, once again
symbolized the international community's strong
consensus on and support for stability and prosperity in
my country. Further, our accomplishment in the Human
Rights Council election and the successful adoption
of two Afghan-initiated resolutions countering the
threat posed by improvized explosive devices, as
well as the International Day of Remembrance of and
Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism, show our active
engagement and contribution at the global platform of
the United Nations.

In order to uphold the General Assembly's
resolution on Afghanistan in letter and spirit, its
effective implementation is imperative. In the area of
security and counter-terrorism, the implementation of
the sanctions regimes under resolutions 1988 (2011) and
1989 (2011) must improve if it is to succeed in helping
turn the tide against terrorism. Those sanction regimes
were put in place to restrict the operational capacity
freedom of movement of terrorists, as well as the flow
of material resources in the region, including illicit
arms and cash, which end up providing oxygen for
terror to thrive.

Yet, experience has shown that the sanction regimes
are lax at best and struggle to achieve the results for
which they were mandated. We hope that the necessary
adjustments on the part of relevant members of the
Security Council are made to enforce sanctions against
terrorists and extremists. Among the outstanding
issues to be addressed, the assets of former and current
Taliban leaders must be frozen so that they do not fund
the death and destruction of innocent civilians.

Furthermore, the listing and delisting of terrorist
groups and associated elements must be based on
existing evidence and proper technical appraisal,
shielded from politicization and manipulation by
certain States. We are looking forward to increasing
our engagement with the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism (OCT). A relationship of mutual
trust between OCT and the Government of Afghanistan
will be pivotal as we strengthen our reliable partnership
to eliminate terrorism in all its forms.

This year has seen major progress in the steady
implementation of mega-regional projects that have
visualized Afghanistan as a land bridge, business hub
and trade and transit roundabout between Central
Asia, South Asia, the Far East and the Middle East.
The Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan and the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
have progressed steadily and helped elevate regional
economic cooperation and sociocultural exchanges to
new levels.

Recently, we have signed bilateral and other
agreements with various countries of the region,
including Turkmenistan, India and Uzbekistan, to
scale up the level of trade, transit and other means of
cooperation for mutual benefit. The materialization
of multiple mega-regional projects demonstrates that,
despite the continuous attempts of some to turn our
location into a destabilizing force for the region and the
world, terror cannot deter the course of development
and prosperity of our country and the region.
In the area of human rights, we continue to make
strides in civilian protection and the promotion of
human rights, despite the effects of conflict. In this
regard, we welcome UNAMA's second annual civil-
military dialogue on the protection of civilians in
Kabul. We are gravely concerned about the increasing
attacks on mosques and worshippers. To combat this
menace, which is trying to sow discord among our
population, we have introduced measures to protect
places of worship at risk. Furthermore, the President
has endorsed an additional annex to the presidential
decree on the prohibition of torture, thereby providing
a legal avenue to victims of torture for redress.
These developments are reflective of our resolve and
commitment to upholding the rule of law for civilian
protection and the promotion of equal rights for all in
a free society.

Consistent with resolution 1325 (2000), the role
of Afghan women is becoming more prominent in
the peace process. The ongoing cycle of violence has
exacerbated conditions for internally displaced persons
(IDPs). In coordination with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the voluntary
repatriation and other programmes are providing much
needed assistance to returning refugees and IDPs.
Additionally, we are working to create economic
opportunities and to strengthen security, which would
provide incentives for people to remain in the country
and contribute to the rebuilding of their nation.

On the counter-narcotics front, we are working in
close cooperation with UNODC to implement a national
drug action that aligns law enforcement, education
and public health in the light of existing challenges.
We need a more sustained and integrated approach
to better reduce the illicit production and trafficking
of narcotics and organized crime, including money-
laundering, corruption and the financing of terrorism.
In this regard, we remain committed to expanding our
cooperation with our allies on related areas. In the
same vein, the recent increase in production should be
seen in the context of the symbiotic link between the
narcotic drug industry and the problem of terrorism
and violence. We also reaffirm the need for a holistic
approach to the drug problem that focuses on all facets,
including production, trafficking and consumption, on
the basis of the principle of shared responsibility.

Finally, as we approach the new year, let us reaffirm
our resolve to consolidate the many achievements
that have been made so far, while bearing in mind
that collective action within the framework of a more
collaborative effort among all stakeholders, particularly
countries in our region and beyond, provides the surest
guarantee for our joint success. Let us therefore seize
the opportunity before us for the benefit of peace and
security, not just in Afghanistan, but rather for the
stability of all our societies.

