The President: I thank the representative of Chile for
his kind words addressed to me. The presidency will ensure
that his remarks to the credit of the Secretariat are passed
on to its members in the absence of their representative.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the United Kingdom.

When this Council decided in July 1994 to increase
the number of United Nations observers on the ground in
Abkhazia on the basis of a significantly expanded mandate,
at the same time it made clear the crucial importance of
achieving progress towards a comprehensive political
settlement. It also made it clear that that settlement was to
respect fully the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Georgia. On each and every occasion since
then on which this Council has discussed the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, it has reaffirmed the fundamental
importance of those two principles. The international
community has offered, and continues to offer, help,
encouragement, assistance and advice to that end. The
United Nations has played the leading role in those efforts
and we are grateful for the patient and persistent work of
Mr. Brunner and his staff. It is therefore deeply frustrating
that 18 months later there has been so little progress
towards that goal of a comprehensive political settlement.

But it is difficult to see how political negotiations
can flourish in the face of the continued unwillingness of
the Abkhaz leadership to face up to reality. The reality is
that this Council remains unequivocally committed to
Georgian territorial integrity. The reality is that this
Council is deeply concerned by the Abkhaz leadership's
continued obstruction of the orderly and voluntary return
of refugees and its failure to ensure the safety of those
who have returned to Abkhazia. And the reality is that the
Abkhaz leadership's actions only serve to undermine
further the situation of the very people whose interests it
claims to represent. We appeal to the parties, but in
particular to the Abkhaz leadership, not to squander the
opportunity represented by the Cease-fire Agreement of
May 1994 and to work urgently and sincerely towards
settling a comprehensive political agreement. The Abkhaz
leadership should not expect that opportunity to exist
forever.

One of the reasons why that opportunity exists at
present is the valuable work of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
peace-keeping force in helping to stabilize the situation on
the ground. Without their efforts, the prospects of
securing a comprehensive settlement would be very
significantly diminished. That is why the United Kingdom
supports the continuation of the presence of United
Nations observers in Abkhazia, subject to the continuation
of the CIS peace-keeping force. We hope that the CIS
summit on 19 January will indeed confirm the extension
of the presence of CIS peace-keepers. It is most welcome
that cooperation between UNOMIG and the CIS
peace-keeping force continues to be satisfactory. The
United Kingdom is one of the main contributors of
personnel to UNOMIG, and our thanks go to the Chief
Military Observer, Major General Kallstrom, and to the
members of UNOMIG for their work. The recent
incidents detailed in the Secretary-General's report remind
us, however, of the ever present threat to those carrying
out this work, and it is vital that the parties recognize
their responsibilities to ensure the safety and freedom of
movement of UNOMIG and CIS personnel. However, the
parties, in particular the Abkhaz leadership, should not
forget that UN OMIG's presence is a means to an end, and
not an end in itself. That is why it is essential that there
be significant progress, both in the political negotiations
and
 

on the return of refugees, in the coming months if the
international community's efforts are not to be wasted.

l resume my functions as President of the Security
Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of

the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.15 pJn.
