Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): We thank the Secretary-
General for his report on the situation in Kosovo
(S/2005/335). We also thank his Special
Representative, Mr. Jessen-Petersen, for his
informative and, I have to say, candid briefing. I wish
to welcome Mr. Covic, President of the Coordination
Centre of Serbia and Montenegro and of the Republic
of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, to our meeting
today.

Greece associates itself fully with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Luxembourg on
behalf of the European Union.

I am sure that all members know what the ancient
Greek philosopher Heraclitus said: "Ta panta rhei -
Everything in life is in flux". In recent years, we have
often heard the expression "road map". Reading the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2005/335), we
believe that both expressions could apply to recent
developments in Kosovo. In other words, since our last
meeting on this item, in February (see S/PV.5130),
things have been moving. Overall, the picture remains
mixed: some more progress, but still some delays;
headway being made, but serious lags in some areas.
As the Secretary-General points out in his report, none
of the standards has been entirely fulfilled and serious
deficiencies remain in key areas. A great deal of work
lies ahead of us. Let us go into this process with our
eyes wide open.

Decentralization, to a large extent, holds the key
to success in restoring confidence and promoting
returns. And yet it has been allowed to slow almost to a
halt. An easy excuse can be offered: it does not feature
formally as one of the eight standards to be
implemented. Yet we all know - and the Secretary-
General's report makes it clear - that it is a key
measure in building the new Kosovo. It remains so
regardless of the standards, a number of which would
actually be facilitated by its completion. In that
respect, we welcome the participation for the first time
of Kosovo Serbs in the relevant working group.
On the important front of returns, no significant
progress has been reported. There can be no alternative
to success in this area. Evidently, efforts have to be
strengthened. Also, let us repeat once more that
Kosovo Serbs need to re-engage in full dialogue on all
levels with the Provisional Institutions; they have to
demonstrate their commitment to integrating into
Kosovo society.

According to the report, improvement has been
achieved in freedom of movement as well as in the
security situation. But the integrated transport system
has yet to become a reality; the zero-tolerance policy
for acts that threaten this freedom needs to be
implemented urgently and fully.

We cannot emphasize enough the importance of
the signing of the memorandum of understanding on
the reconstruction of Serbian Orthodox religious sites
damaged during the May 2004 riots. That constitutes
an encouraging sign of public outreach by Kosovo's
leaders to the Kosovo Serbs.

Some good steps have also been taken in the
direction of economic reconstruction. Progress in the
privatization process is long overdue but is
nevertheless very welcome. Let us hope that the pace
of recovery will increase as the necessary structural
reforms are being completed.

The regional perspective should be fully
exploited. In that respect, the goals of economic
cooperation within the South-East European
Cooperation Process and the question of how these can
include Kosovo should be further explored and
pursued. Greece, as part of the region and as current
Chairman of the South-East European Cooperation
Process, is actively engaged in promoting the
deepening of cooperation in the region.

The internal political situation in Kosovo remains
a real concern. The Kosovar people showed remarkable
political maturity when former Prime Minister
Haradinaj was indicted and surrendered voluntarily to
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. Since then, a new coalition Government
has taken over; the transition was smooth and orderly.

Nevertheless, internal bickering and tension have
continued, along with incidents of violence, which are
a by-product of that kind of atmosphere. If the situation
is allowed to deteriorate, this will inevitably influence
future developments. The creation of a democratic
society in Kosovo is a fundamental prerequisite for the
future stability of the whole region. That cannot be
overlooked.

Bearing in mind the progress in all aspects of the
strategy proposed in November 2004 and the efforts
undertaken by the Provisional Institutions, the
Secretary-General has concluded that a comprehensive
review should be initiated this summer. The review is
to be conducted in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999) and the relevant presidential statements of the
Security Council. On balance - a very fine balance -
we share the Secretary-General's view that we could
move on to the launch of the comprehensive review.

This new stage in the process will not, however,
mean that the standards implementation goal has been
achieved. On the contrary, for the Provisional
Institutions it should mean shifting into a higher gear.
The international community's expectations will not
remain at their current level but will increase as time
goes by; the deliverables from Pristina should match
that.

The resumption of dialogue on practical matters
between Belgrade and Pristina points the way to the
future. We expect that such dialogue will resume soon
at all levels. The invitations by both President Tadic
and Prime Minister Kostunica to, respectively,
President Rugova and Prime Minister Kosumi, are a
welcome initiative and deserve our full support. Just as
we urge Belgrade to engage in dialogue with the
provisional authorities, so we must now make clear to
the Provisional Institutions that there can be no
avoiding a direct dialogue with Belgrade.

Greece has undertaken a series of diplomatic
initiatives aimed at promoting dialogue among the
parties based on the principle of the peaceful resolution
of disputes through negotiated settlement. In this
context, the Prime Minister of Greece recently visited
the region, including Belgrade and Pristina.

It is our hope that Kosovo will one day become
an equal participant in the region's stability and
prosperity - an integral part of the enlarged European
family. Therefore, no less than complete
implementation of all the goals in the standards plan is
a prerequisite.

