The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Chergui for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.

At the outset, I thank Secretary-General Guterres
and Mr. Chergui, the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, for their briefings. I highly
appreciate their personal efforts and the African
Union's outstanding efforts and contributions made
towards achieving peace and security.

Africa is a continent full of dynamism and promise.
The African Union (AU) and African countries are
important forces for the maintenance of world peace and
regional stability. In recent years, African countries,
united in cooperation, have been active in implementing
the African Union Agenda 2063 and its Silencing the
Guns by 2020 initiative, building the African Peace and
Security Architecture, and pushing to address African
issues through African means, thereby making an
important contribution to the maintenance of regional
peace and security.

We are pleasedto note that, guidedby the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, the United Nations
and the AU have continued to deepen their cooperation
in the peace and security arena. The Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative reaffirms the need
to deepen the Organization's partnership with the AU.
Strengthening African peacekeeping operations and
improving Africa's peace and security capacities is in
the common interests of the international community,
and is our shared responsibility.
As rotating President of the Council for this month,
China initiated this open debate on peacekeeping
operations in Africa in order to increase the
international community's attention to and input in the
cause ofpeace and security in Africa, and to effectively
assist the AU and African countries in bolstering their
capacity-building for peace and security. I would like to
make the following four points.

First, I stress the need to strengthen the United
Nations peacekeeping effort in Africa. Africa is
the priority of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Of the 14 peacekeeping missions, the five
largest are deployed in Africa. In its peacekeeping
operations in Africa, the United Nations should
adhere to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, as well as the basic principles of
peacekeeping - consent ofthe parties, impartiality and
the non-use of force except in self-defence and defence
of the mandate - and should respect the sovereignty of
the country in question.

The Security Council and the Secretariat should
take into consideration such factors as the actual needs
of the country concerned, the security environment
and the mission objectives when designing tailor-made
peacekeeping mission mandates, and should adjust
the priority tasks and areas of focus for the various
stages. The Secretariat should take effective measures,
increase input, improve its command and control in
peacekeeping operations in Africa, raise the efficiency
of mission mandate implementation, enhance the safety
and security of peacekeepers, strengthen early-warning
capabilities vis-a-vis security threats, and provide
adequate logistical support.

Secondly, we must deepen the peacekeeping
partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union. We must further strengthen
communication and coordination between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council and
between the United Nations Secretariat and the AU
Commission. The timeliness and accuracy of briefings
and the effectiveness of decision-making must also be
improved. China firmly supports African countries in
resolving African issues the African way and in playing
the lead role in handling African affairs.

Thirdly, we must enhance collaboration between
United Nations peacekeeping operations and African-
led peace processes and operations. The AU and
subregional organizations in Africa have unique
geographical advantages. AU peace operations
represent an important complement to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. China supports the United
Nations in its efforts to provide sustainable and
predictable funding for AU-led peace operations, help
the AU improve mission planning, fund-raising, mission
maintenance and the management of peace operations
under its leadership. China also assists the AU in
accelerating the establishment of the African Standby
Force, the rapid-reaction force and early-warning
mechanisms, as well as in deepening cooperation in
military technology and scaling up military training.

Fourthly, we must help African troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) to strengthen their peacekeeping
capacity-building. At present, more than half of the top
20 TCCs in United Nations peacekeeping operations
are African countries, which have made important
contributions to United Nations peacekeeping.
It is imperative to enhance the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations through reforms. Through
bilateral and multilateral cooperation and in keeping
with the wishes of African countries, the international
community should provide assistance in terms of
training, equipment and resources. The Government
and the people of China have consistently supported
the African countries and peoples in their pursuit of
peace, tranquillity, development and prosperity. China
actively participates in United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa, with about 2,200 peacekeepers
currently serving in peacekeeping missions in Africa.

In September, the Beijing Summit of the Forum
on China-Africa Cooperation identified Sino-African
cooperation in peace and security as one of the eight
major cooperation priorities. The declaration adopted
at the Summit clearly states that China will support
Africa's Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative. China
decided to establish the China-Africa Peace and
Security Fund to support cooperation between China
and Africa on peace and security, peacekeeping and
the maintenance of stability. It will continue to provide
free military assistance to the African Union for its
peace operations.

China supports the countries in African subregions
such as the Sahel, the Gulf of Aden and the Gulf of
Guinea in their pursuit of regional security against
terrorism. With that in mind, it established the China-
Africa Peace and Security Forum to provide a platform
for increased exchanges between China and Africa in
the field of peace and security. Since its establishment,
the China-United Nations Peace and Development
Trust Fund has financially supported multiple projects
aimed at bolstering African peacekeeping capabilities.
China will continue to support Africa in strengthening
its peacekeeping capacity-building; settling regional
hotspot issues at an early date; achieving peace,
stability and development on the African continent; and
joining hands to shape a more connected community
with a shared future for China and Africa.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the other members ofthe Council
who wish to make statements.

