Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like to
express its gratitude and satisfaction to Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs; Ambassador Karel van Oosterom, Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands, in his capacity as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), for his excellent work; and Mr. Serge Christiane,
Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, in his capacity
as Coordinator of the Joint Commission of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. We thank them all for
the comprehensive and detailed briefings they have just
presented.

Furthermore, we welcome His Excellency Mr. Mike
Pompeo, Secretary of State of the United States, and
wish him a wonderful stay in New York. His presence
among us this morning reflects the great importance
of the topic we are discussing. I therefore congratulate
Cote d'Ivoire for having foreseen it in its programme
of work.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his balanced
and comprehensive sixth report (S/2018/1089) on
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). The
resolution, which was adopted unanimously by
the Security Council, is the faithful result of the
international community's commitment to providing
a collective response to the non-proliferation regime,
and remains a key element of the global architecture of
multilateral diplomacy.

Our delegation joins others in commending the

work of the International Atomic Energy Agency, under
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, to ensure that
the Iranian nuclear programme continues in accordance
with the measures imposed by the Plan itself. The
International Atomic Energy Agency has confirmed
in more than a dozen consecutive reports that Iran is
fulfilling its commitments under the agreement. We
welcome that confirmation, despite the considerable
challenges that led to the withdrawal of the United States
from the Plan and its subsequent decision to reimpose
all unilateral sanctions that had been lifted or waived in
accordance with the Plan. However, we expect Iran to
continue to implement all of its nuclear commitments
in full, as provided for by the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action.

Concerns persist about the full implementation of
the provisions related to ballistic missiles and transfers
of weapons to and from the Islamic Republic of Iran
involving territories of the region, taking into account
that some reports on this matter have not yet been
duly verified. In this regard, we invite competent,
duly mandated institutions to conduct a thorough,
effective, independent and impartial investigation into
these reports and to subsequently inform the Security
Council.

At the same time, the recent alleged launch by
the Iranian Government of medium-range ballistic
missiles - if verified and confirmed - would
undermine all advances that have been registered to
date and weaken an agreement that has contributed to
regional and international peace and security. However,
diverging opinions among certain States with greater
research capacity call into question the certainty of
others regarding the verification of such events, as
well as creating further tension in the region. In this
connection, we appeal to the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to continue to respect and strictly
abide by the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015), which
forbid it, inter alia, from carrying out activities relating
to ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear
weapons.

As a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea strongly condemns the proliferation
and use of weapons of war in the Middle East, as well
as the use of force in international relations. We accept
the use of force only when it is in accordance with the
principles of international law and the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Finally, and in line with our foreign policy
objectives and the ideals of peace and stability promoted
and defended by our Government and its President, His
Excellency Mr. Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
commitment to preventive diplomacy, non-interference

and respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of States. We therefore encourage
all parties involved to preserve the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, strictly adhering to the responsibilities
and obligations they have undertaken and with the same
shared vision for the future.

Let us bear in mind that progress is rooted not in
the creation of differences, but in advancing together
towards a better future that benefits all States. In that
context, we once again reiterate the official position of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea in favour of the total
eradication of weapons of mass destruction, including
nuclear weapons, from the face of the Earth. That must
be our aim if we want humankind to be free from this
persistent threat once and for all.
