Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to welcome the presence in the Council of
Ms. Bakoyannis, Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece. I
thank her for her thorough briefing and assure her that
France shares her vision for a strengthened OSCE.

European security has been heavily challenged
during the past year. In the summer of 2008, the war in
Georgia marked the beginning of a conflict between
two member States of the OSCE, and the gas crisis of
this winter led to a further sense of insecurity
throughout the continent. But the days of the cold war
have passed. The current reality is no longer one of two
blocs opposing each other. Europe and Russia have
changed and together we must build a safe space. For
that reason, France believes it is essential to restore
trust and to reflect together on questions of security in
Europe.

In the summer of 2008, President Medvedev
made proposals for European security. President
Sarkozy set out the position of France on several
occasions. He provided the most comprehensive
elaboration of that position in his statement at the
Evian conference on 8 October 2008, and at the
Munich conference on security on 7 February he
reiterated that France is prepared to participate in a
discussion of those issues and will support the efforts
of the OSCE Greek chairmanship in pursuing a high-
level dialogue along those lines.

Any discussion on renewing and improving
security in Europe must be carried out in full respect
for the principles on which security in Europe is based;
the transatlantic connection, the preservation of
existing institutions; a broad concept of security,
including its political, military, human and
environmental dimensions; and respect for the Helsinki
Final Act and the Charter of Paris of 1990. The OSCE,
in the framework of its three baskets, is the appropriate
forum for carrying out such discussions, which must be
an opportunity to reaffirm our common interests as
outlined in the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of
Paris, in particular respect for territorial integrity, the
peaceful settlement of disputes, the non-use of force
and the right to freely choose security arrangements
and alliances.

Preserving and renewing conventional arms
control instruments is an indispensable element of the
discussion. The conventional forces regime in Europe
is in fact the cornerstone of security in Europe;
restoring its viability is therefore essential. Moreover,
resolving the remaining conflicts in Europe, in
Transdniestria and Nagorny-Karabakh, and the
continuation of the process in Geneva on Georgia will
certainly facilitate the discussion. In that context, I
reiterate our conviction that the OSCE must continue
to play an important role in Georgia, including with
regard to conflicts.

France is committed to the OSCE. It is the only
organization within which all the countries of Europe
and Central Asia, as well as the United States and
Canada, can carry out a dialogue. It is a unique model
of cooperation based on the conviction that Europe's
security goes hand in hand with the promotion of
human rights, democracy and the rule of law. The
OSCE has helped to strengthen international stability
and security, in particular by making it possible to
build a foundation of shared values.

It is within that comprehensive concept of
security and cooperation that the OSCE finds its full
value. In that regard, I welcome the essential role of
the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights, particularly in the area of election monitoring.
Its autonomy is its strength and must be preserved.
5
Finally, the OSCE must work in close
coordination with other international and regional
organizations. In that connection, the presence of the
Greek chairmanship in the Security Council is a
demonstration of the vitality of the cooperation
between the OSCE and the United Nations, and we
welcome it.

