Mr. Sevan: I also would like to thank everyone,
on behalf of my colleagues, for all the kind words
addressed to my office, to my colleagues in the field
and to the agencies.
I would like to say one thing with regard to the
prioritization of contracts: we are talking about a
deadline in terms of processing amendments, rather
than prioritization. Prioritization will continue up until
21 November - and I hope beyond that - and my
hope is that we will be able to prioritize all the
approved and funded contracts in the pipeline that have
to be prioritized before that date.

I had mentioned also in my statement that we are
undertaking a further review of the contracts thus far
reviewed, in order to determine whether they have been
established as having relative utility or not, or if they
are, for example, of questionable utility, and so on, and
we want to prepare lists with different categories
indicating which contracts have been prioritized, which
contracts have not been prioritized and the reasons for
the rejection or non-utility. Whatever it is, we will find
an appropriate way of presenting such lists.

The issue that came up, of course, regards how
long we can go on with the amendment process. The
reason for our own Office to have set an internal
deadline was because of he need to do so in order to
conclude the process; but when a deadline has been
established, the programme has to be completed.

Now, regarding the suggestions made by
Ambassador Pleuger, Ambassador De La Sabliere and
others, we have taken detailed notes and we will be
looking through them to see what we can do on our part
with respect to matters that fall within our purview. And
then of course, there are others who are also involved in
this exercise, including the Council and its 661
Committee. Therefore, I will review the suggestions
thoroughly with my colleagues and come up with some
proposals as to how we can meet at least part if not all of
the concerns expressed with regard to such issues as
priorities of contracts, payments and amendments, etc.

I would like to also thank the Ambassadors of the
United States and the United Kingdom for the
assurances given, which I was seeking in my own
statement, that they will provide all the necessary
information regarding arrangements in place beyond 21
November in terms of such questions as authentication.
This is necessary, at least, in view of a letter I received
from the Coalition Provisional Authority's senior
advisor, the Minister of Trade, stating that they expect
to take a decision very soon. I hope it does come very
soon, because it is only fair that we inform all the
suppliers in that respect.

In terms of auditing the escrow account, as you
know, pursuant to resolution 986 (1995), it was decided
that an external board of auditors would do the
auditing. They have been conducting audits every six
months on the escrow account. In fact, there is another
audit in progress as I speak for the current six months,
which will be made available to Security Council
members; it will be a public document. The external
board of auditors will continue to do the auditing.
Concerning an issue I have been working on for a
while, I would like to inform the Council that this has
been: that, with regard to the 2.2 per cent assets, the
Secretary-General has directed that assets purchased
with the funds from the 2.2 per cent account will not be
required by the United Nations for its activities relating
to Iraq, either at Headquarters or in the field, and
should be transferred to the Coalition Provisional
Authority for the benefit of the people of Iraq.

I would like to thank you again, Mr. President, for
all the support and cooperation I have been receiving
from all the Members of the Security Council, its
Committee, Ambassador Pleuger and his delegation,
and I think we will go back to the drawing board,
taking into account the suggestions made. We will
come up with some suggestions in return, I hope by the
end of this week, when the 661 Committee meets,
unless the meeting postponed again.

