Mr. Kahende (Kenya): My delegation would like
to associate itself with others who spoke before in
commending you, Sir, for convening this important
meeting on conflict prevention.

We take the floor because of the importance
Kenya attaches to the issue and the issue's bearing,
especially on the African continent. Armed conflict has
thrown Africa off balance and landed it in the
dungeons of death and despair. Armed conflict-
together with past injustices and, in recent years,
AIDS - can be claimed to be a gigantic enemy of
progress in Africa. However, it is a scourge that has
united humanity in the desire to control, prevent and
end it. This timely meeting is a part of these efforts to
promote prevention, rather than to find a cure at a later
stage.

The various conflicts taking place on the African
continent continue to compound the plight of the
African peoples, whose track record up to now in
social and economic development remains unenviable.
Conflicts and general insecurity have negated peace
and development on the continent, as has illicit
trafficking in natural resources, especially diamonds, to
finance war. These elements only guarantee the
pauperization of the people for posterity. An end to
conflict in Africa, we believe, is very necessary for
socio-economic progress.

Some while back, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) put in place the Central Organ on
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution. The
efforts of the Central Organ, working in tandem with
regional organizations, have gone a long way towards
resolving conflicts and explosive situations on the
continent. However, a lot remains to be done and the
Security Council has the prerogative of giving a boost
to those efforts and of initiating and concluding other
measures, including effective peacekeeping.

The commitment of the United Nations, through
the Security Council, to conflict prevention, control
and resolution is most commendable. We also believe
that the principles of good governance and good-
neighbourliness should be strengthened, as also must
the elimination of other causes of conflict.

Current efforts to deal with the issue of the
proliferation of small arms should be undertaken with
the urgency they deserve. In Africa, meetings have
been held in Addis Ababa and in Nairobi on the subject
of small arms, and both meetings underlined the
gravity of the problem. It is our sincere hope that a
legal and institutional framework will emerge to
confront the dangers posed by the illegal accumulation
and unlawful possession of small arms.

In instances where conflicts are already taking
place, the Security Council must of necessity bring its
weight to bear. We call for Africa to be given the same
weight as other regions in terms of the speedy
deployment and strength of forces.

The issue of conflict prevention, especially in
Africa, is complex and the United Nations must
continue to work closely, we believe, with the OAU;
with such regional organizations as the Inter-
Governmental Authority on Development, the Southern
African Development Community and the Economic
Community of West African States; and with strategic
and peace institutions in order to comprehend and
thereafter tackle the threat of outbreak of conflicts.
Conflicts will be difficult to prevent, however- as
other speakers from our region have stated- as long
as Africa continues to wallow in poverty and despair.
We believe that good governance, participatory
democracy, social and economic progress and the
principle of good-neighbourliness will, in sum total,
prevent conflicts in the end.
