Mr. Malok (South Sudan): At the outset, let me
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and members of
the Security Council for giving me another opportunity
to address the Council on this important issue of an arms
embargo and targeted sanctions against my country.
The reasons given for the threat of an arms embargo
and sanctions were the frustration and impatience of
the international community with the lack of progress
in the implementation of the peace agreement.

In my previous statement to the Council, I
reported on the positive efforts and actions that the
Government is undertaking in order to address the
many challenges that the country is facing, as well as
on the implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions, including the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force (see S/PV.7840). In addition, on
19 December, His Excellency Mr. Salva Kiir Mayardit,
President of the Republic of South Sudan, further to his
launching of a national dialogue, issued a presidential
order that formed the National Dialogue Steering
Committee, which is composed of varied personalities
and will advise the President and the members of the
Council on how to embark on the peace process. All of
the recent commitments made by my President point in
a more encouraging direction. Therefore, I think that
the tabling of the draft resolution is unfortunate.

We were hoping that at this critical juncture, when
the Transitional Government of National Unity is doing
everything to implement Security Council resolutions
and the deployment of the Regional Protection Force,
the Security Council would engage the Government of
South Sudan constructively instead of issuing threats
of the imposition of an arms embargo and targeted
sanctions. It is very unfortunate that individuals who
are critical ofthe peace process were targeted and listed
for sanctions by the draft resolution. That action reveals
a lack of good faith and only serves to further aggravate
matters and invite controversy, potential disagreement
and hostility. In truth, harmony and cooperation are
naturally what the situation calls for.

As we have repeatedly said, punitive measures
may tend to harden positions rather than increase
cooperation. We have always argued that an arms
embargo seeks to further weaken the Government and
strengthen the various militant and armed groups for a
number of historical reasons, including the long civil
war, which left arms in the hands of civilians, porous
borders, which make it difficult to control the illegal
in-flow of small arms and light weapons, and, as stated
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/951), the
proliferation of armed groups in the country with their
own distinct agendas.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the commitment
of my Government to the full implementation of the
peace agreement and to working with all stakeholders,
including members of the Security Council and the
international community, in order to bring peace and
stability to the people of South Sudan. I would also like
to take this opportunity to thank the members of the
Security Council who engaged with us constructively.

The meeting rose at 10.40 am.
