Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): As this is our first
public session in your presidency, I congratulate you,
Mr. President, and wish you good luck. I would also
like to thank Uruguay for its very efficient and open
presidency last month.

I join others in thanking Special Representative
Mindaoudou for her briefing and for her tireless
efforts over the past years and for her commitment to
a sustained peace. I also want to welcome the Foreign
Minister of Cote d'Ivoire to the Council and we really
look forward to hearing from him shortly.

We meet today at a significant moment for the
Government and people of Cote d'Ivoire. By the end
of the month, the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) will close after 13 years of service.
In that time, Cote d'Ivoire has been transformed. A
child born when the first UNOCI peacekeeper set
foot in Cote d'Ivoire would have entered a world of
uncertainty and insecurity. Today, that child is living
in a country with real prospects not just for peace, but
also for opportunity and prosperity. I congratulate the
Special Representative and all her team for all they
have done to help make this a reality. UNOCI has
been an exemplary operation, one that has enjoyed
an excellent relationship with the Government and
with civil society and, importantly, one that it is now
leaving harmoniously and at the right moment.

As their mission nears its end, we must never
forget that such stability did not come without cost; 150
military and civilian United Nations personnel have
lost their lives in Cote d'Ivoire over the past 13 years.
The legacy of their sacrifice and of all their service
must be a sustained peace in Cote d'Ivoire. With that in
mind, I congratulate the Government for capitalizing
on the space that UNOCI has given them. The country
now has one of the fastest growing economies in the
world. We stand with it as it continues along this
positive pathway redoubling its efforts to ensure that
all Ivorians feel the benefits brought by peace through
social development.

Progress in Cote d'Ivoire is not limited to just
the economy. I also want to draw Council members
attention to the Secretary-General's recently published
report on conflict-related sexual Violence (S/2017/249),
a topic that is of particular concern to the United
Kingdom. With this report came the welcome news that
the armed forces of Cote d'Ivoire have been delisted.
That means that Cote d'Ivoire is now able to contribute
to United Nations peacekeeping missions, and it has
recently sent a contingent to Mali. To move from a
nation benefitting from a peacekeeping mission to one
that now contributes to peacekeeping is yet another
marker of success.

There can be no let up. There are tests ahead for
Cote d'Ivoire. The 2015 presidential elections were
peaceful, but of course UNOCI was present. The
presidential elections in 2020 and a smooth democratic
transfer of power to a new president will be crucial
to building a peaceful and prosperous future for Cote
d'Ivoire. This needs continued efforts to build the
independence, credibility and authority of the electoral
commission over the next two years. The credibility
and legitimacy of the institutions of Government must
continue to strengthen.

As the recent unrest in the country illustrates, peace
can be fragile if underlying issues are not resolved. I
therefore encourage the Government of C6te d'Ivoire
to make the most of this opportunity that it and the
United Nations have worked so hard for.

In conclusion, the story of Cote d'Ivoire is a
positive one, with the end of a successful mission and
an optimistic future for the country and its people.
It is also a positive story for the United Nations and
specifically for the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. UNOCI shows how clear mandates with
a clear exit strategy can create the space needed for
the political process to progress. It is a model that we
should seek to emulate elsewhere across the world.
I am delighted that the experience is something that
Cote d'Ivoire will be able to share on a daily basis with
the Council when it joins in 2018. I congratulate the
country on its election earlier today.

