Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Permit
me at the outset to thank you personally, Mr. President,
and your fraternal country. I wish to express our
appreciation for the professionalism with which the
South African presidency has conducted the work of
the Security Council during the month of March. Its
effective guidance of the Council's deliberations has
highlighted South Africa's pioneering and constructive
role in international and regional affairs and its firm
commitment to moving forward. This presidency has
also shown that Security Council reform and support
for the Council have a positive impact on international
peace and security. In addition, I wish to welcome the
presence of Madam Dlamini Zuma, and of Minister
Adada of the Congo and of Ambassador Djinnit,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union. Finally, we thank you, Mr. President, for having
taken the targeted and constructive initiative of
organizing today's Council meeting on an issue of high
priority for this body.

The Security Council is very much interested in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Therefore, it undertakes measures that truly reflect the
Articles of the Charter of the United Nations related to
cooperation with regional organizations, including the
organizations referred to in Articles 52 and 53, in
Chapter VIII.

That brings us to the issue of the relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union,
which is under consideration by the Council, and to the
possible mission to the Sudan. As members are aware,
international texts have referred to the importance of
promoting cooperation aimed at the maintenance of
international peace and security, including cooperation
between the Security Council and regional
organizations. The 2005 World Summit Outcome
(General Assembly resolution 60/ 1), on the Millennium
Development Goals, also referred to this in its
paragraph 170:

"We support a stronger relationship between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the
Charter, and therefore resolve:

(a) To expand consultation and
cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations through
formalized agreements between the respective
secretariats and, as appropriate, involvement of
regional organizations in the work of the Security
Council".
At the inception of the United Nations 60 years
ago, the founders of the Organization, in drafting the
Charter, strove to provide for such a complementarity
of roles in order to achieve the hoped-for collective
security. Therefore, today, we are not seeking new
points of reference; we need only look to Chapter VIII
of the Charter and to implement its provisions.

When we speak of cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, we must refer to
the Protocol Relating to the Establishment of the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union and to the
Council's mandate. The Protocol calls for creating the
conditions necessary for cooperation with the United
Nations' Council, based on the idea that security is an
indivisible and integral whole. Therefore, as regional
organizations address challenges related to
international peace and security in their geographical
areas, the international peace and security system must
be strengthened as a priority, and regional
organizations must act on behalf of the international
community. They are not there to replace or to
substitute for the United Nations; there is no validity to
that.

Nor should there be a confrontation between the
prerogatives of these organizations. To the contrary,
these organizations must seek to overcome regional
technical or logistical shortcomings. But their practical
experiences on the ground have enabled them to
acquire expertise and to build their capacities. We
should benefit from their expertise and capacities; we
should not just discuss their fragility, their incapacity
or their lack of financing.

The idea that the United Nations is worthwhile
only when it leads an operation is not true and must be
rejected. Chapter VIII is clear, and it precisely refers to
the role of regional organizations, a role that must be
played without any conditionalities.

In cooperating with the African Union, the United
Nations must go beyond specific cases - such as
Darfur, Somalia and others - and establish an
effective strategic partnership limited to the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter. In that connection, the
United Nations must honour its commitments as
regards cooperation with regional organizations,
especially since regional organizations are best
equipped with specific knowledge of local social,
political and cultural conditions and entities. They are
the most familiar with the root causes of the problems
at hand and are in the best position to prevent crises.
Regional organizations can also provide the United
Nations with geographical and political information on
which to base future undertakings. Such information is
crucial: in a crisis it is important to stabilize the
situation. It is possible to bring about collective
security in this way.
With regard to partnership with the African
Union, given that 60 per cent of the items on the
agenda of the Security Council pertain to African
countries, the AU should be enabled to resolve crises in
Africa by optimizing its resources and efforts to that
end. The African Union has experience in Darfur. It has
a Mission there and has taken substantial steps, along
with other regional organizations, in an effort to
maintain peace. The AU has unambiguously proven
that it can provide assistance to the United Nations. For
its part, the United Nations can provide financing and
logistical and technical support through the partnership
provided for under the Charter. The Security Council
must therefore develop a mandate for the African
Union Mission covering issues related to financing,
institutional and logistical capacity-building and an
assessment of needs pertaining to expertise in the
information and communications areas. That was
reaffirmed at the Addis Ababa meeting held on 16
November 2006.

The African Union carried out negotiations in
Abuja with a great deal of wisdom and patience, with a
View to achieving the Darfur Peace Agreement. We
appreciate the laudable efforts that have been made by
all partners, including the African Union and the
United Nations. My country unreservedly welcomes
United Nations support for the African Union Mission
in the Sudan in Darfur, as evidenced in the decisions
taken at Abuja and Addis Ababa.

In that connection, I would like to comment on
the statement by the representative of the United
Kingdom, specifically his remarks regarding the
Sudan's position. The Sudan did not object to the
Abuja and Addis Ababa decisions. To the contrary, it
welcomed them while expressing some reservations
regarding a number of points that were contrary to the
Darfur Peace Agreement. The Government of the
Sudan accordingly asked that those points be brought
in line with the Agreement. We proposed that the
tripartite mechanism comprising the African Union, the
United Nations and the Sudan should proceed to
harmonize those points.

No reply is possible to the statement made by the
representative of the United States about what she
called "genocide" in Darfur, given that the United
States lives in a fragile glass house.

I should like to cite what was said about Darfur
last February by Foreign Secretary Margaret Beckett of
the United Kingdom in an article on the threat to unity

posed by a changing situation. She wrote that
instability in the region would fuel tension. There were
a number of reasons for the conflict in Darfur, among
them changing rainfall, which had made the existing
competition between nomads and shepherds more
acute.

I should like to say that, given that lasting peace
and security in Darfur is a priority for the Sudan - an
absolute priority for Sudan - we welcome the efforts
made by Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Darfur, and by Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, his counterpart from the African Union. Those
efforts have also been welcomed by the entire
Government of National Unity. Mr. Eliasson's visit was
a promising one.

We therefore hope that all parties that have yet to
sign the Abuja Agreement on the peace process will do
so. Support for the peace process in Sudan must be a
priority for the Security Council. Given that we are
debating cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union with a View to strengthening
international peace and security, it is our hope that
support for peace will be comprehensive. We also hope
that all United Nations bodies, and especially the body
responsible for establishing the agenda for sustainable
development, will participate in the efforts to
strengthen peace in the Sudan. We must also get to the
root of the evil. To that end, we must be innovative,
especially as regards something over which we have no
control: climate change. As has been so clearly
demonstrated with regard to Darfur, this has a negative
impact upon a country's resources.

I hope that this meeting of the Security Council
will be the starting point for greater cooperation under
Chapter VIII between the United Nations and the
African Union. I also hope that the necessary financial
resources will be provided. That should not depend
upon negative political considerations. Support must be
provided in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. It would also be advisable for the Security
Council to devote a meeting to consider how to benefit
from the recommendations made in the various
statements delivered today.
