Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate for his
briefing, the first he has given to the Council. I would
also like to commend the Permanent Representative of
Croatia, who from now on will be chairing the work of
the Committee.

France notes with appreciation the efforts put
forth by Mr. Smith at the helm of CTED since his
arrival in November. We reaffirm our full support for
him in his mission. The Security Council can only
endorse the guidelines that he outlined to us in his
briefing, guidelines that will be included in the draft
resolution which I hope will be adopted tomorrow.

The Executive Directorate plays a central role in
supporting and advising the Committee. Established by
the Security Council in the weeks following the
heinous attacks of 11 September 2001, the Committee
received an ambitious and unprecedented mandate
aimed at raising to a higher level the anti-terrorism
measures adopted by United Nations Member States. In
order to do this, the Committee, from the outset,
developed a cooperative approach, based on
encouragement and assistance to Member States to
enable them to meet their obligations under resolution
1373 (2001).

The report on the proposals by Mr. Smith
conveyed to us by the Committee identifies the key
issues to be addressed in order to ensure that the work
of the Executive Directorate fully meets our
expectations. I will touch only on a few issues to which
we attach priority. Field visits are an indispensable tool
in order to enhance dialogue with Member States,
performance evaluation and the identification of needs.
Since 2004, with their agreement, 11 countries have
been visited. An in-depth dialogue has begun
concerning their arrangements. This approach is
starting to bear fruit.

In order to ensure that these visits meet their
objectives, it is crucial, as was stated by the
Ambassador of Burkina Faso, that they be prepared
with the greatest care with account being taken of
country specificities and, as was also said earlier, the
specificities of each region and subregion.
Furthermore, each visit should benefit from an
attentive follow-up. As was also stated, we need too to
take into account the capabilities and potential of
regional and subregional organizations. We must
exploit to the full this direct dialogue with the Member
States' administrations.

That same logic has led the Committee to replace
its reports and exchanges of letters with preliminary
implementation assessments, which provide Member
States with a comprehensive and detailed analysis of
their level of compliance with resolution 1373 (2001).
More than 100 such assessments have been approved
by the Committee and conveyed to the Member States
concerned. They should make possible the
establishment of an open and specific dialogue on
technical and political issues.

In addition, on the request of the Security
Council, the Executive Directorate has begun a global
assessment of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) so as to have a comprehensive overview at its
disposal. That overview will make it possible for the
Committee to reach conclusions and provide
recommendations to the Security Council. We attach
special importance to the speedy finalization of that
document.

Technical assistance is another crucial area of
Committee efforts. In order to facilitate the provision
of technical assistance in accordance with resolution
1535 (2004), the Executive Directorate must improve
its working methods and tools in order to focus its
efforts vis-a-vis donors and recipient States. We
welcome the fact that Mr. Smith has made that one of
his priorities as the head of the Executive Directorate.
He can rest assured that all European Union (EU)
partners will support him in that undertaking.

Finally, I would like to add that, given its
mandate and activities, the Executive Directorate must
play its full role in the streamlining efforts under way
to ensure greater coherence of the efforts of the United
Nations to combat terrorism. The Executive Directorate
must therefore participate actively in the task force
established by the Secretary-General to promote the
active and coordinated implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which was adopted in
September 2006. That will undoubtedly be one of the
key priorities of France's upcoming presidency of the
EU, following up on the efforts of the Slovenian
presidency.

The Committee is a unique body that has been
given a very large monitoring mandate under a
resolution that addressees all aspects of the fight
against terrorism. Its role is well-acknowledged.
However, its efforts have also led to criticism and
apprehension. In order to dispel those doubts, more
should be done explain its activities. An outreach effort
should be started in that regard. In that connection, I
would like to support what was said earlier by my
colleague and friend, Michel Kafando. Communication
is one of the elements necessary to ensuring that
everyone endorses and supports a fight that is, by
definition, a global threat that requires a
correspondingly global and collective response. A
sense of ownership of what the Committee is doing is
key for the success of its efforts.

In order that it can successfully achieve its
mandate, the Committee needs an active Executive
Directorate that provides proposals and documents for
consideration, that analyses reports and situations in an
in-depth manner so as to implement quickly and
effectively the guidelines it has been given. It is clear
that the Executive Directorate must continue its efforts
in order to achieve those goals. Mr. Mike Smith's
words reassure us that that is indeed his intention and
that the Executive Directorate is on the right track. We
remain watchful and have great expectations, for our
collective success will depend upon his success in
combating terrorism.

