Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing and acknowledge the
presence in the Security Council this morning of the
Foreign Ministers of the Netherlands, Australia and
Luxembourg.

The United Kingdom welcomes the Dutch Safety
Board's preliminary report of 9 September and would
like once again to send our deepest condolences to the
friends and families of those who died on Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17. Last month, I had to honour to
lay a wreath on behalf of all Security Council members
at the memorial site in Schiphol airport in honour of the
298 victims of the tragedy.

We commend the Dutch Safety Board for having

produced a report that is thorough, professional and
based firmly on the facts. While it is apreliminary report
with a limited mandate, the conclusions drawn from the
evidence available to the investigators are clear. The
report rules out any operational or technical causes for
the crash. The damage discovered on the wreckage of
Flight MH-17 is consistent with the damage that would
be expected from a large number ofhigh-energy objects
penetrating the aircraft from the outside. From that we
can draw only one conclusion: Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17, a civilian airliner carrying 283 passengers and
15 crew, was hit by a blast fragmentation warhead,
which is typically fitted to surface-to-air missiles.

Neither the preliminary report nor the final report
will seek to attribute culpability. But we know that
seconds before Flight MH-17 dropped out of contact,
a surface-to-air missile launch was detected from a
separatist-controlled area in south-eastern Ukraine.
We also know from an intercepted conversation that a
known separatist leader was overheard claiming that a
separatist faction had shot down an aircraft at the time
of MH-17's disappearance. Another separatist leader
claimed on Twitter to have shot down an aircraft around
the same time. We have seen on social media, shortly
after the crash, an SA-11 missile system missing at
least one missile travelling back towards Russia, and
we also know that separatist fighters trained, equipped
and armed by Russia shot down more than a dozen
Ukrainian aircraft in the months before the tragedy of
MH-17.

I, and others, have spoken before in the Council
about Russia's supply of significant quantities of
advanced weapons, including tanks, armoured
personnel carriers and artillery to separatist groups in
Ukraine. And there is evidence that Russia has been
providing training to separatist fighters at a facility
in south-western Russia, including training on how
to use air defence systems. The Russian Federation
bears significant responsibility for the violence and
instability in south-eastern Ukraine - responsibility
that, at the very least, means Russia has questions to
answer about the tragic downing of MH-17.

Assertions promoted heavily in domestic Russian
media that Ukraine had some degree of culpability in
bringing down MH-17 simply do not stand up. They
are sham arguments that attempt to distort the facts.
We have heard contradictory stories that MH-17 was
brought down by a Ukrainian Su-25 fighter jet, either
by missile or by gunfire, or that it shadowed MH-17,
using its crew and passengers as human shields. But
the damage found on the wreckage of MH-17 is not
consistent with the behaviour of an air-to-air missile,
nor does it relate to a gun attack. Radar evidence shows
only three commercial aircraft in the vicinity of MH-17
before the occurrence which led to its breakup. There
was no Su-25 visible on any Ukrainian radar data, and
international investigators regard that data as accurate
and reliable. That Russian version of events is pure
fiction.

Russian allegations of the malign intentions of
Ukrainian air traffic control and insinuations that
air traffic control records were subsequently being
withheld also do not add up. There is no evidence of any
unusual activity in the management of flights in that
area at the time, and the preliminary report contains
a full transcript of the conversations between MH-17
and Ukrainian air traffic control. The transcripts of the
Ukrainian side have been fully confirmed by data that
was traced back from the black box.

We have also heard Russian suggestions that the
Dutch Safety Board report is not fully independent
or impartial and has ignored the opinion of Russian
investigators. That also is untrue. The Board is a
fully independent organization. As we have heard this
morning, it was assisted in its investigation by experts
from 12 aviation agencies, including experts from
Russia, and it has been advised by the International
Civil Aviation Organization to ensure that its report
complied fully with international standards and
recommended practices.

The Dutch Safety Board has set out particular areas
in the report that require further analysis if this important
investigation is to make progress. That will require full
and safe access to the crash site, as demanded by the
Council in resolution 2166 (2014). That is also needed
for the separate criminal investigation, which will
determine culpability and ensure accountability. Firing
on OSCE monitors, such as occurred last weekend
near the crash site, does not create the conditions for a
resumption of the investigation into how MH-17 came
down and who was responsible.

If the Russian Federation shares the wish of the
international community to see progress on both the
Dutch Safety Board final report and resolution 2166
(2014), then we call on them to ensure that the separatists
allow safe full access to the crash site immediately.

