Mr. Jeremic' (Serbia): I really want to direct the
attention of the Council briefly to the source of the
figures that were mentioned in the intervention of
Serbia: 206,000 is the official number of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). It
is really unbelievable that here in this building
somebody is doubting the official numbers of the
UNHCR. That is the number of this Organization when
it comes to the number of Serb internally displaced
persons; it is not the number of the Serbian
Government.

As to the 40,000 unresolved claims for illegally
seized property, that is the official number of the
Kosovo Property Agency during the time it operated
under UNMIK. The 40,000 claims are waiting to be
processed; the people have not heard back. These
numbers are quoted by international sources.

We do really want to find ways of working
together. It is not Serbia that fears this Kosovo Security
Force; it cannot fear the Kosovo Security Force. It is
the citizens of Serbia who live in the province who fear
the Kosovo Security Force; that is their position. So I
believe we need to do more to try to rebuild the trust of
those people who have been living under those
conditions since 1999. The reason why the do not trust
any Pristina institutions, and why they are not taking
any steps towards working with them, probably has to
do with the way they have been treated in the past ten
years.

We do want to help everybody. We want to fight
organized crime. I think that regional efforts should be
made to fight organized crime, first and foremost in the
province of Kosovo. I am really not breaking any news
to anybody here in the Council when I say that Kosovo
is the hub of organized crime, not just for the Western
Balkans but for all of Europe. There is a lot of work to
be done there in order to combat organized crime.
Serbia wants to work with the international community
in order to curb organized crime in the province.

Having said all that, I want to emphasize our
intention to work constructively together with
everybody in order to find solutions to practical
problems on the ground, for the sake of the citizens of
the province. We stand behind these remarks and look
forward to a more hopeful future - a future in which
all United Nations Member States of the Western
Balkans become member States of the European
Union.

