Mr. Swe (Myanmar): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on a subject that is of
great concern to all of us. My delegation also joins
others in expressing our thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, for her informative briefing.

Armed conflict always takes a human toll and
causes devastation. It is even more shocking when
children become its victims or are forced to become
armed perpetrators in conflicts. Myanmar shares the
view that the most effective and sustainable solution to
protect children in armed conflict is to address the root
causes of conflict. Therefore, the promotion of
sustainable development, the eradication of poverty,
the promotion of national reconciliation, good
governance and the protection of human rights would
go a long way towards preventing and resolving
conflicts.
Myanmar has taken concrete steps to prevent
conflict and to protect children in armed conflict.
Stringent laws and regulations have been put in place.
Under the Defence Services Act, Myanmar's military
prohibits the conscription or recruitment of children
under 18 years of age. In order to prevent underage
recruitment, new recruits for the military services must
undergo stringent scrutiny, not only during the
recruitment and training period but also during the
post-training period. To further strengthen that
screening process, in 2004, the Government established
a high-level committee for the prevention of the
military recruitment of underage children. Under the
committee's supervision and surveillance, between
2004 and 2009, a total of 296 instances of underage
recruitment were detected, resulting in discharge from
military service. While those children were returned to
their respective guardians, punitive action was taken
against military personnel who failed to abide by
recruitment rules and regulations. In 2008 alone,
punitive action was taken against 23 military
personnel. The Committee also works in close
cooperation with UNICEF and the United Nations
Resident Coordinator's office in the area of
information-sharing and awareness-raising campaigns.

With the support and cooperation of the United
Nations country team, the action plan is being updated
to bring it in line with international standards. Updated
information on the work of the Committee has been
provided to the United Nations country team on a
regular basis. This includes lists of and detailed
information on underage children who have been
discharged from military service. For ease of
verification and follow-up by the United Nations
country team, the addresses of the discharged underage
recruits will be provided in future through the
information-sharing process. The Myanmar
Government has also extended an invitation to the
United Nations country team to be present during the
hand-over of the underage children to their respective
guardians.

Advocacy and awareness-raising campaigns were
also carried out for military personnel, police
personnel, social workers and the general public. The
Government, with assistance from UNICEF and other
non-governmental organizations such as World Vision
(Myanmar) and Save the Children (Myanmar),
conducted seminars and workshops on the subject. The
Social Welfare Department, in collaboration with
UNICEF, published and distributed to members of the
military and armed groups a pocket-sized handbook on
preventing the recruitment of underage children.

Despite the commitment made at the highest level
and the concrete steps taken by the Myanmar
Government, which have been recognized in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2009/158), it is
regrettable that the well-trained and disciplined
Myanmar national army, the Tatmadaw Kyi, is still
listed in annex I of the Secretary-General's report.
Myanmar urges that due recognition be given to the
progress made by the Government and that our national
army be removed from the list in future reports.

Myanmar wishes to underscore that the
Government is also making progress in the national
reconciliation process. Of the armed ethnic insurgent
groups, 95 per cent, a total of more than 100,000
people, returned to the legal fold between 1989 and
2008. The olive branch is still extended to the
remaining 5 per cent. The former insurgent groups are
now working with the people and the Government on
the development of their respective regions. They are
also actively participating in the national political
process aimed at transforming Myanmar into a
democratic nation. Today, peace and stability prevail in
almost all corners of Myanmar. The country is no
longer in a situation of armed conflict. The situation in
Myanmar is therefore no longer relevant to the
discussion of the issue of children and armed conflict.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that my
Government is committed at the highest level to
preventing the recruitment of child soldiers into
Myanmar's armed forces. To this end, Myanmar will
continue to support and cooperate with the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations country team.

