Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Mr.
President, allow me to congratulate you and say how
pleased we are to see the Security Council being
presided over by a person of your skills and talents. I
would also like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the work accomplished by Guinea, as President of
the Council, during difficult and frustrating times for
the international community.

In my capacity as Coordinator of the Rio Group, I
am making this statement on behalf of Argentina,
Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Guyana, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela, all member
States of the principal mechanism of political
understanding in Latin America.

On 20 February, we took the floor in this Council
to reiterate our strongest rejection of terrorism, no
matter who commits it, whatever the motives. This firm
conviction is at the heart of the decisive support of the
Rio Group for the actions that have been undertaken by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), established
by resolution 1373 (2001). All members of the Group
have completed the submission of their first and second
reports to the CTC, and Group members have either
sent or are drawing up their third explanatory reports,
as requested by the Committee. We welcome the States
that have done likewise, and we hope that, in the near
future, all States will have complied with their
obligations and presented their respective national
reports.

The immense work to harmonize and implement
measures against terrorism in such a short period of
time, and the implementation of concrete mechanisms
of international cooperation against this scourge, could
not have achieved a breakthrough without the firm
commitment and efforts of United Nations Member
States. We hope that this commitment will be
maintained and strengthened.
In our statement in February, our Group said it
was appropriate, as pointed out in resolutions 1377
(2001), 1456 (2003) and other relevant resolutions, to
state that the fight against terrorism can also be
supported by the firm cooperation of regional and
subregional organizations and relevant agencies of the
United Nations system. For this reason, the Rio Group
welcomes the meeting held between the CTC and
international, regional and subregional organizations
on 6 March 2003. We believe that this event
contributed to the improvement of the flow of
information on experiences, standards and practices, as
well as for the coordination of current activities.

Among other organizations that participated in
the March event was the Inter-American Committee
Against Terrorism (CICTE). This Committee was
created in 1999 as a result of the inter-American
conferences on terrorism that took place in Lima in
1996 and in Mar del Plata, Argentina, in 1998. The
Minister of Foreign Affairs of El Salvador, in her
capacity as President of the CICTE, pointed to a
number of actions taken at the inter-American level in
the fight against terrorism. Notable among these were
the recent adoption of the Inter-American Convention
Against Terrorism and the Declaration of San Salvador
on strengthening cooperation in the fight against
terrorism, approved in June 2002 and January 2003,
respectively. Furthermore, the CICTE plays a role in
disseminating international standards and carries out
activities of cooperation to prevent, combat and
eliminate terrorist acts and activities. Here it is
important to highlight the proposal made by the
Organization of American States (OAS) for a follow-up
meeting to the 6 March session, to be held at OAS
headquarters.

This regional counter-terrorism dimension,
already pointed out in the March meeting, is also valid
when it comes to adopting a comprehensive approach
to terrorism. As we pointed out at the Security
Council's meeting this past February, terrorism does
not limit itself to criminal activities of one particular
organization or region. The Security Council, which
has reaffirmed that terrorist acts are unjustifiable,
whatever the motivation or whoever the perpetrators
may he, must take this fact into consideration in its
efforts to identify and punish those responsible for
terrorist acts and to prevent the commission of such
acts.

The Rio Group welcomes the presentation of the
seventh 90-day work programme of the CTC. The
programme contains a set of innovative activities that
are worth pointing out, such as the development of a
global information network against terrorism, the
updating of the Committee's web site and the
convening of a meeting with the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, the World Customs Organization
and Interpol, among other specialized agencies whose
activities relate to the control of the use of nuclear,
chemical, biological and other dangerous materials.
The Rio Group also welcomes the recent holding of a
meeting in Geneva among representatives of the group
of experts of the CTC and the Human Rights
Committee. We hope for the continuation of meetings
between the CTC and other organs that promote human
rights, because the struggle against terrorism must be
firm and unflagging, utilizing all the means set out in
the United Nations Charter, treaties and international
norms, including those set forth in the legal structure of
the OAS. The international community must act with
resolve and with respect for the rule of law and
international law, and in particular human rights and
humanitarian law.

The Rio Group reaffirms its support for the
declaration contained in resolution 1456 (2003)
adopted at the meeting of Security Council Ministers of
Foreign Affairs on 20 January. It takes the View that
there is a need to continue to bolster the legal
framework to combat terrorism. We hope that it will
soon be possible to overcome the differences of view
on a comprehensive convention to combat terrorism, so
that it can soon become a reality. We also hope that the
same will apply to the draft convention to combat acts
of nuclear terrorism and in the review of the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material.

I reaffirm the Rio Group's commitment to United
Nations efforts to combat terrorism, and wish to
express our gratitude to Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock for his outstanding leadership of the CTC,
which has enabled the Committee to achieve
significant progress in this first stage. We should also
particularly mention the experts who worked with the
Committee providing technical advice. Similarly, we
wish to say how pleased we are that our friend
Ambassador Inocencio Arias is about to take over the
leadership of the CTC. We are certain that under his
stewardship, the Committee will continue its important
tasks and receive a fresh impetus.

The members of the Rio Group wish to reaffirm
once again our determined resolve to do our utmost to
contribute to the efforts of this Organization to defeat
terrorism for the sake of stability and peace.

