Mr. Sen (India): We thank you, Mr. President, for
providing this opportunity to the general membership
to express its views on the threats posed by terrorist
acts to international peace and security. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Denisov, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), and Ambassador Javier
Ruperez, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, for their extensive briefings this
morning.

Today, there is almost unanimous agreement
among the membership of the United Nations that the
threat represented by terrorism is global, afflicting
countries worldwide irrespective of region, religion,
colour or creed. The instances of terrorist attacks in
Beslan or Bali, Moscow or Madrid, New York or New
Delhi, Casablanca, Istanbul, Taba or Riyadh are fresh
in our minds. They represent flashpoints in a larger
fight against terror being waged in various parts of the
world.

Terrorism is not a new phenomenon to India.
More than 60,000 Indians have fallen victim to the
ravages of terrorism and to those who perpetuate,
promote, sponsor or facilitate it. Nor is terrorism new
to the United Nations. As early as in October 1970, the
General Assembly affirmed in a declaration that every
State had the duty to refrain from organizing,
instigating, assisting or participating in terrorist acts in
another State.

We congratulate the Security Council on its
unanimous adoption of resolution 1566 (2004) on 8
October 2004. We would have been happy to share our
views on that critical resolution before its adoption, but
we did not have the opportunity to do so. In our view,
resolution 1566 (2004) represents a logical extension
of the existing multilateral cooperation on counter-
terrorism. It takes forward the ideas first enunciated in
the landmark Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1373 (2001). In doing so, it also draws attention to the
need to move forward in the General Assembly's
consideration of this important issue.

Soon after the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001), my delegation, in a statement to the Council
under this agenda item, recommended that the Council
extend its actions to groups known to perpetuate
terrorism; that it be proactive in seeking the views of
Member States, particularly those affected by terrorist
acts; that it not leave unchallenged or unaddressed
claims of moral, political and diplomatic support for
terrorism; and that it institute more effective measures
to deny safe haven to terrorists and to seek their
extradition. Resolution 1566 (2004) seeks to
implement the very measures that India advocated
almost three years ago. For that reason, among others,
it has our support.

Terrorism constitutes one of the most serious
threats to peace and security. It knows no border or
boundary; it observes no codes of conduct or
constraints of religious ideology; nor is it restrained by
humanity or the bounds of civility. Its objective is,
inter alia, to provoke a state of terror in the general
public or in a group of persons or particular persons,
intimidate a population or compel a Government or an
international organization to do or to abstain from
doing any act. It dictates its terms through death and
destruction, fear and confusion. It is indiscriminate in
its wrath. It cannot be justified under any
circumstances, be they of a political, philosophical,
ideological, racial, ethnic, religious or other similar
nature.

The international community has to continue to
work together to address this common global threat.
The work of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001) has to be
taken further. Resolution 1566 (2004) represents a
timely and laudable initiative designed to move the
international community forward in its common
consideration of the issue. We hope that the working
group constituted by the Council pursuant to that
resolution can come to an early conclusion on the need
for greater international cooperation on practical
measures to be imposed on terrorists and their
supporters, including through prosecution or
extradition and the establishment of a consolidated list
of individuals, groups or entities involved in or
associated with terrorist acts.

Resolution 1566 (2004) calls upon Member States
to cooperate fully in expeditiously adopting the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
and the draft international convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism, pending in the
Sixth Committee of the General Assembly. We are
confident that this would renew the impetus among
Member States to activate the Assembly on this
important issue and lead to the speedy adoption of both
texts.

The unanimous Council vote in favour of
resolution 1566 (2004) was a positive sign of the
commitment of the international community to remain
steadfast in this global fight against terror. It is
sometimes forgotten that Mahatma Gandhi, who led the
greatest non-violent mass movement, preferred to call
it off and postpone independence in the 1930s rather
than compromise with an act of terrorist violence in
Chauri Chaura. The integration of all faiths that have
contributed to the rich fabric of Indian civilization is
shown by the fact that there was not a single terrorist
from India among the "foreign fighters" abroad.

We also recall the unimpeachable secular
credentials of the great popular movements in the
Islamic world after the Second World War. Against that
backdrop, the extreme reactionary vision of terrorists
can only strengthen responses, while their extreme
antihumanism and devotion to death and destruction
dooms them to certain failure.

I would like to conclude by mentioning, as I have
done on an earlier occasion, that the new Government
of India is committed to the repeal of the Prevention of
Terrorism Act and, therefore, to fighting terrorism
without - in Benjamin Franklin's great phrase -
diminishing the legal personality of the citizen.

