I thank you and the German presidency for organizing this virtual high-level open debate. I also express my sincere appreciation to Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Nadia Carine Therese Fornel-Poutou, Executive President, Association des Femmes Juristes de Centrafrique, and the representative of civil society for their insightful remarks. As evident in the most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/487), sexual violence in conflicts remains a growing concern. Conflict related sexual violence continues unabated, and justice and redress remain elusive. Despite numerous commitments, compliance remains unsatisfactory - in terms of prevention and enforcement alike. Today's debate, on turning commitments into compliance, taking place on the twentieth anniversary of the women and peace and security agenda, could not be more relevant and timely. Bangladesh itself went through the painful experience of conflict-related sexual violence during its war of liberation in 1971. Over 200,000 women bore its brunt. We took measures for their rehabilitation in 1972. The perpetrators were brought to justice through a trial process, and the contribution of victims was recognized officially. We are having a repeat of that traumatic experience hosting over | million forcibly displaced Rohingyas in Cox's Bazaar. More than half of them are women, who suffered the worst forms of sexual violence in Myanmar. To realize its commitment to combating conflict-related sexual violence in the context of the women and peace and security agenda, Bangladesh recently adopted a national action plan on women and peace and security. Taking into account Bangladesh's contributions to United Nations peace operations, the action plan includes specific activities to increase the number of women peacekeepers and strengthen knowledge of, and compliance with, obligations relating to conflict- related sexual violence. The action plan includes specific activities to update and localize modules and training materials on mandate aspects relating to conflict- related sexual violence. We are conducting trainings for troops and police personnel on those materials. The women peacekeepers of Bangladesh provide life-saving services as well as psychosocial support to the victims of conflict-related sexual violence in various war-ravaged zones. To meet the growing demand for women peacekeepers, the action plan also includes specific activities aimed at increasing the recruitment of women into the armed forces and police. The national action plan also addresses the need for capacity-building for local humanitarian actors on gender-responsive and victim-centred humanitarian actions. This has been given particular focus in the light of the Rohingya context. The humanitarian assistance programmes for the Rohingya people led by the Government of Bangladesh along with United Nations and other stakeholders take into account the specific needs of women and girls, including the victims of sexual violence. Rohingya women have also been made part of the response as agents against security threats, including violent extremism and human trafficking. The list attached to the 2020 report of the Secretary General on conflict- related sexual violence (S/2020/487) names 54 parties who are credibly suspected to committing or being responsible for matters of rape and other forms of sexual violence in armed conflict. Unfortunately, many of those names belong to State machineries. It is appalling to know that over 70 per cent of listed State and non-State parties are persistent perpetrators and have appeared on the list for more than five years. As presented in the report of the Independent International Fact-finding Mission on Myanmar, sexual violence against Rohingya women and girls was used by Tatmadaw operations as a tactic of war in Rakhine during 2016 and 2017. Even now, the increased fighting between the Myanmar armed forces and various armed groups continues to put the remaining Rohingyas in Myanmar at constant risk of conflict-related sexual violence. The listing of Tatmadaw in the Secretary-General's report is a step in the right direction. However, unless and until perpetrators are held accountable, the risks will only exacerbate. The international community, including the Council, needs to persuade Myanmar to cooperate with the relevant United Nations entities, including the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the Independent International Fact-finding Mission on Myanmar and other international judicial mechanisms, including the International Criminal Court and the International Court of Justice. In the past 20 years, we have made significant progress in developing norms relating to conflict-related sexual violence and its intricate connection with international peace and security. Decisive actions have to be taken to put those norms into practice. To ensure the implementation of Security Council resolutions on women and peace and security, we would like to suggest following actions. The compliance framework suggested by Council resolutions, including resolution 2467 (2019), needs to be fully utilized, especially by regular monitoring at the field level and engagement by the Office of the Special Representative through United Nations country teams to adopt prevention commitments. We see merit in the recommendation of the Secretary-General to strengthen targeted measures against those who do not implement existing obligations and commit, command or condone sexual violence. Coherence between conflict-related sexual violence and targeted measures would indeed send a clear signal underlining the gravity of these violations. In addition, there is a need for greater synergies between mandated United Nations entities and the Committee on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women towards ensuring compliance with the General recommendation No. 30 of the Committee, on women in conflict prevention, conflict and post-conflict situations, which obliges the 189 States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women to report on the resolutions related to conflict-related sexual violence. We believe the issue of sexual violence cannot be addressed sustainably if the root causes of conflict are not addressed. Discrimination, persecution and subjugation weaken vulnerable and marginalized communities and reduce their ability to prevent incidents of sexual violence at the hands of the parties in conflict. When sexual violence continuously goes unaccounted for, it becomes persistent and often normalized. Such an environment of impunity obstructs peacebuilding and recovery efforts. Hence, accountability and justice need to be prioritized in addressing sexual violence by prioritizing the strengthening of justice mechanisms in conflict and post-conflict contexts. Stronger implementation mechanisms for the Security Council's women and peace and security agenda are needed at the national, regional and global levels. Only 44 per cent of Member States - 84 - have to date developed national action plans under resolution 1325 (2000). One practical method could be to pursue universalizing national action plans more vigorously. National action plans could serve as an important yardstick to measure progress. Commitments relating to conflict-related sexual violence need to be internalized by the entire United Nations system, including at the field level by Resident Coordinators and other United Nations agencies in country teams. This would address the capacity gaps in the security sector, justice system and overall political processes for increasing women's participation at all levels of peace processes.
