Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I
naturally welcome the presence of the President of the
Republic of Djibouti, Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh. The
French delegation has taken note with much interest of
his analysis, while the situation in the Horn of Africa
remains very unstable.

Fighting has stopped in Ras Doumeira and
Doumeira Island, but almost two years after Eritrea's
attack on Djibouti positions, not only is the conflict
still unresolved, but the Djibouti authorities have no
news of the soldiers captured by Eritrea. On 12 June
2008, the Security Council condemned Eritrea's
military actions and asked the two parties to withdraw
their forces to the positions of the status quo ante.
While Djibouti did this immediately, Eritrea still refuses
to do so, in spite of the adoption of resolution 1862
(2009) on January 2009 and then, under Chapter VII of
the Charter, of resolution 1907 (2009) last December.
To date, Asmara has rejected any international mission
to the area.

The Council thus raised the pressure on Eritrea,
which was hit with an arms embargo and individual
sanctions. The Secretary-General is ready to appoint
experts to the Monitoring Group working on sanctions
for Somalia and Eritrea. We eagerly await their
recommendations in the sanctions Committee, as well
as the report on the implementation of resolution 1907
(2009) that the Secretary-General will present to the
Council in June.

It is urgent that the situation on the ground be
settled peacefully and, beyond that, that the two
countries resolve their border disputes in a sustainable
and peaceful way.

The Eritrean authorities have sent a series of
positive signals in the past few weeks, such as their
reception of the Chairman of the sanctions Committee,
Mexican Ambassador Claude Heller. It is essential that
Eritrea set no preconditions to settling its problem with
Djibouti and that it move from words to deeds. France
encourages all efforts towards dialogue and mediation
pursuant to the Security Council's resolutions, which
require, inter alia, the return of Eritrean forces to the
status quo ante.

I also thank President Guelleh for the information
he has given to the Council on the situation in Somalia.
While the Istanbul Conference will open in a few days,
the Somali Government must come together, under the
authority of President Sharif, and deepen the political
dialogue.

Like the Ambassador of Uganda, I should like
here to pay a tribute to President Guelleh for Djibouti's
essential role in seeking a solution to the Somali crisis.
The political agreement that is the key to the
reconciliation process was negotiated in Djibouti. It is
on Djiboutian territory that the Djibouti and French
forces have begun to train Somali soldiers. Djibouti has
thus facilitated the training operation for 2,000 soldiers
that the European Union is launching this month, in
close cooperation with the African Union Mission in
Somalia. Beyond the political events of the last few
days, the most important thing is that the Transitional
Federal Government continues to strengthen itself
militarily so as to be able to provide the Somali people
with the basic services they need. Finally, as we all
know, Djibouti is playing a decisive role in fighting
piracy off the coast of Somalia.

France hopes that the Council will continue to
closely follow this situation and would like to thank
the Special Representative Ould Abdallah for his
efforts.

