Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and we thank him for his
statement. I also thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
for his briefing and Mr. Skender Hyseni for his
remarks.

As Brazil has stated on previous occasions,
resolution 1244 (1999) was intended to provide a legal
framework for a negotiated solution to the dispute on
the status of Kosovo. Also, it expressly recognizes the
need to respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
resolution remains in force and therefore continues to
be the key parameter guiding the United Nations
presence in Kosovo and international efforts to resolve
the dispute. In that regard, we look forward to the
outcome of the proceedings in The Hague on this
matter. The search for a negotiated settlement on the
final status of Kosovo should remain our ultimate goal.

We are satisfied that the security situation on the
ground remains largely calm. The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
continues to play an important role in promoting
engagement between Belgrade and Pristina as well as
with relevant stakeholders.

It is also positive that the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo remains active in its efforts
to support stability in that country. We note with
satisfaction the appointment by the European Union of
a facilitator for the protection of the religious and
cultural heritage of the Serbian Orthodox Church.
The risk of increased ethnic tensions in northern
Kosovo, however, has not disappeared. Reported
attacks against Serbian returnees in some localities, for

example, are quite disturbing, and must not be
tolerated. Regardless of the position one takes on the
status of Kosovo, now or in the future, all concerned
must ensure that it is a place where ethnic tolerance
and multiculturalism allow for peaceful coexistence
among communities. We urge the Kosovo Force and
the Kosovo Police Service to redouble their Vigilance
to prevent new incidents of violence.

Continued disputes related to the provision of
services to the population are also worrisome. We fully
endorse the call by the Secretary-General for all sides
to demonstrate openness and flexibility in this regard.
Pragmatism is what serves people better at this
juncture. Depoliticizing problems will help find
solutions, or at least some modus vivendi that
addresses the practical needs of regular citizens. The
UNMIK-facilitated working groups on issues of
interest for local communities in northern Kosovo
show that such cooperation is possible.

Full cooperation with UNMIK is also needed. It
is regrettable that Pristina did not consult with the
Mission in preparing and announcing its "strategy for
northern Kosovo". Kosovar authorities must always
bear in mind that the Security Council has given the
Mission the authority to administer Kosovo in its
entirety.

In the Western Balkans, as much as anywhere
else, there is no substitute for dialogue and negotiation
when differences arise and have to be surmounted in
the interest of the people. We hope that sustained
engagement and full cooperation with UNMIK, by all
stakeholders, will pave the way for a transparent and
inclusive approach to address issues still unsettled. We
also hope that the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice will help all parties achieve a just
solution.

Brazil will continue to support the work of the
Special Representative in implementing the mandate of
UNMIK, within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999).

