Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (S/2012/603). We
welcome the participation in today's meeting of His
Excellency Mr. Ivica Daeie, Prime Minister of Serbia,
and we thank him and Mr. Hashim Thaci for their
statements.

The position of Azerbaijan with regard to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and
non-recognition of Kosovo's unilateral declaration
of independence remains unchanged. Resolution
1244 (1999) continues to be the binding international
legal basis for a comprehensive settlement through a
negotiated political process.

We welcome the peaceful and orderly conduct of
Serbian presidential and parliamentary elections in
Kosovo in May, and we commend the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
international partners for their contribution to the
preparation and conduct of the voting.

We note that both sides have expressed the
will to resume consultations in order to discuss the
implementation of existing agreements. We believe
that a good faith commitment to continued dialogue
will contribute to further tangible progress in the near
future.

Although the overall security situation remained
generally calm during the reporting period, a series of
incidents that occurred in northern Kosovo and other
areas served to increase tensions on the ground.

We condemn the double murder on 6 July of a
popular Kosovo Serb village leader and his wife in the
home to which they had recently returned in Kosovo.
We concur with Mr. Zarif that such terrible crimes must
not be allowed to remain unsolved or go unpunished.
We look forward to the conclusion of the ongoing
investigation.

The situation regarding the return of internally
displaced persons to Kosovo again showed few signs of
improvement during the reporting period. More attention
and strengthened political will are required to reverse
the continuing decline in the number of returns. In that
regard, we share the view of the Secretary-General that,
among other measures, improved responses by public
institutions, in particular the police and other public
service providers, are needed to address the continuing
challenges faced by the minority communities in all
parts of Kosovo.

We take note of the information on some important
developments pertaining to the investigation of facts
related to organized crime, the inhuman treatment of
people and organ trafficking. We strongly believe that
establishing the truth will serve the principles ofjustice
and the rule of law and will contribute to a lasting
political settlement. The Security Council should play a
greater role in that regard. We do not see any obstacles
that could prevent the process from being empowered
by and accountable to the Council.

The issue of missing persons continues to be one
of the major obstacles to reconciliation efforts. It is
therefore encouraging that during the reporting period,
with the direct support of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and other
international partners, the sides have made important
steps towards addressing that human rights issue in
a spirit of cooperation. We look forward to further
progress and encourage the sides to continue their
efforts to that effect.

The protection of religious and cultural heritage
in Kosovo should remain an UNMIK priority. Some
progress was observed during the reporting period,
including the reconstruction of several sites, improved
interaction at the local level and legislative measures
taken after long delays to strengthen the protection of
cultural heritage sites in some areas.

At the same time, we deeply regret that acts of
vandalism and religious intolerance have continued. We
recall the obligation to comply with the commitments
made by each side in that regard.

In conclusion, I would like to commend UNMIK
under the leadership of Special Representative Zarif for
its efforts and important role in maintaining peace and
stability in Kosovo and in the entire region.

