Mr. Okamura (Japan) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by expressing my gratitude to France for
having convened today's important meeting.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for
his detailed briefing and Ambassador Tanin for his
remarks.

Furthermore, I would like to join other Member
States in welcoming today's adoption of resolution
2210 (2015), which renews the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I would like to extend my sincere congratulations to
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi and the Permanent
Mission of Spain for their leadership in the renewal
process.

This year Afghanistan will embark on its path
towards self-reliance through the transformation decade.
We welcome the strong determination and capacity
that the Government and the people of Afghanistan
have shown in addressing the important challenges
that the country faces. Afghanistan, nevertheless, does
not stand alone. The Tokyo and London Conferences
have reiterated that the international community stands
ready to continue its support for Afghanistan, under the
concept of mutual accountability.

The extension of UNAMA's mandate is testimony
to the international community's commitment
to Afghanistan. Japan expects that UNAMA, as
an embodiment of the international community's
engagement with Afghanistan, will continue to play an
important role in supporting the Afghan-led political
process and the country's socioeconomic development.

The first democratic transition of power marked
a watershed in Afghanistan's pursuit of self-reliance.
We look to the national unity Government, under
the guidance of, and with cooperation between,
President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah,
to successfully implement its ambitious reform
programme. It is regrettable, however, that a full cabinet
has yet to be formed six months after an agreement was
reached. We reiterate our call on the new leadership to
form an inclusive national unity Government that can
tackle the challenges that the country faces.

In this regard, I would like to touch upon three
points of particular importance as Afghanistan
embarks on its transformation decade, namely, first,
strengthening governance and institution-building;
secondly, advancing political reconciliation; and,
thirdly and lastly, laying the foundation for sustainable
economic development.

First, we believe that strengthening governance and
institution-building will be fundamental to achieving
self-reliance. A critical component of this is the
strengthening of Afghanistan's own security forces.
With the conclusion of the International Security
Assistance Force, the Afghan Government is now called
upon to take full responsibility for security and public
order. We are therefore concerned at the recent increase
in terrorism and civilian casualties. To this effect,
Japan will continue to help reinforce Afghanistan's
law-enforcement capacity. Our assistance in this area
will be carried out principally through the Law and
Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan, to which Japan has
hitherto contributed more than $1 billion.

In the light of the importance of maintaining
security, we hope that Afghanistan and international
donors will be able to agree on a form of management
for the Fund that is reliable and acceptable to all parties
involved, via constructive dialogue.

Secondly, political reconciliation is crucial for
Afghanistan's long-term stability. In that light, Japan
values the Afghan Government's efforts in leading
the Afghan-led process towards peace, reintegration
and reconciliation. Japan also welcomes Afghanistan's
increased cooperation with regional partners, which is
conducive to peace. Japan, for its part, will continue to
support the reintegration of ex-combatants by providing
vocational training and promoting job creation in such
key sectors as agriculture.

Thirdly, we note with concern the recent economic
slowdown. This affects not only Government revenues
but also the welfare of ordinary Afghan citizens. Hence
it is all the more crucial for Afghanistan to achieve
a strong, endogenous and sustainable economy. The
development of infrastructure and human resources
would underpin this objective.
Strengthening the agricultural sector is also
important owing to its large potential for job creation.
To that end, Japan has provided assistance to reinforce
Afghanistan's infrastructure and facilitate its integration
into the global economy. This includes, inter alia, our
assistance for the rehabilitation and expansion of Kabul
International Airport, the reinforcement of land routes
with neighbouring countries, and the rehabilitation of
irrigation facilities in rural areas.

Furthermore, through initiatives such as the
Promotion and Enhancement of the Afghan Capacity
for Effective Development, Japan is helping train
Afghan officials who will lead the country's economic
development through and beyond the transformation
decade.

It is said that a journey of 1,000 miles begins
with a single step. We are confident that the millions
of Afghans who made their historic voices heard
last September will, along with the Government of
national unity, cement the foundations for a stable and
prosperous Afghanistan.

As testimony to Japan's solidarity with Afghanistan,
the Japanese Government has decided to disburse an
additional $242 million before the end of this month.
We hope that this will reinforce Afghanistan's first
steps into the decade of transformation. Japan, along
with the international community, stands ready to
accompany Afghanistan on its path towards reform and
self-reliance.

