Mexico thanks the Niger for convening this debate on the humanitarian effects of environmental degradation on peace and security in the context of the maintenance of international peace and security. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and Secretary-General of the World Meteorological Organization Petteri Taalas recently reminded the international community of the seriousness of the phenomenon of climate change and its effects through the publication of the United in Science 2020 climate report, which clearly states that floods and droughts have caused 90 percent of the impacts of natural disasters worldwide. In this context, Mexico recognizes the relevance of the topic and wishes to make the following observations. Climate change and its effects, such as desertification, droughts and soil erosion, as well as floods caused by rising sea levels, are a risk factor in humanitarian impacts, among other reasons for those impacts, particularly as a result of its adverse effects on the food security and displacement that we have witnessed in some regions. Accordingly, all analyses must take into account the specific cases from which they are derived and integrate them in the multifactorial analyses that inform the decision-making process. The United Nations system must provide a multidimensional, coherent and coordinated response. Although the Security Council is not the organ charged with responding to the global threat of climate change and its demonstrated effects on environmental degradation, the humanitarian impact of this threat and its effects may accentuate the risk of instability or exacerbate existing conflicts. It is therefore necessary to work in a coordinated manner with the various entities present in the field, including humanitarian actors, to generate scientific evidence and synergies that facilitate timely analysis and improve the system's decision-making and preventive capacities. The institutional architecture has been strengthened in recent months and is a solid foundation to build on in future. The analyses carried out by the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs' collaboration mechanism are the kind of concrete measures that will help us to strengthen the capacities the system needs. Mexico is convinced that the Security Council must have at its disposal solid and targeted risk analyses to avoid situations that could lead to serious humanitarian situations. Members of the Council must also be prepared to take action to strengthen the Organization's preventive capacities, which necessarily means systematically asking the United Nations and all its entities to work internally as a genuine system.
