Mr. Guillen (Peru) (interpretation from Spanish): I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. Allow me also to convey my congratulations to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Poland,
Ambassador Wlosowicz.

I am pleased to speak on behalf of the delegation of
Peru. I am also expressing the feelings of Latin American
and Caribbean countries, which are taking an interest in
those meetings on the situation in Angola. It is our wish in
particular to welcome the recent inauguration of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation of
Angola. Over these years we have seen the difficult path
that the people of Angola have had to travel in order to
reach this important moment. The inauguration of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation is a
fundamental step towards the promise of consolidating
peace and democracy to replace the mistrust and violence
that have so sorely affected the people of Angola.

We welcome the step taken last March in Lusaka by
the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan. This gave critical
impetus to achieving the final agreement between the
Angolan parties. The efforts made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Maitre Alioune
Blondin Beye, and by all mediating countries have also
been notable. All of this has been invaluable to reaching
this event.

States Members of the United Nations have been
looking forward to this moment because there have been
setbacks which have jeopardized the entire process ever
since the "Acordos de Paz" were signed in 1991 and the
Lusaka Protocol in 1994. The transitional phase about to
begin will be difficult, complex and sensitive. It will be
vital during this phase to have the firm support and
commitment of the parties in carrying out their
responsibilities in keeping with the agreements they have
entered into.

There is therefore a special responsibility on the
parties with regard to the United Nations. The peace,
security and development of the Angolan people, who
have suffered so much, are rights that we cannot ignore.
In this connection, we welcome the initiative of the
Secretary-General to convert the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) at the end of its
mandate into a United Nations observer mission. We
believe that what has been attained with such great effort
could be lost without this.

Angola urgently requires a process of rehabilitation
and reconstruction. Basic needs must be met. The
development and training of human resources are
particularly essential. We believe that this is a typical case
of the reconstruction of a country. This can only be
achieved through the organic, carefully planned efforts
and well-integrated efforts of the international
community - as various Members of the United Nations
and the Secretariat have proposed - in order to
consolidate peace and internal security.

 
We hope that peace in Angola will move the parties
involved in conflicts in other parts of Africa to act, because
the peoples of this continent are entitled to the right to life
and security that we all believe in as individuals and as
Members of the United Nations.

