Mr. Saenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): We are meeting today to adopt a creative solution
to the conflict that arose following the reprehensible
terrorist attacks on Pan Am flight 103 and UTA flight 772,
a solution that will allow for a prompt end to be put to the
sanctions regime imposed by the Security Council on Libya
through its resolution 883 (1993). Today we will adopt a
draft resolution that will allow for the immediate
reintegration of Libya into the international community.

At the outset we must not forget that the imposition of
the sanctions regime against Libya is the result of two very
serious criminal acts carried out against two commercial
airliners that took the lives of 441 innocent people and
caused thousands of families pain and suffering. Those acts
are crimes that cry out for justice. Costa Rica today
remembers those victims and, by adopting this draft
resolution, reaffirms its faith in the validity of law and
justice as the best tribute that we can pay to those victims.

My delegation has repeatedly reaffirmed that
preventing, combating and eliminating international
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations are essential
elements in the maintenance of international peace and

 

security. Similarly, we have reiterated my Government's
condemnation of all States that provide safe haven,
support or assistance to those who plan, organize or
participate in terrorist acts. We believe that those
activities should be condemned and combated by the
international community as a whole and that they must be
prevented and punished using all available legal and
political means, such as international legal and judicial
cooperation, but without resorting to unilateral actions.

In this context, we welcome in particular and will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us, because
it represents an intelligent legal solution to a longstanding
legal problem. This draft resolution will make it possible
for those accused of committing the terrorist act against
Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie to be brought to justice
in a Scottish court sitting in the Netherlands.

Costa Rica also sees this draft as the logical yet
overdue result of a sanctions regime and the process of
dialogue that it must stimulate. My delegation has stated
on several occasions that although we accept sanctions as
a means of legitimate collective defence for the
international community, recognized and established in
the Charter of the United Nations, any sanctions regime
must be carefully designed to comply with its prime
objective of modifying illegal policies of a given
Government. That is the sole valid objective of sanctions.
From that standpoint, sanctions must always be a
temporary regime; in no circumstances can they become
a form of punishment for the innocent civilian population.
For that reason and in order to assist the State subject to
sanctions in modifying its illegal policies, any sanctions
regime must be accompanied by active and ongoing
dialogue between the parties. Only in this way can that
State be reintegrated into the international community.

In this particular case my delegation wishes to
express its gratitude for the considerable contributions
made by the League of Arab States, the Organization of
African Unity, the Organization of the Islamic Conference
and the Non-Aligned Movement and for their useful and
positive input into this process of dialogue. It is thanks to
them and to their creative contributions that today we are
able to adopt this draft resolution. It was in those forums
that the basic idea arose for the agreement we are
adopting today and which Costa Rica has consistently
supported in recent months.

Likewise we wish to express our gratitude for the
goodwill of the United Kingdom and the United States in
accepting this proposal and in allowing justice to pursue

 

its course in the best interests of the Victims of those
regrettable incidents.
We welcome the kind offer of the Netherlands to host
this court, and we have confidence in the guarantees it has
provided regarding the accused as well as the participation
of international observers who will bear witness to
impartiality of the proceedings.

We express our satisfaction at the decision by Libya
to accept this solution fully and without conditions. In this
context, we recall the words of Mr. Muntasser, the
Secretary of the General People's Committee for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, who on 20 March 1998 in this very forum
affirmed that Libya agreed to the accused being tried in
The Hague by Scottish judges in accordance with Scottish
law, and reaffirmed its acceptance of any of the alternatives
proposed by the League of Arab States. Costa Rica has no
doubt that the Libyan authorities will keep their word.

Finally, Costa Rica reiterates its full trust in the
Scottish judicial system and in the European system of
human rights, which will guarantee, as stated by Messrs.
Dumbutshena and Schermers in their report, absolute
respect for the fundamental rights of the accused and the
strictest compliance with the basic principles of due
process.

