Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
introduce the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/1105) on the situation in Mali to the members
of the Security Council, and update them on the most
recent developments concerning the political and
security situation in the country.

I would also like to welcome the presence today of
the new Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Republic of Mali, His Excellency
Mr. Tieman Hubert CouIibaly, whom I warmly
congratulate on his appointment. I should like to convey
through the Minister to the new Government our every
wish for its success, and to reiterate to him our readiness
and that of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to support him in his work, especially with regard to the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

The adoption of a timeline for implementing urgent
measures within the framework of the Peace Agreement
at the last meeting of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee on 15 and 16 January was an important
step. That timeline includes an entire series ofmeasurcs
that should allow progress with regard to institutional
measures, including, in particular ensuring that the
Territorial Communities Code conforms with the Peace
Agreement, and the operationalization of the interim
authorities and the transitional electoral colleges,
as well as the local Governments in the Me'naka and
Taoudenni regions, by March. The timeline could also
help advance security arrangements, including the
operationalization of the Operational Coordination
Mechanisms of Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu, the
finalization of the criteria for the integration of former
combatants into the armed and security forces, the
further development of security sector reform strategy
and the establishment of security conditions for the
upcoming elections. The timetable could finally revive
development for the northern regions.

However, with the holding of presidential elections,
scheduled for mid-July, less than six months away, it is
now important that the Government and the signatory
movements make every effort to respect that new
timetable. Almost a year ago, on 10 February 2017,
the then Minister for Foreign Affairs of Algeria, His
Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, as chief mediator,
presided over a high-level ministerial meeting of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee, which resulted in
a road map for installing the interim authorities and
initiating joint patrols, as well as the establishment
of a permanent consultation framework comprised of
the signatory parties, international mediators and key
partners. Unfortunately, it is clear today that those
measures have not been followed up.

I welcome the fact that the first trip by
Mr. Soumeylou Boubeye Maiga, the new Prime
Minister of Mali, appointed on 30 December, was
slated for Algeria, the lead mediator. We hope that
consultations with the Algerian authorities will give
awaited impetus to talks with the other signatory parties
with a view to overcoming the differences observed
over the past several months. In particular, I highlight
the controversy related to the Territorial Communities
Code, as well as persistent divergences concerning
the issue of quota requirements for the integration of
former combatants into the armed and security forces,
which are essential for the launch of the cantonment
and security sector reform.

It is also hoped that constructive consultations
among the parties, following the meeting of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee of January 15 and
16, will enable them, in the days to come, to adhere to
the timetable agreed at that meeting. That is essential
to ensuring coherence between the Peace Agreement
and the legal framework concerning decentralization
and to laying the groundwork for the holding of local
and regional elections in April 2018 in an optimal
security conditions.

In the same vein, I would like to encourage the
signatory parties to dedicate the coming months to
developing a road map articulating their vision for
new Malian defence and security institutions and the
various stages of the reform. A consensus on the next
steps would enable the launching of the cantonment
and demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
processes and thereby help reduce insecurity in the
northern regions.

Time is short, and we are facing a constant race
against time in Mali. We are facing increasing insecurity
that has unfortunately cost the lives of hundreds of
civilians in the northern and central parts of the country,
as well as dozens of members of the Malian defence
and security forces, Blue Helmets and contingents of
Operation Barkhane over the past year. We are also
facing a worsening human rights and humanitarian
situations in the country. The fact that, after more than
two years following the signing ofthe peace agreement,
the northern development strategy project has not
been adopted means that a large percentage of those
living in the north has been deprived of long-awaited
peace dividends. Humanitarian actors estimate that
by 2018, 4.1 million Malians - or 22 per cent of the
population * will be food insecure. The estimated
percentage is even higher for the northern and central
regions where 30 to 40 per cent of the population would
be affected.

As members of the Security Council saw for
themselves during their visit in October 2017, the
challenges remain considerable, and, as I have said, our
goal must be to establish conditions conducive to the
holding of elections and, beyond them, pursuing the
peace process. To that end, I encourage the Government
to launch the implementation of the agreement's key
measures - decentralization and security sector
reform - in a concerted and inclusive manner. In that
regard, I would like to assure the Government of the
continued support of MINUSMA, under the leadership
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mahamat Saleh Annadif, who is sparing no effort in
exercising his good offices.

(Spoke in English)
As was previously mentioned, the report under
consideration highlights the continued worsening of the
situation in the centre of the country with the highest
number of terrorist attacks documented in the Mopti
region. The Government is making efforts in that regard.
Prime Minister Maiga convened a Cabinet meeting
devoted to addressing insecurity in the central region
and the national coordination body's integrated plan for
securing the centre of the country is now operational.
For its part, MINUSMA has enhanced its support
for the Malian defence and security forces in central
Mali following the signature of the memorandum of
understanding with the Government on 8 November.
The Mission is helping upgrade the security of six
Malian armed forces bases for an estimated cost of
$1 million, as well as continuing to assist with casualty
and medical evacuations.

I would also like to welcome the progress made in
the operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), which has launched
its second operation, as well as the establishment by
the G-5 Sahel secretariat of a coordination cell to
provide political oversight to the operations of the Joint
Force. As recommended by the Secretary-General in
his October report (S/2017/811), we would also advise
that the groupe de soutien be activated to ensure
unity of vision and purpose among all stakeholders.
Meanwhile, consultations for the conclusion of the
technical agreement among the G-5 Sahel, the United
Nations and the European Union are progressing, and
we intend to work closely with the European Union
and the African Union on ajoint resource mobilization
strategy before the donors conference of 23 February in
Brussels in accordance with the provisions ofresolution
2391 (2017).

Development partners are also stepping up their
efforts. Since October 2017, the Peace Building Fund
launched four projects focused on the Mopti and Segou
regions for a total of$8 million. Those projects are aimed
at enhancing the participation of women and youth in
reconciliation efforts and preventing intercommunity
conflicts, including by restoring traditional conflict
mediation mechanisms. However, most of those
initiatives remain in the inception phase, and have yet
to produce significant changes on the ground. For the
future, central Mali is likely to command sustained
attention and become an increasingly prominent feature
in peace and reconciliation efforts.

The upcoming presidential elections will mark
the beginning of a new chapter in the stabilization
of Mali. The modest achievements made to date in
the implementation of the Peace Agreement that
forms the cornerstone of the Mission's mandate,
the entry into function of the independent observer,
the operationalization of the sanctions regime, the
establishment of the international commission of inquiry,
the upcoming presidential elections, the continued
security risks facing our personnel on the ground, the
growth of insecurity spanning towards the centre of the
country and the deployment of a new regional force by
the G-5 Sahel make the independent review requested
by the Secretary-General particularly timely.

Allow me here to welcome the participation of
the Carter Center, for the first time, in the Agreement
Monitoring Committee meeting held last week, the
recent nomination of the Panel of Experts mandated
by resolution 2374 (2017) and the Secretary-General's
decision to establish the international commission of
inquiry, of which he informed the Security Council
by letter yesterday. The independent observer will
identify blockages, apportion responsibility and make
recommendations for the way forward. The Panel of
Experts will support the Committee in identifying and
imposing sanctions against individuals hampering the
implementation of the agreement. It will also help to
shed light on the links between international organized
crime, terrorist groups and signatory armed groups. The
International Commission of Inquiry will investigate
serious violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law committed in Mali since
January 2012. Its establishment represents an important
step forward in the implementation of the justice and
reconciliation measures outlined in the Agreement, and
in efforts to fight impunity.

Five years after the Mission's establishment and
two and a half years after the signature of the peace
agreement, we believe the time has come to re-assess
the assumptions about MlNUSMA's presence, review
its key mandated tasks against its achievements on
the ground and re-examine the Mission's layout for
a comprehensive strategic review. I must note that
resolution 2364 (2017) had requested that MINUSMA
develop within six months a mission-wide prioritization
plan articulating a phased approach to mandate
implementation and a transition plan. However, we felt
that to ensure maximum impact, it would be important
that the two plans be informed by the findings of
the strategic review to be conducted in the coming
weeks. We therefore believe that the two plans will
remain living documents until the conclusion of the
strategic review can be incorporated. In the meantime,
MINUSMA continues to focus on core-mandated tasks,
with notable achievement in its good offices and the
protection of civilian efforts.

In spite of persisting capability gaps, including
for crucial assets, such as helicopters, MINUSMA
is pursuing its effort to project the robust posture
mandated by the Security Council. Since the beginning
of the year, peacekeepers repelled three attacks against
one position in Kidal region and one ambush in
Mopti region, and three improvised explosive devices
exploded against Mission vehicles. I am pleased to
report that such attacks resulted in only minor injuries
to two peacekeepers. We also note that the mitigation
measures implemented by the Mission are having a
positive impact. However, such endeavours are long-
term. The review on peacekeeping fatalities recently
conducted by Lieutenant General Cruz and our plan of
action highlight the importance ofenhancing our efforts
and ensuring that all peacekeepers receive the training
and equipment necessary to operate in such hostile
conditions. We are currently working with MINUSMA
to take all necessary measures to implement the
recommendations outlined in that report.

