Mr. Kobler (spoke in Spanish): First, I would like
to congratulate Spain on its accession to the presidency
of the Security Council for December.

Members of the Council have before them the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (8/2016/1011).
I would like to update members on developments in
the situation.

(spoke in English)

The first anniversary of the signing of the Libyan
Political Agreement on 17 December is fast approaching.
It is time to take stock. I will concentrate my remarks
on the following three points. First, what has been
achieved so far? Secondly, what are the challenges?
Thirdly, what is the outlook for Libya in 2017?

With respect to my first point, the Presidency
Council has been operating for almost nine months
from Tripoli. Following economic talks in London and
Rome, the Presidency Council now meets regularly
with financial institutions to address Libya's economic
troubles. Oil production has increased significantly,
tripling from August to almost 600,000 barrels a
day. I am thankful for the fact that the international
community is clear and in consensus. It supports the
Presidency Council and the Libyan Political Agreement.

In that regard, the African Union, the League of
Arab States and the United Nations have formed a
troika to work together and provide stronger support.
Ambassadors are submitting their credentials to the
Presidency Council, and Member States are looking to
return to Tripoli. Advances against terrorism have been
made in both the east and the west. The Islamic State
has shrunk from occupying the entirety of Sirte to now
just few buildings. Although it continues to be a threat,
the days of the Islamic State controlling territory in
Libya are over, while in Benghazi the Libyan National
Army continues to make progress, taking area after
area. I would like to pay tribute today once again to
all the sons of Libya who have sacrificed their lives for
this common cause. I would also like to commemorate
the many civilians who have died in the course of
these clashes.

My second point is that while these developments
are encouraging, there is much to be concerned about.
The institutions of the Libyan Political Agreement still
work far below expectations. Although the Presidency
Council resides in Tripoli, the Government of National
Accord has limited authority. Twice, proposed
Government of National Accord lists have been
rejected by the House of Representatives. Cooperation
within and between many of the institutions remains
gridlocked. Pretender Governments compete for power.
The Interim Government in Bayda exists in parallel to
the Government of National Accord. The Government
of National Salvation has also tried make a comeback in
recent weeks, creating a tense stand-off between rival
armed groups in Tripoli.

The fragmented security situation allows criminal
and terrorist networks to flourish. Kidnappings,
extortion, and theft occur daily. Over the last days,
we have seen the most violent clashes in Tripoli since
2014 between armed groups competing for power and
territory. I am very concerned and take this opportunity
to urge and call on forces engaged in the violence
there to immediately stop fighting and terrorizing the
population, and I call for wisdom to prevail.

The deadly clashes were triggered by the murder
of the religious scholar Sheikh Nader Al-Omrani,
whom I met a few months ago. We recently also saw
clashes in Sabha, in the south, where 23 persons were
killed. These events are symptoms of the lack of
security and underlying tensions among communities.
Weapon deliveries are still going on, and they appear
in violation of the weapons embargo imposed by the
Security Council and sometimes end up in the hands
of terrorist groups throughout the region. Until Libya
has a reliable and coherent security apparatus, the arms
embargo must remain in force and enforced.

The fundamentals of the Libyan economy also
need to be tackled as a matter of urgency. Although the
increase in oil production provides some relief, Libya
runs a budget deficit of around 70 per cent of gross
domestic product (GDP) - the largest budget deficit
compared to GDP in the world. Still, the Presidency
Council has challenges utilizing funds. Relations
between the Central Bank and the Presidency Council
are strained. While the some opponents of the Libyan
Political Agreement in Tripoli seem to have unrestricted
access to huge sums of money, the Presidency Council
and the Central Bank of Libya are still struggling to
find a way to disburse money.

I urge the Central Bank of Libya to save the
Government of National Accord and other institutions
by rapidly disbursing money in an orderly way and
with a minimum of bureaucracy. Access to funds is the
lifeline of the Presidency Council. Libya's financial
reserves have shrunk from $108 billion in 2013 to a
mere $45 billion. The country will face an economic
meltdown unless something changes.

People in Libya are rightly frustrated at the slow pace
of progress. More containment is not a recipe for Libya
in 2017. As many say, the mistake was to leave Libya
alone after 2011. Six years later, we must engage more
with our Libyan partners. Together, we must work so
that root questions are firmly and decisively addressed.
The situation requires Antibiotics, not aspirin.

I am convinced that the Libyan Political Agreement
remains the one and only viable framework. It is
without alternatives. Until today, even the most
vociferous critics of the Agreement acknowledge that it
is the only workable framework. That said, the Libyan
Political Agreement has not fulfilled expectations. its
implementation has stalled. However its articles are
not set in stone. The Libyan Political Agreement even
foresees a mechanism for change, should the political
circumstances demand. Libya must move forward. I
would like to propose six points.

First, the outstanding political questions must be
tackled. I have convened the Libyan political dialogue
multiple times. In November, the Libyan political
dialogue called on the House of Representatives to
amend the Constitutional Declaration to incorporate the
Libyan Political Agreement. I conveyed this message
to the House of Representatives President, Mr. Agila
Saleh Essa Gwaider, urging him to convene a meeting
of the House of Representatives and vote, and thereafter
endorse the Government of National Accord presented
by the Presidency Council. Should this be difficult, I
asked President Gwaider to tell us why, so that we could
be helpful and address the open questions within the
House of Representatives.

This being done, the Libyan Political Agreement
will be owned by the institutions that it creates:
the House of Representative and the State Council.
All outstanding questions, including the supreme
commandership and the chain of command of the
Libyan Army, can be addressed by the process provided
for by the Libyan Political Agreement. However, a path
forward should consist of inclusive, peaceful dialogue
and never military escalation.

Secondly, the issue of armed groups in Tripoli must
be tackled urgently. In this regard, I give my full backing
to the creation of the presidential guard, which will
provide protection to State institutions and embassies.
I agree with those who say that the Presidency Council
and the Government of National Accord must not be
protected by armed groups. The vision of a presidential
guard has been transformed into a realistic plan. This
plan deserves our full support. It is not an alternative
to the building up of the Libyan Army under a unified
command. Once established, the presidential guard
will apply for exceptions from the weapons embargo to
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011). The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) will convene a high-level meeting next
week, on 13 December, to remove the obstacles to the
formation of the presidential guard.
Thirdly, the fight against terrorism has produced
results. I have spoke about Sirte and Benghazi. However,
the gains are not irreversible. The economic recovery of
Sirte and Benghazi in particular has to be planned and
implemented. This is a matter of priority.

Fourthly, the fundamentals of the Libyan economy
must be addressed. Deficit, inflation, the lack of
liquidity and more must be tackled to avoid economic
meltdown. The Presidency Council must have access to
funds and the capacity to disperse them. In this regard,
I will maintain my support to the current multilateral
meetings on Libyan financing, which have already led
to valuable achievements such as the appointment of
the Minister of Finance. I intend to provide technical
support to the Presidency Council to assist in building
its administrative capacity.

Fifthly, the issue of human rights and the rule of
law, including the situation of migrants, must be more
effectively and comprehensively addressed. Libya is a
human marketplace. That is a shame for a country like
Libya. It has to be addressed and it has to end. The
rule of law must also be respected. Summary justice
dispensed by armed groups must make way for due
process. Abductions, assassinations and threats against
judicial officers and social activists must cease. In this
regard, I would like to reiterate my full support to the
efforts of the International Criminal Court and applaud
the Prosecutor's announcement that new investigations
will begin in Libya.

Sixthly and finally, I want to emphasise the
importance of UNSMIL returning to Tripoli in a
phased way once security questions are adequately
mitigated. We can be far more effective there than we
can hope to be in Tunis. UNSMIL must return to Libya;
we should do it now to support all partners in these
difficult moments. Stability can be better achieved if
the international community is on the ground and not
in exile.

(spoke in Spanish)

I would like once again to thank the Security
Council for its unwavering support to the Libyan
Political Agreement. The only alternative to the Libyan
Political Agreement is chaos. The Libyan Political
Agreement must work, can work and will work.

