Mr. Kombo Yaya (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): Permit me to convey to you, Madam
President, the regrets of His Excellency Mr. Francois
Bozize, President of the Republic and Head of State,
who, because of other commitments, could not
personally take part in this meeting on cooperation
between the United Nations Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council. He remains
convinced that, under your country's presidency, the
Security Council will further strengthen its cooperation
with the African Union Peace and Security Council.

The African architecture in the area of conflict
prevention, management and resolution is the outcome
of the commitment of our heads of State or
Government, first within the former Organization of
African Unity and then within today's African Union
(AU), to ensure that peace and security - which are,
moreover, inseparable - are the top priority, because
without peace there can be no economic and social
development. The relevant provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and of the Constitutive Act of the
African Union emphasize that point quite clearly.

We welcome the active cooperation between our
two organizations in the area of peacekeeping. There
are many examples in that regard. I need not refer to
them in detail, as most of those who have spoken
before me have eloquently cited numerous examples of
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. However, I would like to emphasize in
particular the need to strengthen the capacity of
subregional organizations with conflict settlement
mechanisms, such as the Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa. Such bodies work at the
grass-roots level, play a basic and crucial role in the
settlement of conflicts and should rely on the African
Union only as a last resort. We therefore welcome the
proposal of the Secretary-General for the establishment
of a joint United Nations-African Union group of
experts to consider in detail how to support the
peacekeeping operations of subregional organizations,
especially in terms of funding.

I should like to take this opportunity, on behalf of
my President, to commend Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his support for the establishment of a
regional office for the Great Lakes region of Central
Africa.

In the light of the new situation, enhancing the
capacity of the African Union also continues to be a
priority. As you are aware, Madam President, the
Central African Republic is a post-conflict country that
is trying to emerge from two decades of ongoing crisis.
Any effort aimed at re-establishing and strengthening
peace should take into account the economic situation
in the country, because extreme poverty, hunger and
the precarious state of our people's health constitute
fertile ground for instability.

I should like to take this opportunity to welcome
the joint efforts made by the African Union through the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
Central African Republic, including the efforts of the
Special Envoy of the Chairman of the African Union,
in order to bring about reconciliation in Central Africa,
including the work done to prepare for the inclusive
dialogue, which came to an end on 31 March and
which will open up the way for the dialogue to take
place very soon.

In conclusion, we fully support the draft
resolution put forward by your country, Madam
President, which opens up new horizons for our
continent.

