The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of Haiti,
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lelong (Haiti)
took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Civilian
Police Mission in Haiti, document S/2000/150.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General dated 25 February 2000
(S/2000/ 150) submitted in accordance with resolution
1277 (1999) of 30 November 1999.

"The Security Council commends the
Representative of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH),
the International Civilian Mission in Haiti (MICIVIH)
and all the previous missions deployed in Haiti for
assisting the Haitian Government in supporting the
professionalization of the Haitian National Police

(HNP) force, consolidating Haiti's system of justice
and other national institutions and promoting human
rights. The Council expresses its thanks to all the
countries which took part in and contributed to the
success of MIPONUH, MICIVIH and all the
previous missions deployed in Haiti, particularly the
troop-contributing countries.

"The Security Council recognizes that the
people and the Government of Haiti bear the
ultimate responsibility for national reconciliation, the
maintenance of a secure and stable environment, the
administration of justice and the reconstruction of
their country and that the Government of Haiti bears
particular responsibility for the further strengthening
and effective functioning of the HNP and the justice
system. The Council considers that timely, free and
fair elections are crucial to democracy and all
aspects of Haiti's development and strongly urges
Haitian authorities to work cooperatively together in
order to finalize arrangements for holding credible
elections as rapidly as possible so as to restore,
promptly and fully, the lapsed Parliament and
independent local governments.

"The Security Council commends the
Secretary-General for ensuring a phased transition to
the International Civilian Support Mission in Haiti
(MICAH) and recognizes that economic
rehabilitation and reconstruction constitute a major
task facing the Government and people of Haiti and
that significant international assistance is
indispensable for the sustainable development of
Haiti.

"The Security Council recognizes the success
of cooperative efforts in bringing about the mandate
for this new mission in Haiti and notes with
satisfaction the contributions made by the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council in
this regard. The Security Council welcomes the
initiative of the Economic and Social Council to
develop a strategic framework and a comprehensive
approach for a long-term United Nations programme
of support for Haiti and underlines the vital link
between national stability and economic and social
development.

"The Security Council expects the Secretary-
General to keep it informed, as appropriate, of the
 

situation in Haiti and, in particular, the progress This statement will be issued as a document of the
achieved in the electoral process." Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ZOOO/S,

The meeting rose at 10.25 pm.

