Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing by Ms. Fatou Bensouda.

Our country strongly supports the Prosecutor's
efforts to ensure justice and accountability in the fight
against impunity, as well as to promote a comprehensive,
transparent and effective justice system. More than
10 years have past since the adoption of resolution
1593 (2005), by means of which the Security Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the Office of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
However, little progress has been made with regard to
its implementation.

With regard to the political situation, great
strides have been made through the implementation
of the provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur and thanks to the mediation efforts of former
President Thabo Mbeki of the African Union High-
Level Implementation Panel. Such progress, as stated
in the Prosecutor's report, has led to a reduction in
instances of violence on the ground. However, we share
the Prosecutor's concern regarding sexual and gender-
related violence in the armed conflict in Darfur, which
make strengthening the rule of law difficult to achieve.

For our country, accountability is a sine qua non
condition to achieve lasting peace in the Sudan. Hence,
we insist that those who have violated international
humanitarian law and human rights law within the
context of the armed conflict in Darfur be brought to
justice. That would contribute to not only breaking
the prevailing cycle of impunity, but also to fostering
confidence in the State institutions of the Sudan.

In that vein, we believe it would be worthwhile,
inter alia, to encourage effective dialogue between the
International Criminal Court and the African Union
with a view to considering practical steps that would
facilitate the work of the Prosecutor and the Court,
including the possibility of taking action in the region
and achieving agreements based on mutual respect and
full respect for international law. We believe that such
cooperation would complement regional initiatives to
fight impunity. And it would do so all the more at a
time when the legitimacy and impartiality of the Court
have been called into question by several countries of
the region, including Burundi, the Gambia and South
Africa, which recently decided to withdraw from the
Court, which sits in The Hague.

With a View to supporting the work of the Prosecutor
to ensure that justice and accountability are a reality, we
also encourage the Court to assess the situation on the
ground in an objective and impartial fashion. Its role in
the impartial investigation of the actions of all parties
to the conflict is of the utmost important to increase
the credibility of such legal authority. To that end, the
International Criminal Court must work in a balanced
fashion, in favour of promoting justice and achieving
a firm and lasting peace from a comprehensive and
indivisible point of View. However, we are concerned
by the attempts of some factions to politicize the work
of the International Criminal Court, which affects
the principles on which the Court is based, such as
autonomy, independence, impartiality, transparency
and objectivity.

The arrest warrant issued by the International
Criminal Court against President Omar Al-Bashir
undermines the right to jurisdictional immunity
for Heads of State of those States that are not party
to the Rome Statute. The process to suspend the
jurisdictional immunity of a President in exercising
his office so that he can be tried is a matter of course
by judiciary of his country represents a procedure set
out in the Constitution of the Republic of the Sudan.
In that regard, we share the calls of the African Union
to request a suspension of the Court's proceedings
regarding the arrest warrant against the President of
the Sudan. However, we call upon the Government
of the Sudan, the competent regional authorities and
neighbouring States to cooperate effectively with the
International Criminal Court with respect to the arrest
of those alleged suspects who do not enjoy jurisdictional
immunity and who are currently being investigated by
the Office of the Prosecutor for alleged crimes against
humanity, war crimes and genocide and whose arrest
warrants have been issued by the International Criminal
Court in the case of the situation in Darfur.

In conclusion, we encourage the strengthening
of cooperation between the International Criminal
Court and the Government of the Sudan, as well as
by the countries of the region, in order to help to find
a political solution to the conflict in Darfur whereby
the objectives of peace and justice are achieved for the
benefit of the Sudanese population, in accordance with
international law.

