The President: I shall now make a brief
statement in my national capacity.

I join other Council members in thanking
Mr. Jeremie and Mrs. Citaku for attending this
afternoon's debate. I would also like to thank
Mr. Zannier for his detailed briefing and for his hard
work and leadership. I also thank the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo for the role
that it continues to play in promoting stability and
reconciliation in Kosovo, and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force for
their important work.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2010/562)
rightly highlights progress in a number of areas,
including the closure of the Cesmin Lug camp near
Mitrovica. This is a particularly welcome step towards
the reintegration of the Kosovo Roma and will improve
the living and health conditions of the affected
families. The United Kingdom also welcomes the
cooperation among Belgrade, Pristina and the
international missions in Kosovo in making
arrangements for the enthronement of the Serbian
Orthodox Patriarch in Pee, and the prompt action of the
Kosovo Police against those suspected of violence
against pilgrims. The report also draws our attention to
areas of concern, such as the trend of targeting Serbs
working for Kosovo Government institutions and a
number of small but violent incidents in northern
Kosovo.

During the period covered by the report, the
International Court of Justice published on 22 July its
advisory opinion on Kosovo's declaration of
independence, stating that the declaration did not
violate international law. On 9 September, the General
Assembly adopted by consensus resolution 64/298,
presented by Serbia and European Union member
States, which welcomed the prospect of a dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade, to be facilitated by the
European Union. We call on Serbia and Kosovo to take
advantage of this opportunity for both countries to put
their differences over status to one side and move
forward on cooperation over practical matters. I am
encouraged that both Mr. Jeremie and Mrs. Citaku
underlined in their comments today that they will look
to the future, not to the past, in embarking on that
dialogue.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.
10-63455
