Mr. Ehouzou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for having
organized this public debate on the topic "maintenance
of international peace and security: role of the Security
Council in conflict prevention and resolution, in
particular in Africa". I particularly commend the
Secretary-General for the important introductory
statement he made this morning, which reflects his
great interest in the subject and particularly in our
continent, Africa.

Conflict prevention is an essential aspect of the
Security Council's mandate emanating from Chapter
VI of the Charter and, more specifically, its Article 34.
The Council has made considerable efforts to meet the
challenges identified. Its various initiatives are based
on the 10 principles of conflict prevention set out in
the Secretary-General's first report on the subject
(S/200l/574), dated 7 June 2001, to which are added
the recently defined criteria for the exercise by the
international community of the responsibility to
protect.

The measures taken by the Security Council have
had a major objective: preventing the resurgence of the
conflicts it seeks to resolve. The establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission, together with the General
Assembly, also had the same motivation. Its efforts to
help countries emerging from conflict to strengthen the
rule of law and achieve reconstruction and sustainable
development are praiseworthy.

07-4920]
The adoption of resolution 1625 (2005) - to
which my Algerian colleague just referred - during

the Security Council summit held on 14 September
2005 was aimed primarily at strengthening the
Council's capacity to take effective measures to
prevent fragile States experiencing difficulties from
relapsing into armed conflict by helping them to
reverse negative trends and, with the international
community's support, to climb back towards the
desired stability. The need for more effective action on
this front is supported by consensus owing to an
awareness of the inherent threat to our collective
security caused by State failures in fragile countries.
Among the important instruments highlighted by the
resolution in that regard are the periodic reports and
the substantive reports that the Secretary-General,
pursuant to Article 99 of the Charter, is invited to
submit to the Council on the regions where the risk of
conflict exists.

The reports are intended to allow the Council to
identify cases where operational prevention measures
are required; for example in the form of awareness
raising political missions or mediation missions and
preventive deployment, where there is a risk that
substantial violence may erupt. The Mediation Support
Unit within the Department for Political Affairs (DPA)
is, in our view, an embryonic structure that must be
developed by the Secretariat to provide the Security
Council with the information it requires in order to
fully assume its responsibilities in the sphere of
conflict prevention. The Unit should be provided at a
central level with sufficient human resources to
achieve the desired performance. It should also be able
to rely on extension units to be deployed in the regions
involved and in the target countries.

Thus, subregional offices such as the one based in
Dakar should be established in all risk zones. Likewise,
closer cooperation should be considered with early
warning systems and regional conflict-prevention
mechanisms to more effectively share and rationally
utilize information.

Furthermore, there is the strategic assessment of
conflict risk that the Secretary-General is invited to
assist risk countries in carrying out and the
establishment of measures agreed upon on that basis.
Those instruments create a prime framework for the
coordination of actions at the operational level by the
principal organs of the United Nations, by States and
by United Nations programmes and agencies.
We must carry out an in-depth study of the matter
within the framework of the Security Council seminar
on conflict-prevention strategy announced for
November 2007. That will make it possible to find the
best way to promote systematic coordination and create
a synergy between bilateral and multilateral action in
the sphere of conflict prevention. In that context we
can define a common view that meets the requirements
for rationality and coherence to underpin, among
others, structural prevention actions to be undertaken
to tackle the root causes of the crisis situations in the
countries involved. We reaffirm the considerable
interest of Benin in the forum for conflict prevention
proposed by the Secretary-General, which should
provide an opportunity for the necessary, regular
gathering of actors involved in conflict prevention.

Coordination is also essential in order to enhance
the effective implementation of systemic prevention
measures to tackle external factors which may
contribute to the emergence of conflicts, such as
unlawful arms trafficking, unlawful exploitation of
natural resources, trafficking of all types and money-
laundering. That would give greater authority to
international legality strengthened by more active
involvement of the International Criminal Court, in
particular in the fight against violations of international
humanitarian law.

The importance of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional conflict-prevention bodies
should be emphasized in that connection. Decisive
initiatives taken by the Economic Community of West
African States in the early 1990s to deal with conflicts
in West Africa have led to similar actions in other
regions and to the establishment within the African
Union of a complete African peace and security
architecture throughout the continent. Cooperation
with the African Union and its subregional
communities should rest on decisive implementation of
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. Security Council resolution 1631 (2005)
spelled out those modalities.

It is clear that the United Nations system in
conducting peacekeeping operations has, until recently,
operated with marginal involvement by regional
organizations. The time has come to make the
necessary changes in order to make it possible for the
organizations to fully play their role in the collective
security system established by the Charter - both in
terms of the doctrine of peace operations and in the

allocation of related resources. There is reason to
welcome the support programmes implemented to
build the capacity of the African Union in that regard,
as well as the decision taken to introduce an annual
meeting of the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. We also
welcome the practice of appointing joint special
representatives in countries in crisis or in situations of
post-conflict, as occurred in Darfur with the
appointment of the former foreign minister of Congo to
conduct the African Union-United Nations hybrid
operation.

The last point to be discussed constitutes a real
challenge to the viability of the peace and security
architecture of the African Union. The problem has to
do with the coordination of its subregional conflict
prevention mechanisms. In that connection, the African
Union needs to ensure that it has the means to exercise
its position in regard to subregional mechanisms in
order to ensure harmonious coordination with the
Security Council at the operational level. That issue
also deserves an in-depth study in terms of defining the
practical modalities for achieving the desired
coordination.

We urge the Secretary-General to consider - in
conjunction with the President of the African Union
Commission - ways of guiding the actions of Member
States and to ensure that the United Nations can
achieve a level of effectiveness that is in keeping with
the current stakes in conflict prevention.

