Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like first of all the thank the Secretary-General
for the special report on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) and to express
gratitude to Mr. Guehenno for having introduced it to
us.

Before talking about the report, however, I should
like to offer the condolences of the people and the
Government of Mexico to the people and the
Government of the Republic of Korea for the loss of
the five United Nations peacekeepers.
Turning to the report, I would like to point out
that it notes the importance of the Security Council's
remaining vigilant with regard to developments on the
ground and alert to the danger of creating unrealistic
expectations that could undermine what has, to date,
been a success story for the United Nations. Over the
past few months, we have noted the violent incidents
that have somewhat affected the progress of
Timor-Leste in its efforts to consolidate its status as a
nation. Mexico, however, is convinced that the
Timor-Leste authorities, under the leadership of
President Gusmao, and with the support of the
international community, will be able to deal with and
overcome those obstacles in the best possible manner.

My country would like once again to express its
gratitude for the work done by UNMISET. We would
also like to extend our support to Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma, head of UNMISET, in fully
carrying out his mandate.

Mexico shares the goals of consolidating security
throughout all of Timor-Leste, improving coordination
between international police and the country's security
bodies, and strengthening the operation of the national
police in responding to civil disturbances.

It is important to strengthen security during the
post-conflict reconstruction phase in order to guarantee
a climate conducive to the country's development. As
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/243)
appropriately points out, unemployment and a lack of
training and prospects make it easier to recruit young
people to commit acts of violence. Mexico believes
that security could be strengthened in the following
areas, inter alia: creating an effective local police force,
establishing an independent justice system,
strengthening the rule of law and national institutions,
and promoting and protecting human rights and basic
freedoms.

Cooperation between Timor-Leste and all its
neighbours, particularly Indonesia, is of fundamental
importance. Finalizing the agreement on the
demarcation of borders and dealing with the situation
of former militia and Timor-Leste refugees still in West
Timor are priorities. In addition to other measures,
addressing those issues will serve to improve the
situation along the border, where the majority of
violent incidents have taken place.

Given the structural weaknesses that still exist
with regard to security - particularly in the border
region - it is necessary to establish whether the acts
that have taken place over the past few months are
motivated by political considerations, whether they are
connected, whether they are part of an orchestrated
campaign, or whether they are the desperate acts of
persons trying to regain former perquisites and
influence or who perhaps view armed attacks as a
booming business.

In that regard, the opinion shared by the
Governments of Timor-Leste and Indonesia to the
effect that the acts of violence are not part of any
official policy is a positive element. That opinion also
holds that in any case such acts involve Indonesian or
Timorese individuals acting alone, something that the
detention of armed persons in Liquica appears to have
confirmed.

Given all that, Mexico will in good time analyse
proposals to strengthen the response capacity of the
bodies responsible for security in Timor-Leste, bearing
in mind the ultimate goal of ensuring the effective
hand-over of responsibilities to the Government of
Timor-Leste and strengthening the capacities of the
new State so that its viability is guaranteed.

We are concerned by the mention in the report of
the Secretary-General of terrorist threats in Timor-
Leste. We would like to know whether that is a
concrete threat and, if so, what measures have been
taken to confront it. Whatever the case, we must bear
in mind the obligation incumbent upon all States -
and therefore upon forces under the command of the
United Nations - to protect the human rights of all
persons in the fight against terrorism, as established in
General Assembly resolution 57/219, adopted last
December.

The international community must maintain the
commitment thus far shown towards Timor-Leste. For
its part, the United Nations must continue to support
the authorities of the new State in this process. It is
therefore indispensable to clearly define the
responsibilities and competencies of UNMISET's
military and police components and those of the police
and defence forces of Timor-Leste and to coordinate
their activities. It is also important for the United
Nations to reaffirm its commitment to the
administration of justice in Timor-Leste, as well as to
reaffirm its full support for the work of UNMISET's
Serious Crimes Unit. Mexico believes that combating
impunity must be a priority.

Finally, I would like to reiterate the support of
Mexico's Government and people to the Government
and people of Timor-Leste. We also express our
confidence that this will continue to be a success story.
