Mr. Guehenno: As requested, I would like to
brief the Security Council on recent developments in
Sierra Leone and in the subregion, including progress
in the forward deployment of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), various
meetings involving the United Nations, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Government of Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF), and actions taken or being
envisaged by the parties and by UNAMSIL in
implementing the decisions of the recent review
meeting of the Abuja ceasefire Agreement.

First, I will touch on the political developments.
Since our last briefing to the Security Council, the
major political development was the meeting in Abuja
on 2 May 2001 of ECOWAS, the United Nations, the
Government of Sierra Leone and the RUF to review the
implementation of the Abuja ceasefire Agreement. The
review meeting was preceded on 1 May by a meeting
of the United Nations-ECOWAS-Government of Sierra
Leone coordination mechanism.

The review meeting was chaired by the Foreign
Minister of Mali and attended by UNAMSIL, the
Government of Sierra Leone, and an RUF delegation
led by Omrie Golley, Chairman of the RUF Political
and Peace Council. The meeting, which was held in a
frank but cordial atmosphere, resulted in a number of
important conclusions and decisions, as follows.

It was concluded that the ceasefire Agreement
had been largely observed, but that the Civil Defence
Forces (CDF) had violated it by attacking the RUF in
Tongo on 19 April. The Government of Sierra Leone
should exert the necessary control over the CDF in
order to avert future attacks which could jeopardize the
peace process. The Government of Sierra Leone was
called upon to extend its authority throughout the
country in the wake of UNAMSIL's deployment.

There was a renewed commitment by the
Government of Sierra Leone and the RUF to remove all
roadblocks in areas under their control. The RUF
pledged to return, by 30 May 2001, all weapons and
equipment it had seized from UNAMSIL and
ECOMOG.

The meeting called for the simultaneous
disarmament of the CDF and the RUF, and a decision
was taken to set up a joint committee comprising
UNAMSIL, the Government of Sierra Leone and the
RUF, to meet in Freetown on 15 May to develop a firm
timetable and modalities for the implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. The meeting also called on the RUF to
release all abductees, in particular child combatants,
and called on the two parties to create an atmosphere
conducive to the safe return of refugees and internally
displaced persons.

The review meeting also decided that in order to
stop the RUF incursions and the Guinean attacks, the
RUF would withdraw all its combatants from the
Kambia district and allow the Sierra Leone Army
(SLA) to deploy there. UNAMSIL, accompanied by
unarmed RUF observers, would mount increased
patrols in the district. The withdrawing RUF
combatants would be disarmed and screened for
absorption into the Sierra Leone army.

Confidence-building measures reached at the
meeting include the Government of Sierra Leone's
declared intention and preparedness to address the
RUF's political concerns, including releasing some
detained RUF officials; facilitating the complete
certification of the RUF as a political party; and
providing land or office space to the party in Freetown
and in the provinces.

The Abuja meeting constitutes a step in the right
direction. Obviously, the right balance will have to be
struck between giving the RUF the opportunity to
transform itself into a political entity, and maintaining
a strong posture for UNAMSIL. On balance, we
believe that, if properly implemented by both sides in
good faith, the Abuja meeting has the potential to
create the confidence needed to make further progress.
It is a first step.

The Government has set up a high-ranking task
force to oversee the implementation of the Abuja
meeting. The members of this task force will also
represent the Government at the meeting on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme with the RUF, to be held tomorrow. The
RUF, in a meeting with Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Adeniji last Friday, 11 May,
reaffirmed its commitments, but also stressed the need
for more confidence-building measures. It also said it
was ready to welcome the deployment of the Sierra
Leone police in the areas now under the RUF's control.

During the period under review, ECOWAS
leaders actively pursued their efforts to advance the
peace process in Sierra Leone. On 11 April, an
Extraordinary Summit meeting of ECOWAS Heads of
State was held in Abuja. That meeting called on the
Security Council to authorize and assist the deployment
of the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) forces
along the borders of Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia.
It also set up a mediation committee, comprising the
Presidents of Mali, Nigeria and Togo, to encourage
dialogue between the Heads of State of Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone, and it decided to dispatch an
ECOWAS mission to Liberia on 18 April to assess
Liberia's compliance with the Security Council's
demands in resolution 1343 (2001). I understand that
the Permanent Representative of Mali has kept the
Security Council well informed of these important
developments.

(Spoke in French)

I should now like to touch on follow-up actions
by the parties and by UNAMSIL. In a meeting held at
Makeni on 6 May, the RUF military leaders
unanimously endorsed the Abuja decisions and
established committees to oversee follow-up
implementation of these decisions. In subsequent
meetings with UNAMSIL, RUF representatives
reiterated their leaders' commitment to withdraw from
Kambia on 18 May, to release at least 200 child
combatants by 25 May, and to return all seized
weapons by 30 May. These undertakings by the RUF
are a positive development that need to be encouraged
and very closely followed up.
It is worth noting that the withdrawal of all RUF
combatants from the Kambia district would facilitate
efforts at repatriating Sierra Leonean refugees from
Guinea so that they can return home. Such a
withdrawal would also set a positive precedent for the
withdrawal of the RUF from other areas, particularly
the diamond-producing areas.

On 9 May, UNAMSIL organized a meeting with
the Government of Sierra Leone to prepare for the 15
May meeting between the RUF, the Government of
Sierra Leone and UNAMSIL, which will clarify
modalities and establish a firm timetable for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process,
in keeping with a decision taken at the review meeting
of the Abuja ceasefire Agreement.

Turning to the deployment of UNAMSIL in areas
being held by the RUF, I should like to inform the
Council that, in keeping with its concept of operations,
UNAMSIL deployed into RUF-held areas, notably
Lunsar, Makeni and Magburaka, between 7 and 23
April. UNAMSIL has also continued to conduct
long-range patrols into these areas, including three
patrols to the Kono district, two of which took place at
night, enabling the area to be approached from both the
west and the east. One patrol was conducted from
Magburaka to Koidu, Konkoworo, Saima and Koardu,
which is 2 kilometres from the Guinea border. From the
east, the Guinean battalion patrolled from Daru to
Bumumbu, Benda Juma, Gandahun and Woama. Long-
range patrols were also carried out three times to
Kailahun from Daru, as well as to Buedu.

The local people have warmly welcomed
UNAMSIL's deployment and patrols, which had an
immediate and very positive effect on economic
activities in the areas concerned and on the return of
displaced persons. UNAMSIL is considering the
establishment of a permanent presence in Kambia and
Koidu.

The Pakistani contingent should start deploying at
the end of this month, with the arrival of an advance
party of 900 men. There will be several elements in the
Pakistani brigade, and the full contingent of about
4,500 should be on the ground by early September. The
Secretariat is also reviewing offers by Nepal and
Senegal, in particular with regard to the equipment of
their possible contingents.

(Spoke in English)

I would now like to turn now to some ceasefire
violations. UNAMSIL has received reports of clashes
between the CDF and the RUF near Tongo fields on 19
April, and at Talia, 9 kilometres east of Mano Junction,
on 6 May. UNAMSIL's investigations of the first report
of a ceasefire violation determined that the RUF
repelled an attack by CDF forces. At present, the
situation in the area has been stabilized, and civilians
that had fled to Kenema and Mano Junction have
started returning to their villages. UNAMSIL is still
investigating the second report of ceasefire violations.

Reportedly, the CDF had received orders from its
leadership in Freetown to recapture the Kono district
from the RUF. It should be borne in mind that the Kono
district is a key diamond-producing area. The RUF has
claimed that CDF attacks on their position in the Kono
district were carried out with the assistance of Guinean
forces. UNAMSIL has also received reports of artillery
and helicopter gunship attacks by Guinean forces on
RUF positions near the Sierra Leone-Guinea border. It
is hoped that the withdrawal of the RUF from Kambia
will bring these attacks to an end in that area. In the
meantime, we call on all parties involved to exercise
maximum restraint.

The extension of the authority of the Government
of Sierra Leone throughout the country has continued.
Members of the Council may recall that, in his ninth
report on UNAMSIL, the Secretary-General stressed
that the ongoing deployment of UNAMSIL troops is
being undertaken for the principal purpose of
facilitating the restoration of Government authority
throughout Sierra Leone. As a result of UNAMSIL's
constant pressure on the RUF, Government education
and medical officials have conducted assessment visits,
and national school examinations will soon be
conducted in Makeni and elsewhere. The RUF also
agreed to, and actually called for, the deployment of
the Sierra Leone police force in Lunsar. The postal
service is also in the process of being restored in
Lunsar. However, the lack of resources and capacity on
the part of the Government remains a major constraint
in the efforts to extend civil administration.

With regard to human rights, UNAMSIL forward
deployment upcountry also involved the opening of the
first human rights office in Kenema. This is part of the
efforts to establish a permanent human rights presence
in the provinces to undertake, inter alia, monitoring,
reporting, training and capacity-building in human
rights and international law, with emphasis on the
establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission (TRC). In this regard, it is our intention to
augment the human rights section of UNAMSIL from
14 to 20 professionals.
Significant progress has been made towards
establishing the Truth and Reconciliation Commission,
with an initial assessment of the 54 nominations
received for the four national positions, and the
impending convening by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General of his statutory advisers,
representing the Inter-religious Council, the Council of
Paramount Chiefs and the international community
based in Sierra Leone. These advisers will assist him in
drawing up a shortlist.

Meanwhile, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights has identified three persons considered suitable
as international members of the Commission and is
currently ascertaining their availability. UNAMSIL is
also working with human rights non-governmental
organizations that have formed a TRC working group,
in order to reinforce the feeling of local ownership. A
sensitization campaign on the TRC is also under way.

On the issue of HIV/AIDS, I would like to point
out that the United Nations is stepping up its efforts to
raise the awareness of the troops on the ground with
regard to the risks of HIV/AIDS. UNAMSIL has
conducted sensitization seminars for its troops and
distributed condoms throughout the force and will
shortly be distributing HIV/AIDS awareness cards
designed specifically for peacekeepers, in coordination
with the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS.

Finally, I should like to refer to my colleagues in
the Department of Political Affairs and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Assistant
Secretary-General Ibrahima Fall and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator Carolyn McAskie, who
will brief members on the recommendations of the
recent Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa and
Ms. McAskie's mission to the countries of the Mano
River Union, respectively.

