Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): Today's
meeting is most timely. My delegation welcomes the
delegation from Angola led by Mr. Georges Chikoti,
Vice-Minister for External Relations, and thanks Mr.
Chikoti for the useful information he has provided
about the situation in Angola, including its
humanitarian dimensions. Our thanks go also to Mr.
Kenzo Oshima for the superb work he has been doing
and for the invaluable information he has shared with
us today.

As members know, the conflict in Angola is
among the oldest crises in Africa; it may be the oldest
of all. And because of its scale and its subregional
dimension, it has caused profound suffering to the
Angolan people. With the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol and the many initiatives that have been taken,
we can acknowledge that progress has certainly been
made, but the situation remains alarming, particularly
in the humanitarian sphere. Guerrilla activities have
exacerbated the situation in several provinces, leading
to the internal displacement of more than 4 million
people out of a population of 12 million. That is the
sombre picture that was sketched for us this morning.
Obviously, the statistics are shocking; as Mr. Oshima
said in his briefing, they are among the worst in the
world.

Above and beyond the many difficulties currently
facing the people of Angola, the restoration of peace,
in our opinion, is of the essence. Guinea encourages all
parties to do all they can to compel UNITA to abide by
its commitments to ending the suffering of the Angolan
people. Guinea supports the encouraging measures
undertaken by the Angolan Government to address the
situation. I would even say that these measures have
often been very courageous, as the Minister related
earlier, such as the permission granted to an armed
group to sit in Parliament as an opposition party, even
as it continues to wage guerrilla activities. We believe
that this is a very brave initiative on the part of the
Government.

Guinea welcomes the invaluable support of the
humanitarian agencies on the ground and calls for
greater coordination of their efforts. My delegation
appeals to the international community speedily to help
meet the urgent needs on the ground, particularly the
repair of infrastructure; the establishment of reception,
health care and food centres; the implementation of a
reintegration plan to alleviate the problem of crowding
in transit centres and camps; an increase in food
assistance by enhancing the capacities of the World
Food Programme; support for the work of the
Government on the urgent need to improve access to
isolated areas and, in particular, to the most vulnerable
populations; the strengthening of security in the
reintegration areas; and the protection of the civilian
population.

As I said at the outset of my statement, the
Angolan conflict has lasted too long and caused too
much suffering. Every effort should be made to
maintain pressure on UNITA with a view to ending the
conflict swiftly. The sanctions against UNITA must be
maintained and additional measures should be
considered to ensure that they are effectively respected.

Finally, Guinea encourages the initiatives and
efforts of the Secretary-General and his Adviser for
Special Assignments in Africa, our brother Ibrahim
Gambari, to pursue their efforts towards a speedy end
to the conflict.

