Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
President Kafando for his briefing today.

The United States welcomes PresidentNkurunziza's
announcement in June that he does not intend to seek
a fourth term. The act of stepping down of his own
accord would be a strong step forward for Burundi
and democracy, and would set a positive example for
other leaders in the region. Such a step would also
reaffirm the promise he made to the Burundian people
in 2015. As we welcome this positive step, we also call
on the Government of Burundi to improve respect for
human rights, civic space, media freedom and overall
governance so as to allow all Burundians to participate
in their Government.

We are concerned that the Government of Burundi
has still not agreed to a resumption of cooperation with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and has denied access to the
country by the commission of inquiry mandated by the
Human Rights Council. We remain deeply concerned
about continuing human rights violations and abuses,
including excessive restrictions on civic and political
space in Burundi, media restrictions, arbitrary arrests
and unduly harsh sentences for human rights defenders.
We look to the Government of Burundi to take clear
steps to end violence and reopen the political space
for members of the opposition, independent media and
civil society, and to engage in inclusive dialogue with
Burundian political stakeholders.

We also urge the Government of Burundi to
ensure that opposition political actors, including
those currently acting as independents, are fully
able to participate in future elections. We encourage
opposition political actors to commit to participating
in elections in 2020 and to take concrete and realistic
steps to ensure that they are able to do so. We must
also insist that all parties, including the Government
and opposition members, categorically reject violence
as a political tool. These measures will be essential
to peaceful, free, fair and open political competition
ahead of the elections scheduled for 2020.

We also welcome efforts by the region to convene the
next round of the inter-Burundian dialogue, led by the
East African Community, in September. The sustained
support of the region will be required to produce a
durable political solution that lays the groundwork for
peaceful, free, fair and inclusive elections in 2020.
However, we reiterate that good-faith engagement from
both the Burundi Government and opposition members
is necessary for a successful dialogue.

