Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to express its appreciation to the
French presidency for convening today's important
open debate. We thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, and Mr. Mubin Shaikh
for their briefings.

We condemn all incidents that have caused
civilian casualties across the world, especially among
children. The Sudan has been making significant
efforts to promote the protection of children and
their rights, in cooperation with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflicts and other child-related
entities, such as UNICEF and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Refugees, inter alia, pursuant to the
Sudan's regional and international commitments, in
particular the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its two Optional Protocols, as well as International
Labour Organization Conventions 138 and 182.
The Sudan has also signed the Paris Principles and
Commitments, whose tenth anniversary we celebrate
this year.

We have established a national council on
child welfare, child and family units within police
departments, and human rights protection units in
the military. In this regard, it is worth mentioning
that the Sudanese armed forces have long-standing
and well-established regulations that, even before the
independence of the Sudan, in 1956, prohibited the
recruitment of children under the age of 18, in line
with the provisions of international law. The Sudan has
also established an integrated legal system for juvenile
justice, which includes the 2010 Child Act. We have
also set up special prosecution protocols and given
technical training to prosecutors.

To prevent Violations of the right of children, we
have appointed a public prosecutor for Darfur-related
crimes to investigate allegations related to Darfur
from the outbreak of the conflict in 2003 until the end
of this year, in particular those allegations related to
the violations of the rights of children. We have also
established a fact-finding mission on the abduction and
recruitment of children in South Kordofan and Blue
Nile states and launched a comprehensive national ten-
year plan to promote human rights in the Sudan.

In March 2016, the Sudan signed ajoint action plan
with the United Nations to protect children in armed
conflict. Under this plan, we revised and amended
rules and regulations with regard to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the areas where conflict had
ceased. This has made it possible to provide protection
and welfare for affected children, especially in the
field of vaccination against disease. We would take
this opportunity to thank the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
in Armed Conflict, the UNICEF Office in Khartoum
and the UNICEF regional office in Jordan for their
exemplary and commendable cooperation, particularly
with regard to sheltering children who had fought in
the ranks of the Justice and Equality Movement and
to providing protection and psychological support for
these children upon their release.

My delegation takes this opportunity to reiterate
its commitment to the implementation of the important
action plan to protect children in armed conflict,
in order to ensure the continuation of these efforts,
uphold our responsibility towards children and achieve
security and stability for them. We hope that this
positive step will lead to the delisting ofthe Sudan from
the reports of the Secretary-General. We are confident
that an objective review of the facts would achieve that
end. We take note of the Secretary-General annual
report on the protection of children in armed conflict
(S/2017/821) released last week, which commends the
Sudan's achievement in this respect. We consider this
commendation to be an initial step on the logical, just
and necessary path towards the Sudan being delisted
from the annual report.

Further, with respect to the vaccination of children
in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states, we cite the
difficulties noted by the UNICEF Office in the Sudan
more than two years ago. Armed non-State actors in
those two states prevented the vaccination of children.
We call on the Security Council to take note of that
incident, which threatened the lives and futures of
Sudanese children in those two areas.

In order to address the issue of children in a
comprehensive and integrated manner, my delegation
calls for assisting Governments of countries facing
conflicts in their efforts to end these conflicts. Joint
action plans should be developed in order to deal
with armed groups, aimed at condemning the use and
exploitation of children and compelling them to lay
down their weapons and engage in negotiations. States
should also be involved in any matter relating to the issue
of children and armed conflict in other States, while at
the same time proceeding in complete transparency and
fully respecting the principle of national sovereignty.

Concerning the situation in Yemen, we welcome
the report of the Secretary-General's acknowledgement
of the constructive measures adopted by the coalition
aimed at restoring legitimacy in Yemen, which will lead
to promoting the protection of children in that country.
The coalition announced that it would strictly adhere to
the principle that all potential targets were civilian until
proved otherwise, and ensure every precaution to avoid
civilian casualties, especially among children.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
commitment to pursuing cooperation with the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
because we believe in the noble principles underpinning
the protection of children and their dignity. We also
cooperate with the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We reiterate our commitment to
implementing all international and regional instruments
involving the promotion and the protection of the rights
of children to which we are party, and we will continue
to closely cooperate with all United Nations bodies
dedicated to the welfare of children.

