Mrs. Gallardo Hernandez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): We should like to express our gratitude to
the delegation of Austria for convening this meeting to
consider the annual report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (S/2009/444).

El Salvador has been committed to the cause of
peacebuilding since the Commission was created, as
we believe that the contribution of countries, like ours,
that have themselves overcome armed conflicts is
critical to building the capacity to identify the causes
of violence, share experiences and implement, with the
agreement of national authorities, comprehensive
peacebuilding strategies within the framework of the
Commission.

Our statement today complements my
delegation's expression of its position on this matter in
the General Assembly on 20 November. We reiterate
our gratitude for the leadership shown by Ambassador
Heraldo Mufioz at the helm of the Commission, and we
also welcome the support given by the Chairs of the
country-specific configurations.

The report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(A/2009/304) is, in our view, an extremely important
contribution for the entire United Nations system,
inasmuch as it places the responsibility for
peacebuilding on the shoulders of national authorities
along with the international community, which also has
a decisive role in the implementation of a common
strategic goal. Likewise, the third report of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which is the subject of our
meeting today, takes a new approach, thanks to the
experience accumulated by the Peacebuilding
Commission and the countries on its agenda, to
important issues, such as relations among the principle
organs of the Organization, increased public awareness
and the visibility that the Commission should have,
which includes coordination with the funds and
programs of the United Nations system and with
international financial institutions and regional
organizations and subregional banks.

In this context our recent visit to the African
Union headquarters in Addis Ababa with the Chair of
the Commission and other Commission members gave
us an opportunity to consider how important it is to
enhance communication, dialogue and coordination
between the Commission and regional organizations,
because they are the main actors and they know the
reality and the culture on the ground, so as to give
effect to the Commission's commitment to prevent the
recurrence of violence in those countries.

I would also like to indicate that the
Commission's report refers to the fact that the Working
Group on Lessons Learned has touched on some
important matters. Membership in that Group has given
us the opportunity, along with other countries, to
examine issues of importance to the countries under
consideration, such as the role of the United Nations in
establishing the rule of law and regional approaches to

disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as in
the Great Lakes region of Africa. The Working Group
has also focused on national capacity-building in the
aftermath of conflict, including the coordination
between the Commission and regional and subregional
organizations, sustainable integration and the need to
set up permanent forums for dialogue among different
sectors to promote genuine national reconciliation.

My country has had the privilege of chairing this
Group since it was established, and we firmly believe
that the work done holds added value for the work of
the Commission. It has become an open arena wherein
Member States, together with civil society and the
academic world, have been able to come together to
share a vision, which has contributed not just to
enhancing the presence of the Commission in various
post-conflict countries but also to enhancing the
visibility of the Commission's activities. On the eve of
the 2010 review of the Peacebuilding Commission, my
delegation would like to suggest that the members of
the Security Council consider allowing the Working
Group in Lessons Learned to continue and become an
institution.

The experience garnered as a member of the
Commission leads us to indicate how important it is for
there to be greater coherence among the various
subsidiary bodies when it comes to their respective
mandates, so that strategic planning among the various
entities responsible for post-conflict peacekeeping and
peacebuilding demonstrate a shared vision and
integrated mechanisms.

That leads us to propose a more rational use of
equipment and goods employed by peacekeeping
missions in the field, which could greatly benefit the
country teams as they move into the peacebuilding
phase. In other words, the capacities assigned to
peacekeeping missions could be kept in place in the
countries in which they operate - if needed, and in an
appropriate way - such as to accelerate moving into
the peacebuilding phase. We believe that there would
be a reduction of the financial costs in both phases and
that a synergy between the teams would be created. We
must not forget that this would make it possible to
enhance the response capacity of national institutions
and regional organizations, together with the
Commission, when the national priorities are defined
in the phases of reconstruction, rehabilitation,
institutional capacity-building, respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law and others.
These thoughts come to us from considering how
important it is to improve and strengthen the steering
function and the coordination and coherence that must
exist among the various organs and subsidiary bodies
to achieve a fuller realization of the goals of the
Peacebuilding Commission in the field.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate El
Salvador's firm commitment to continue to play an
active part in United Nations endeavours to contribute
to the maintenance of international peace and security
as well as to the 2010 review process of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

