Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries
Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

Like others, I would first like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2012/ 133), and in particular Special Representative
of the Secretary-General J an Kubis for his briefing and
for the excellent work that he and his team are doing
under truly difficult circumstances. I would also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his clear statement here today.

The Bonn Conference confirmed international
long-term engagement in Afghanistan beyond the end
of the transition and through the transformation decade
from 2015 to 2024. The signing of a number of
bilateral partnerships manifests that. On our part, we
are firmly committed to that objective as well, as
specified in the European Union Council conclusions
of 14 November 2011. The commitments made in Bonn
were mutual. As we prepare for the Chicago and Tokyo
conferences, we must ensure that those mutual
commitments are swiftly implemented. We note with
satisfaction that transition in the security sector
remains on track, with the implementation of the
second tranche progressing well.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) will continue to play a critical
role in supporting the Afghan Government, and will do
so with a mandate reviewed in line with the progress
made in Afghanistan, in full consensus with its
Government and informed by the helpful review
conducted by the Secretary-General. UNAMA's good
offices, including support for the Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process, and for strengthening human
rights and for regional cooperation, will remain
cornerstones. Similarly critical is its role in supporting
the Afghan Government in the coordination and
management of international assistance. In that regard,
greater coherence of international assistance with the
national priority programmes identified by the
Government of Afghanistan is necessary.

A continued United Nations role in long-term
electoral reform will contribute to strengthening the
role of the Afghan Government and institutions. The
importance of that was underlined in the Kabul
Conference communique, and most recently at Bonn,
where there was agreement that strengthening and
improving Afghanistan's electoral process would be a
key step in Afghanistan's democratization.

Finally, we highlight the continued importance of
UNAMA support for the Afghan authorities' efforts to
increase transparency and accountability. For all those
support efforts, a continued UNAMA presence
throughout the country is needed.

Progress in the peace process will be sustainable
only if the peace and reconciliation process is truly
inclusive, if it proactively seeks balanced gender and
social-status representation and if it involves civil
society. Both the process and its outcome must respect
the Afghan Constitution, including its human rights
provisions and, notably, the rights of women and girls.

At the present time, we encourage particular
attention to the continued implementation of the law on
the elimination of violence against women. In that
vein, we wish to reiterate our firm commitment to
resolution 1325 (2000) and all subsequent resolutions
on women, peace and security. In that respect, we
welcome the commitment of the Afghan Government
to the resolution's full implementation through the
establishment of the inter-ministerial steering
committee on resolution 1325 (2000).

Follow-up to the Istanbul Conference on regional
cooperation is encouraging. The February senior
officials' preparatory meeting in Kabul laid the
groundwork for the June Kabul ministerial meeting by
firming up some of the Istanbul commitments. Further
progress is necessary to translate those promises into
tangible improvements in regional security and
economic development. As the recent Paris Pact
Conference stressed, regional cooperation will also be
indispensable to address common threats, such as drug
trafficking.

In conclusion, I once more assure you,
Mr. President, of our firm commitment to remain
engaged as a strong and reliable partner for
Afghanistan after the transition has been completed.
The aim of our joint efforts in Afghanistan remains
clear, namely, to support the Afghan Government as it
puts the many years of conflict behind it and offers all
Afghan people the prospect of a better future. To that
end, we support the proposed extension of a strong
UNAMA mandate.

