Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
my delegation is grateful to you for once again giving us
an opportunity to take up the situation of Timor-Leste,
a country friendly to Congo. We would like to thank
Ambassador Kumalo and his team for the very
complete report (S/2007/711) that he has given us.

My delegation would like to say how pleased it is
at the work done by the Security Council delegation in
such a short period of time. The contacts established
with the entire political class, civil society and other
actors attest to the determination of the Security
Council to get a feel for the realities, which are not
always easy to grasp from New York, despite the
impeccable quality of the briefings given by the
Secretariat. That also allows participation in the
rebuilding of the social fabric, which has been
seriously impaired by recent events in that country.

My delegation would like to say that it is in
favour of continuing such Security Council missions,
carried out by light and representative teams. We regret
that we were not able to participate in the recent
mission because of some national imperatives.

Taking into account what has already been said
by other delegations, Congo would like to make the
following comments.

We take note of the determination of the
Timorese Government to do everything it can to
strengthen peace and stability in order to release the
people from poverty, but also to relieve the United
Nations of its current responsibilities vis-a-vis
Timor-Leste. My delegation also takes into account and
welcomes the fact that the Government of Timor-Leste
rejects a culture of dependence, stating clearly that
letting things slide would not be appropriate, nor would
a premature celebration, as there are enormous
challenges still facing the country. Those political
commitments are signs of the Government's maturity,
in a young nation resolved to quickly take in hand the
control of its own destiny as an independent and
sovereign nation.

More than ever before, therefore, the
international community has a duty to complete its
work there and to live up to the legitimate expectations
of the Timorese. Here, the activities of the United
Nations have to be ongoing, through its main
multilateral mechanisms. This will be crucial for
peacebuilding, promoting the rule of law and
strengthening democracy and national institutions.

The capacity of the Timorese political class has to
be reflected in greater ability to work together in the
higher interest of the nation, both in the parliament and
in other national structures, in order to enable this
young nation to meet the challenges strewn along its
path to the future. Members of this political class must
resolutely commit themselves to dialogue and national
reconciliation and put an end to the ongoing

differences which make them lose sight of their
development goals, which squander their energies and
which endanger the restoration of security and stability.

Social and economic questions relating to poverty
and widespread unemployment, as well all the
consequences of the 2006 crisis, demand that priority
be given today to resolving a number of serious
problems. The first is the case of Major Alfredo
Reinado and the situation of the petitioners - that is,
the former members of the military who were asked to
leave the army or who deserted. The second is the
reintegration of the 100,000 displaced persons who are
now living in about 53 camps and the improvement of
their living conditions. This situation adds the threat of
a humanitarian catastrophe to the many challenges that
Timor-Leste must confront. The third is continued
capacity-building in State institutions in general, and
particularly in the justice sector, and the formulation of
a Government strategy for reform in the sensitive
security sector, which is seen as the Achilles heel of the
Timorese institutions.

Because of its mandate, and in light of the results
it obtained, the recent Security Council mission once
again showed that the Council and the broader United
Nations are committed to Timor-Leste. My delegation
is convinced that, as in the past, the Council must be
very attentive to needs expressed and act for the best,
through the United Nations presence in Timor-Leste,
with regard to the readjustment of the role of the
United Nations Police in Timor-Leste and other vital
questions, such as the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

The Congo supports the conclusions contained in
the report of the Security Council mission, and we
support the renewal of the UNMIT mandate so that the
young Timorese nation will be able to continue to rely
on the United Nations system until it attains self-
reliance.

