Mr. Balarezo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, Peru of course associates itself with the statement
made by the Ambassador of Costa Rica on behalf of
the member countries of the Rio Group.

I would like to begin my statement by conveying
Peru's satisfaction with the progress made to date by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). We believe
that that progress is the direct result of the resolute
leadership of Ambassador Sir Jeremy Greenstock and
of his Vice-Chairmen. It is also due to the firm
commitment of Member States like Peru that want to
end this scourge.

Not long ago, during the holding of the
Monterrey Summit - during which we sought new
forms of cooperation to give momentum to
development and to eradicate poverty - and just hours
shy of the official visit of the President of the United
States to my country, we in Peru were the victims of a
serious terrorist attack that left behind the dark and
ghostly shadow of destruction and suffering. That
attack, like any other terrorist act that negates, in the
most basic sense, the right to life, security, tranquil
coexistence and peace, had no other effect than to
reaffirm Peru's deepest conviction that it must combat
terrorism using the weapons of international law, the
rule of law and the supreme value of proper moral
conduct.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee has taken
decisive steps to confront the sources and means that
enable this scourge of humanity to emerge, develop and
operate. Progress has been made in preventing and
repressing the funding of all types of international
terrorism and collaboration with it. We must continue
to make every effort until money laundering, drug
trafficking and other transnational crimes no longer
serve as the source of, or support for, terrorist acts.
This should be our goal and we should not rest until it
is accomplished.

But a frontal attack against terrorism requires
much more from the international community. This
struggle requires deepening and widening the scope of
technical and financial cooperation to many other
areas, so that all countries of the Organization can truly
control, suppress and defend themselves against
terrorism. It also requires that we prevent the
emergence of "hyper-terrorism" capable of mass
destruction, the consequences of which are
unimaginable.

To that end, and in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1377 (2001), Peru believes that the
CTC, with the cooperation of other relevant entities
and additional funding, could develop or promote an
extensive cooperation programme with countries that
so request. In our view, such international cooperation
might include, inter alia, the following programmes.

First, a programme for legal assistance to ensure
that domestic laws are compatible with the 12 United
Nations conventions concerning terrorism, as well as,
of course, to ensure their effective implementation. For
Peru, an appropriate juridical framework should also
consider the obligations of States to prosecute,
extradite, try and punish those engaged in terrorist acts.

Secondly, a programme of "smart" borders that
allows the strengthening of coordination and action in
real time among agencies that control and police the
cross-border movement of persons, goods and services.
The use of new technologies and the experience of
various countries in this sphere will be fundamental.

Thirdly, the fight against terrorism could become
an obstacle to trade and the free circulation of goods
and services, not only by increasing costs but also by
eroding the narrow profit margins of many poor
economies. Certainly, this is an area that must be
analysed in detail, and we must find the best ways to
diminish such effects. We must avoid creating barriers
to the normal transit of persons, goods and services,
because that would run counter to the globalization
process, which should unite peoples, not separate them.

Finally, for Peru, victory over terrorism can be
achieved only when democratic values, the rule of law
and respect for human dignity prevail. For that reason,
it is very important to develop a programme that will
strengthen awareness of human rights and their legal
foundation and will ensure that the fight against
terrorism is carried out with respect for the civil rights
and political freedoms of all persons, including
immigrants, as recognized in the various international
instruments approved by all the members of the United
Nations community.

In conclusion, we are convinced that
strengthening the Committee's work from the
subregional and regional perspective is most welcome,
and I believe it is a course of action that we should
pursue.

