Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Envoy Michel Kafando
for his briefing on the constitutional referendum
held in Burundi and the development of the situation
there. We have taken note of the report of Mr. Jiirg
Lauber, Permanent Representative of Switzerland
to the United Nations, in his capacity as Chair of
the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). We welcome the configuration's
balanced and equidistant approach to the issue of a
Burundi-owned settlement, which has made it one of
the most trustworthy channels for communication with
Bujumbura. We support the PBC's efforts to revitalize
cooperation with Burundians by discussing issues
related to the country's socioeconomic development
and re-establishing donor confidence.

The Russian Federation continues to be of the
View that the referendum on 17 May on amending the
Constitution is a strictly internal affair for Burundi. As
we know, the changes were initiated by the National
Commission for the Inter-Burundi Dialogue, which
included representatives of various sectors of society,
encompassing members of all the parties represented
in Parliament, including the opposition, as well as
non-parliamentary political associations, the clergy
and civil society. The Commission's high level of
representativeness, even during the referendum's
preparatory stages, has meant that we can say that the
people supported the idea of holding the referendum.
The results showed an impressive - even unheard-of,
among African countries - turnout of 96.24 per cent,
with an overwhelming majority of voters - 73.26 per
cent - supporting the constitutional amendments.
We believe that the referendum took place in calm
circumstances and was preceded by a democratic and
transparent campaign, despite some problems.

We would like to draw our colleagues' attention
to the fact that the alarmist predictions made in this
Chamber only a few weeks ago were not justified. On
the contrary, in general we see positive momentum in
the way the situation in the country is developing. We
are not idealizing it, but we also see no reason to get
worked up about it, as some of our colleagues have done
today. That could send those who do not enjoy support
in Burundian society the wrong message about the
Security Council's attitude to the situation there.

The reality of the security situation in Burundi is
surely testified to by the fact that the seventy-second
session of the African Inter-Parliamentary Union
will be held in Bujumbura from 22 to 23 May. We
urge that be taken into consideration, including when
considering the rationale for keeping the Burundian
dossier on the Security Council's already overburdened
agenda. Ultimately, there are always problems in any
country. However, it is important to ensure that the
Council considers only those issues that represent a
threat to international and regional peace and security.
We do not believe that the Council should get embroiled
in discussing countries" domestic political situations,
usurping the role of other United Nations structures in
Geneva, giving someone or other some advice or other
on State structure and lecturing them on democracy
and how people should live. Today, unfortunately,
we had a lot of people wanting to tell an independent
Government what to do. Let us respect ourselves and
others. Exercises such as these definitely do nothing to
enhance the Security Council's authority in the eyes of
African Governments.

