Judge Meron (spoke in French): It is always a
great honour for me to take the floor before the
Council. That is more than ever the case today since it
is the French presidency that is guiding the Council's
work. Mr. President, your country has left a profound
imprint on the history of democracy and is considered
to be the homeland of human rights. As President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, I believe that it is my duty to emphasize
that it has also actively helped in setting up and
developing the Tribunal and has played a key role in
combating impunity.

Mr. President, as the representative of a country
that uses civil law, you are, of course, aware of the
gradual development of our rules of procedure, in
keeping with an ongoing concern to improve the
effectiveness of our procedures without sacrificing the
imperative need to safeguard the right of defence.
Those changes have in particular transformed the role
of judge from that of a neutral arbiter, as it is under
common law, to that of a real participant in the
procedure, both at the pre-trial preparation stage and
during the trial itself.

During the discussions which preceded and
accompanied that development, French law and
judicial practice were often a source of inspiration.

(spoke in English)

Mr. President, it is with honour and pleasure that
I am addressing the Security Council as President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
under your presidency. Your country has been a
steadfast supporter of the Tribunal, and that, Mr.
President, is very much appreciated.

This is the third report that I have presented to
the Council since the adoption of resolution 1534
2004), which requested the President and Prosecutor of
each ad hoc Tribunal to provide the Council with
assessments every six months detailing the progress
made towards the realization of their respective
completion strategies. The written report is now before
the Council in document S/2005/343. Through both the
narrative part and the annexes, it is intended to provide
the Council with a realistic picture of how the
Yugoslavia Tribunal is grappling with the challenge of
meeting the goals of the completion strategy. I shall
try, in my oral statement, not to repeat the details of the
report, but rather to highlight its salient features and to
provide the Council with an update of the information
provided therein.

Since the last report (S/2004/897), submitted in
November 2004, the Tribunal's three Trial Chambers
and one Appeals Chamber have been working at
maximum capacity, with the Trial Chambers handling
six cases simultaneously. That means that, on average,
six different cases are being tried by different benches
of three judges each. The written report indicates that
two judgements have been issued since the last report
and predicts that by the end of this November four
additional judgements will have been issued in cases
involving an additional seven accused persons. That
means, of course, that by the end of this year another
batch of four cases will begin. The pace is unrelenting.
The new report also highlights the fact that 22 new
accused persons have arrived at The Hague since the
last report was issued, meaning that there are now 50
per cent more people awaiting trial than there were the
last time I appeared before the Council. Obviously, that
dramatic increase has significant implications for the
completion strategy.

With those critical preliminaries out of the way,
allow me to survey the major features of the report, and
in particular to emphasize the relevant updates
contained therein.

With regard to internal measures taken to
implement the strategy, we have adopted significant
amendments to our rules of procedure and evidence,
including one relating to judgement of acquittal -
namely, rule 98 bis, which mandates oral rather than
written submissions. I am happy to report that that
amendment has already had a salutary effect on
speeding up out procedures to a few days or a few very
short weeks, without sacrificing defendants' due
process rights. Before the amendment, rule 98 bis
proceedings would likely have taken up several months
of the Trial Chambers' time.

I have also appointed two working groups of
judges for speeding up trials and appeals. The working
group on trials, which is chaired by Judge Bonomy, has
been exploring ways to speed up trials by, among other
alternatives, finding additional courtroom space and
streamlining our pre-trial and trial procedures. Those
modalities were the subject of an in-depth and wide-
ranging discussion among all the judges just a week
ago.

The working group on speeding up appeals,
which is chaired by Judge Mumba, has focused on the
rules governing the admissibility of additional
evidence at the appeals stage as well as on the
procedures for translating decisions and judgements for
appellants, which can have a major impact on the
timely disposition of appeals. By the time the plenary
of judges meets in July, I expect that both working
groups will have presented concrete and actionable
recommendations.

Turning now to ad litem judges, I very much
appreciate the adoption by the Council of resolution
1597 (2005), which amended the Statute of the
Tribunal to allow for the re-nomination and re-election
of ad litem judges. Nonetheless, I am very concerned
about the lack of a sufficient number of nominations.
That has significantly delayed the election of a sorely
needed new roster of ad litem judges. For new trials to
be assigned to panels of judges without delay, it is
absolutely imperative that the President have at his
disposal a roster of distinguished jurists who are
willing and able to serve the Tribunal, often on quite
short notice, at this critical juncture. I appeal to all
States that have not yet submitted nominations to
nominate experienced jurists for that important
position. It provides a unique opportunity for
individuals to make a difference in advancing the cause
of international justice.

I now come to a key component of the
completion strategy, namely, the referral of cases
involving intermediate and lower-rank accused persons
to competent national jurisdictions. I should
particularly like to highlight the opening of the War
Crimes Chamber of the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on 9 March 2005. After much time and
effort devoted to making that event a reality - efforts
in which I and my colleagues have been deeply
involved - the Sarajevo War Crimes Chamber is now
in a position to accept cases that the Tribunal's Referral
Bench may decide to refer to the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The Government and people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the High Representative,
donor Governments and the international community
as a whole have made that possible, and the Tribunal
and its staff are pleased to have been central to that
endeavour.

The report notes that, so far, the Prosecutor has
filed 10 motions involving 18 accused persons for such
referrals under rule 11 bis of our rules of procedure and
evidence. In enclosure V to the report, members of the
Council will see that, of those 10 motions, the Referral
Bench has granted the motion in one case, referring the

case to Bosnia and Herzegovina for proceedings before
the Sarajevo War Crimes Chamber. However, that
transfer must await the disposition by the Appeals
Chamber of filed appeals. The Council will note that
the Referral Bench has already held hearings in six
other cases, involving 13 accused persons. Future
decisions on the Prosecutor's motions to refer cases to
competent national jurisdictions are therefore expected
in the very near future. In addition, as the Prosecutor
points out in her assessments, she is considering filing
additional rule ll bis motions for referral.

As to the cooperation of States in the region with
the Tribunal, as I have already indicated, there has
been a dramatic increase in the number of indictees and
fugitives transferred to the Tribunal, mostly thanks to
the efforts of the authorities of Serbia and Montenegro,
sometimes together with authorities of Republika
Srpska. The impact of those new arrivals will be
addressed later in my statement.

With regard to Croatia, while cooperation
remains good in some areas, it is of major concern that
the last remaining stumbling block to achieving full
cooperation with the Tribunal is the continuing failure
on the part of authorities in Croatia to apprehend Ante
Gotovina and render him to The Hague.

Concerning Republika Srpska, other than
assistance with regard to the arrival of some indictees
and fugitives, cooperation remains lacking in other
areas, in particular with regard to any serious attempts
to locate and arrest such notorious fugitives as
Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic.

Cooperation has improved with Serbia and
Montenegro with regard to the arrival of indictees and
fugitives. During a meeting and in-depth discussion
with Prime Minister Kostunica of Serbia and President
Tadic of Serbia this March, I strongly encouraged them
both to ensure the arrival of the remaining fugitives
thought to be in Serbia and Montenegro or Republika
Srpska. The largest impediment on that front is the
continuing failure to apprehend and render to The
Hague Ratko Mladic.

Allow me to add that it goes without saying that
when and if those three principal fugitives move across
borders to avoid apprehension and arrest, the
obligation to pursue and arrest them applies in full to
the authorities of their temporary se'jour. That also
highlights the need for Governments in the region to
redouble their efforts to ensure judicial cooperation
between their own authorities. I have consistently
maintained that if the voluntary surrender of accused
war criminals is not forthcoming, the international
obligation of the States of the region is to arrest and
transfer the accused without delay.

As I have said many times, the Tribunal will not
have fulfilled its historic mission - and it will not
close its doors - until Karadzic, Mladic and Gotovina
have been arrested, brought to The Hague and tried
before the Tribunal in accordance with the full
procedural protections recognized by our
jurisprudence.

I now turn to the updated prognosis regarding
implementation of the Completion Strategy. In my last
assessments, I estimated that, by the end of 2008, the
Tribunal could complete the trials of all accused in our
custody at that time, including Gotovina if he arrived
before 2006, but warned that any further growth of the
trial docket would make achieving that target date
entirely dependent on some cases being disposed of by
guilty pleas. I also added that, if new indictees or
fugitives were to arrive and require separate trials, it
would become likely to take at least until the end of
2009 to complete the trials of all accused within the
custody of the Tribunal.

As is evident from the report before the Council
now, some of those factors bearing on the
implementation of the Strategy have come to pass and
others must be addressed. Allow me to take them up
one by one.

First, with respect the number of new
indictments, as the report indicates, seven new or
amended indictments have been submitted since my
November report. Five of the indictments will require
new, separate trials. For two other cases involving five
accused, I understand that the Prosecutor is considering
whether to move the joinder of those cases with pre-
existing cases.
Secondly, with respect to the number of rule ll
bis motions for transfer granted, as I have just
mentioned, one of the 10 outstanding motions has been
granted by the Referral Bench and is currently on
appeal. Six others have been the subject of hearings.
While it might be anticipated that the Referral Bench
will render more decisions by the end of this month, it
would be neither possible nor appropriate for me to
speculate about the ultimate disposition of those
motions.

Thirdly, as to the number of guilty pleas, I need
only mention that there have been no new guilty pleas
since my last report.

Fourthly, I wish to refer to the arrival of new
indictees and fugitives. With the arrival of 22 new
indictees or fugitives, our projections must be adjusted,
as I warned in my last report to the Council. As of now,
we are working on the assumption that at least ten of
the new accused will be the subject of seven new,
separate trials. Five trials will involve one individual
accused; one will involve two accused; and another,
three accused. Of the remaining 12 accused, the
Prosecutor has already moved to join three to a pre-
existing case. I understand she is also considering
moving the joinder of seven accused to another pre-
existing case, which would result in a "mega case" of
eight or nine accused. Finally, two new arrivals are the
subject of a rule 11 bis motion for referral to a
competent national jurisdiction. I cannot, of course,
predict how Trial Chambers will decide on motions for
joinder, or indeed anticipate the Prosecutor's ultimate
decision about whether to move for joinders in the first
place.

Turning to the 10 fugitives who have still not
arrived and the impact on the caseload should they
arrive, six of the fugitives are on indictments with co-
accused already in custody and therefore new, separate
trials for them would not be required. Meanwhile, the
Prosecutor is considering the suitability of two others
for joinder. And the arrival of Karadzic and Mladic
would entail a new, joint trial, provided they arrive
more or less contemporaneously. We know that their
trial will be lengthy and complex, but it is impossible
to know how it will impact the timeline of the overall
situation without knowing when they will arrive and
when the trial could begin for both the Prosecution and
defence counsel. Obviously, for purposes of planning
and enhancing the prospects of the Tribunal's
completing its work sooner rather than later, the earlier
they have been apprehended and transferred to The
Hague, the better.
Fifthly, the timing of the arrivals of remaining
indictees and fugitives has a critical influence on the
Completion Strategy, but it simply cannot be predicted
with any degree of certainty. While it might be possible
to estimate roughly the length of a trial prior to the
arrival of an accused, we have to wait until the accused
is actually in The Hague to assess a variety of
factors- the readiness of both parties to proceed,
whether joinder is possible, and the availability of
courtrooms and judges to hear the cases.

Sixthly, as to the disposition of joinder motions,
as I indicated earlier, the Trial Chambers are seized of
several motions by the Prosecutor for joinder of cases,
and she is considering filing further such motions.
Decisions are expected soon on the pending motions. If
such motions are granted, there could be trials of up to
eight or nine accused. Of course, such joinders are not
a panacea, as additional time would be required to
dispose of a given case, but they would clearly save
time when compared to having separate trials for each
of the accused. As my report indicates, I welcome any
such major time-saving tactic that is consistent with
due process and the rights of the accused.

Allow me to mention another matter of
importance. While the arrival of indictees and fugitives
obviously complicates our Completion Strategy
timetable, it goes without saying that the arrival of
alleged war criminals can only be applauded. Persons
accused of having committed war crimes must be
brought to justice and cannot be allowed to hide,
hoping that the Tribunal will close its doors before they
are found and arrested. The arrival of such a substantial
number of accused moves the Tribunal further towards
the fulfilment of its mandate: prosecuting those
accused of committing war crimes in the former
Yugoslavia.

Coming to the current estimate, I should preface
my remarks with a cautionary word. Any estimates are
necessarily tentative, since they can only be based on
assumptions subject to unpredictable factors. I would
indicate, for instance, that if all possible rule 11 bis
motions are granted; if all possible motions for joinder
are granted; if no new fugitives arrive; and if no guilty
pleas are entered, the Tribunal would complete its
current caseload sometime in 2009. But all of those
"ifs" indicate that those estimates are based on
assumptions that evolving reality will modify.

For example, if the Tribunal's three most
notorious fugitives - Karadzic, Mladic, and
Gotovina - are arrested in the near future, their cases
would extend the time necessary to complete trials by
an additional four to seven months, given the possible
joinders. As a purely independent matter, if half of the
pending and anticipated rule 11 bis motions are denied,
the trial completion date would slip an estimated nine
months. Further, if one of the large joinder motions -
the so-called mega-cases - is denied, it could add
another three months to the time required to try them
all. Any combination of other contingencies - health-
related trial interruptions, guilty pleas, et cetera -
could also alter the outcome.

Knowing what we know now, the most I can
indicate is that trials will necessarily have to be
conducted in 2009 and that they will most likely
continue until the end of that year. When the next six-
month report is presented, the President of the Tribunal
should be able to provide an assessment that is based
on more factual predictions. It is hoped that by next
November, current and possible rule 11 bis and joinder
motions will have been disposed of. Arrivals of
additional indictees will provide more data on the
caseload and target dates. In addition, the judges will
have considered recommendations for speeding up both
trials and appeals.

Before concluding, I should like to raise another
matter mentioned in my report: the possibility of
adding a fourth courtroom. Such an additional
courtroom would be very advantageous in my View and
would make it possible for us to speed up trials and
appeals. The report indicates the advantages to be
derived from adding a fourth courtroom. Advantages
would arise whether we maintain the existing six trials
a day or, even more, if it is decided to allow three
additional ad litem judges to serve so that a seventh
trial bench could be established to help deal with the
backlog. I wish to stress that I would not request that
the cost of constructing such a courtroom be borne by
the United Nations budget, but would rather approach
possible donor countries that would see the long-term
advantage of expediting trials and appeals through
increased courtroom capacity.

This is a matter that we have just begun to
explore, and no doubt the President of the Tribunal will
return to the Council to discuss this subject once the
possibilities have become clearer. We would welcome
any comments that members of the Council might have
regarding the matter and will count, as always, on the
guidance and leadership of the Council as we pursue
this question.

Before I conclude, let me allude to the
approaching tenth anniversary of an atrocity that, in its
character and magnitude, was reminiscent of those
committed during the Second World War. This July
will mark 10 years since the atrocities - the
genocide - at Srebrenica. Let me quote the following
from the 19 April 2004 Krstic Appeals Chamber
judgement:

"By seeking to eliminate a part of the Bosnian
Muslims, the Bosnian Serb forces committed
genocide. They targeted for extinction the forty
thousand Bosnian Muslims living in Srebrenica, a
group which was emblematic of the Bosnian
Muslims in general. They stripped all the male
Muslim prisoners, military and civilian, elderly
and young, of their personal belongings and
identification, and deliberately and methodically
killed them solely on the basis of their identity.
The Bosnian Serb forces were aware, when they
embarked on this genocidal venture, that the harm
they caused would continue to plague the
Bosnian Muslims. The Appeals Chamber states
unequivocally that the law condemns, in
appropriate terms, the deep and lasting injury
inflicted, and calls the massacre at Srebrenica by
its proper name: genocide. Those responsible will
bear this stigma, and it will serve as a warning to
those who may in future contemplate the
commission of such a heinous act."

It is a shame that Karadzic and Mladic are still at
large, 10 years after Srebrenica. As we approach that
commemoration, it is worth emphasizing that it is to
the Security Council that the international community,
the public and, especially, victims of atrocities turn for
leadership and justice for the redress of atrocities. The
Tribunal is one manifestation of the Council's
commitment to international justice, to the rule of law
and to the struggle against impunity, as well as to
peace and reconciliation. We are there to carry out the
mission that the Council entrusted to us. We commit
ourselves to redouble our efforts to see that justice is
done for victims and accused alike, that due process is
honoured and that accused war criminals are not
treated with impunity, but rather are afforded a fair
trial. With the support of the members of the Council, I
am confident that we can succeed in our difficult task
in the remaining years of our mandate.

I would now like to conclude by making some
remarks in my personal capacity. Over the years, the
Security Council has played a critical role by using its
power and prestige to resist impunity, to establish
individual criminal responsibility for perpetrators of
atrocities and to impose sanctions on those who violate
human rights and humanitarian norms. The Council's
decisions, taken under Chapter VII, to establish the ad
hoc Tribunals in 1993 and 1994 - half a century after
Nuremberg - were seminal moments. They led not
only to the trial and punishment of senior figures
responsible for atrocities in the Balkans and Rwanda,
but also to the creation of a whole new corpus of
jurisprudence on international criminal law, procedure
and evidence - a body of law that will be the historic
legacy of the ad hoc Tribunals. Of course, much
remains to be done to combat impunity outside the
areas covered by the jurisdiction of the ad hoc
Tribunals. The Council has the power and the
responsibility to do all it can to advance those goals.

I see the Council's referral - under Chapter
VII - of the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court as a critical next step in the historic
evolution of the anti-impunity principle. The referral
underscores the world community's resolute
commitment to the principle that the perpetrators of
such crimes against humanity will be held to account.
It also demonstrates the potential of Chapter VII and
its beneficial uses in advancing accountability in all
parts of the world. Speaking as a scholar of
international humanitarian law, I congratulate the
Council on its wise action this spring.

Finally, in mid-November, my presidency of the
ICTY will come to an end and I will continue as an
Appeals Chamber judge. This is thus my last
appearance before the Council as Tribunal President.
May I take this opportunity to express to you,
Mr. President, and to all the other members of the
Council my deep gratitude for your steady support of
the Tribunal and of international justice, and for the
help you have generously given me in the performance
of my duties.

