Mr. Bieke (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this briefing to consider the
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by ISIL (Da'esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat (S/2019/612). It
congratulates Mr. Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General
and Head ofthe Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT),
and Ms. Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
on their enlightening briefings.

Da'esh represents one of today's greatest security
challenges for the international community and, above
all, for the Security Council. Despite its militarily
defeat in Syria and Iraq, Da'esh still retains its ability to
cause harm. Worse still, its ideology, rhetoric and scope
of action continue to extend beyond the borders of the
two countries, thereby posing an ongoing threat to the
security and stability of our States. Indeed, this terrorist
organization remains very active throughout the world,
demonstrating its resilience thanks to new technologies
and various devices that allow it to bypass international
technical and financial control mechanisms.
The relevant reports of the Secretary-General, the ninth
of which is before the Council for consideration, draw
our attention to the extent of the threat and the urgency
of coordinating our actions to curb or even eradicate
this phenomenon.

In the face of the global threat posed by Da'esh,
counter-terrorism strategies must, in order to be
effective, be part of a multilateral approach based on
enhanced cooperation among all actors in the fight
against terrorism. In that regard, it is the responsibility
of the United Nations, and more specifically the
Security Council, to be at the forefront of our
common action to halt the spread of this scourge.
My country therefore welcomes the adoption in
2019 of two key texts in the fight against terrorism,
namely, resolution 2462 (2019), which recommends
in particular the adoption of national and regional
legislation to remove sources of terrorist financing;
and resolution 2482 (2019) which, inter alia, establishes
a direct link between terrorists and organized crime.
Cete d'Ivoire also welcomes the launch of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, as well
as the approval of the revitalized structure of the
related working groups and the 2019-2020 workplans.
In addition, my delegation appreciates the support
of UNOCT and CTED in strengthening the legal
and institutional capacities of States and regional
organizations. Cote d'Ivoire therefore encourages them
to promote meetings designed to promote exchanges of
experience and good practices in counter-terrorism.

For the fight against Da'esh to be comprehensive
and effective we will have to take into account a
range of issues, including accountability for crimes
committed, the phenomenon of radicalization and the
repatriation of children of foreign fighters, of whom,
according to UNICEF, there are about 29,000 in Syria,
including 20,000 who are believed to be from Iraq.
C6te d'Ivoire is of the view that the crimes committed
by Da'esh in Iraq and Syria must not go unpunished and
therefore reiterates its support for the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, whose work should safeguard the right of
victims to justice as part of a fair trial.

The fight against terrorism and violent
extremism can only produce the desired results if
it is supported by national and regional strategies
to eradicate youth poverty and unemployment,
as well as transnational organized crime.
To that end, it is essential to develop urgent responses
to the social demands of the population and to provide
better job opportunities to young people. Such a
strategy is particularly valid for West Africa and the
Sahel, geographical areas that have seen a worrying
increase in activities of the Islamic State and its
complex network of affiliates, which take advantage
of the porous borders, States' weak capacities and
community rivalries.

The strengthening of international cooperation
and the pooling of resources must remain the guiding
principles underpinning our action against terrorism in
all its forms. Aware of that imperative, the members of
the Economic Community of West African States have
decided to hold an extraordinary summit on the threats
posed by terrorism to regional peace and security on

14 September.

Cote d'Ivoire remains convinced that eradicating
terrorism demands holistic solutions within the
framework of a multilateral approach. It therefore
welcomed the Franco-German position articulated on
the side lines of the Group of Seven summit to promote
broader support for the Group of Five for the Sahel
within a security and stability partnership in the Sahel
aimed at expanding the scope of its work.

In conclusion, my country hopes that our
shared commitment to combating terrorism will be
commensurate with the magnitude of the challenges
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. It
must be an ongoing and coordinated effort that takes
into account the structural causes and phenomena that
fuel terrorism and violent extremism.

