Mr. Rinkevics (Latvia): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this very important debate
on conflict prevention and sustaining peace. My
congratulations and best wishes go to the Swedish
presidency and for your membership in the Security
Council. My best wishes also go to Secretary-General
Guterres. He can count on Latvia's support.

The United Nations was created because the world
had paid too high a price for the absence of a credible
international system. However, the potential of the
United Nations for preventing the outbreak, continuation
or resurgence of conflicts has not been used effectively.
Far too often the United Nations has been unable to
prevent conflicts, build peace or stop atrocities. All too
often resources have been spent on responding to and
managing crises instead of preventing them.

In 2017, many complex violent conflicts around the
globe persist. All of those conflicts not only threaten
the principles of the international order and the global
rules-based system, they also fundamentally affect
the security of our world. Most importantly, those
conflicts have a devastating impact on millions of
civilians. All recent reviews of the United Nations'
peace and security pillar call for the strengthening
of preventive diplomacy. The United Nations must
develop an effective culture of prevention. Tools for
prevention have long been available, including in the
Charter of the United Nations. We need to move from
mere commitment to concrete action - individually
and collectively as the international community.

I appreciate the Secretary-General's energetic
engagement today and his vision for a more effective
United Nations. I would like to thank him personally
for placing conflict prevention at the centre of the
United Nations agenda. In that context, we look forward
to the implementation of his initiatives announced
on 3 January that will enhance the United Nations
performance in the peace and security pillar, and will
strengthen the arrangements for information and crisis
management. The success ofhis strong appeal for peace
from his first day in office largely depends on all of us.
We expect that he will use all the tools at his disposal
to preserve the rules-based international order and to
restore it where it has been broken.

The best way of preventing conflicts is to solve
existing ones in the most efficient way. All Member
States of the United Nations are the guardians of this
international system and the Charter of the United
Nations. Member States of the Security Council have a
particular responsibility. With the privilege of being a
permanent member of the Council and having the veto
power also comes the responsibility to use that power in
the interests ofcommon peace and security. The Council
has not always lived up to that special responsibility.

In the case of Syria, the Council has not been
and is not able to stop the State from committing
crimes against its own population. The failure to act
promptly to prevent or stop the conflict and to demand
accountability has brought with it immense human
costs. The brutal horrors of five years of the ongoing
bloodshed in Syria haunt our consciences as human
beings and diplomats.

Accountability is an essential part of any political,
reconciliation and peace process in Syria. In the
framework of the General Assembly of the United
Nations, Latvia strongly supported the creation of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, contained in resolution
71/248, which seeks to assist the investigation and
prosecution of the serious crimes committed in Syria
and to ensure justice for all victims. Latvia has also
called for referring the case of Syria to the International
Criminal Court, which the Council has been unable to
do. I repeat that call now.

Through the Charter of the United Nations, all
Member States have committed to the renunciation of
the illegal threat or use of force, and to settling their
disputes by peaceful means. In the case of Ukraine,
the Council was not able to prevent and stop the act of
aggression, which triggered the commission of further
crimes. Russia's actions in Ukraine are ablatant violation
of international law and pose a serious challenge to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We
must return to the former rules-based security order
in Europe. The peaceful resolution of the conflict in
Ukraine, one that respects Ukraine's independence and
territorial integrity, must be a priority.

In order to maintain international peace and to
ensure that the United Nations remains an organization
in which people trust and believe, Security Council
members must move beyond their domestic interests in
the name of genuinely addressing global challenges. We
must also further strengthen early warning measures.
In that regard, the respect for international law, the
protection of human rights and the rule of law are key.

