Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): I would like to
begin by thanking you, Sir, for your initiative of
convening this open debate on Afghanistan. The many
members who have asked to speak today vividly
remind us of how many friends Afghanistan has in the
international community, and reflect the determination
we all share to help Afghanistan rebuild, reconcile and
fulfil the aspirations of the Bonn Agreement and the
Afghanistan Compact.

I am pleased to be accompanied today by Mr. B0
Asplund, who has ably led the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) since the
departure of Tom Koenigs last December, and, above
all, by Ambassador Kai Eide, whom, as the President
just noted, the Secretary-General has recently
appointed as his new Special Representative for
Afghanistan and Head of UNAMA. He will bring new
dynamism to our efforts. In that regard, I would like to
thank all the Member States that have expressed their
strong support for him as he takes up his duties in
Kabul.

The report (5/2008/ 159) of the Secretary-General,
which was released last week, speaks for itself. It
describes frankly the difficulties we have faced,
especially in the past year. However, we have learned
some important lessons by virtue of those difficulties,
which we must now apply. In particular, we have an
increasingly shared diagnosis of the main obstacles
08-26870
before us. We face an insurgency that has proven to be
more robust than we expected, as well as more ruthless
than we ever imagined. Afghan governmental
institutions remain fragile. Being without sufficient
capacity, they are even more fragile due to the
corrosive and destructive practices of corruption. A
massive illegal drug economy is thriving in the context
of the State's weak authority. It has also abetted the
insurgency and undermined the State. The regional
environment is complex and national interests are
sometimes pursued at the expense of an effort to
mutually support stability in Afghanistan in a
coordinated manner. Finally, the international
community, while certainly being committed and
generous, has also too often been insufficiently united
on crucial issues relating to the strategy in Afghanistan.
The United Nations bears its own share of
responsibility for the deficiencies in international
coordination. We recognize that and, as I will explain
during this briefing, we are working to correct it.
However, we also need the cooperation of our
international and Afghan partners.

In the light of that common diagnosis of the
problems before us, the Security Council now has the
important responsibility of renewing UNAMA's
mandate. Despite important progress in Afghanistan -
in particular in the areas of education and public
health - and despite a fast-growing economy, we still
face the serious problems I have just mentioned. Given
the evolution of the situation during the past two years,
now is the time to confront those challenges and to
make the necessary changes and corrections in course.
For that reason, the Secretary-General has included in
his report a section on UNAMA's mandate that we
hope will assist the Council in its decisions on the
Mission's future.

(spoke in English)

UNAMA's current mandate is the product of
negotiations with the Afghan Government and key
partners that took place at the end of 2005. As
indicated in the Secretary-General's report of 6 March,
we feel that that mandate is still appropriate, and is
sufficiently broad to fulfil our objectives. We have
therefore not sought to change or expand UNAMA's
mandate. We do not feel, in other words, that UNAMA
needs additional powers. We do think, however, that, in
the face of the evolved situation, the mandate needs to
be sharpened. That is why the Secretary-General has
proposed the six areas of focus set out in paragraph 64
08-26870
of his report. I would like to draw the Council's
attention to a few of those areas of focus. The first one
is the coordination of international assistance.

The Secretary-General's recommendations on
that essential question are the culmination of a
discussion that began in September of last year at the
high-level meeting on Afghanistan held at the margins
of the General Assembly. We heard the very clear calls
made by many participants for the United Nations to
enhance its coordination efforts. We subsequently
began consultations with Member States, the Afghan
Government and within UNAMA on how best to
achieve that. Those discussions were carried forward to
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB)
meeting in Tokyo last month. Among the conclusions
of the Tokyo meeting was that the Compact remains
the expression of the international partnership with the
Afghan Government, that the JCMB constitutes the
primary coordination body to oversee that partnership,
and that the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy, when it is presented at the Paris conference in
June, will be the blueprint to implement the goals of
the Compact.

There are, therefore, two key issues to ensuring
that all of that leads to improvements in the lives of all
Afghans. The first is that the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy must be given as much support
as possible; the second is that the JCMB must be able
to play an effective role. The Secretary-General's
recommendations reflect those two priorities. Support
for the Afghanistan National Development Strategy
means that donors provide more of their funds through
the Afghan core budget. Strengthening the JCMB
means ensuring that it is at least aware of all the major
assistance projects taking place in the country and can
identify whether certain sectors or provinces are being
under-served and be in a position to propose
adjustments. The JCMB secretariat may need to be
strengthened so as to organize and analyze such data.

The second issue is UNAMA's relationship with
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
That relationship rests on two firm pillars: our common
goals and our complementary but distinct mandates,
both of which have their source in the Security
Council. In the time since NATO assumed leadership
of ISAF, we have created mechanisms for coordination
and learned how to work with each other - at the
provincial level, where Provincial Reconstruction
Teams (PRTs) and UNAMA offices interact; at the
3
Kabul level, between the UNAMA leadership and
ISAF headquarters in Kabul; and at the headquarters
level, in New York and Brussels. We look forward to
the Bucharest meeting on Afghanistan to be held in
early April, when NATO will present its own
comprehensive approach. The Secretary-General will
attend that meeting, demonstrating the high priority we
ascribe to this relationship and to achieving success in
Afghanistan.

The third issue that I wanted to highlight is the
upcoming elections. The United Nations played a
significant role in the 2004 and 2005 elections, where
we not only provided technical advice but were also
co-responsible for the elections through our presence in
the Joint Electoral Management Body (JEMB). We
remain willing to provide support for the next cycle of
elections, with the understanding that, unlike the
previous cycle, the Afghan Independent Electoral
Commission will be clearly in the lead. The
registration of voters and the holding of elections will
require significant financial support from the
international community. We are working with the
Electoral Commission to complete the plans so that we
can submit them to donors. The obstacles should not be
underestimated, nor should the stakes. We have learned
from other peace operations that the second set of
post-conflict elections is often more critical than the
first. That will likely be the case for Afghanistan. We
are reviewing our structures and resources to ensure
that we can react immediately, once we receive a
request for assistance and once Afghan authorities take
the required decisions on the electoral date and on
essential electoral legislation. I encourage the Afghan
Government and legislative institutions to take those
decisions without further delay.

The issue of political outreach remains central to
our efforts. Mr. Asplund recently met with President
Karzai and was reassured by the President that he fully
supports UNAMA's efforts to reach out to the Afghan
public, especially those Afghans who feel alienated
from their Government and are not opposed to the
Constitution and are not targets of United Nations
sanctions under the process initiated by resolution 1267
(1999). In order to be more effective, we will
strengthen our field presence by adding international
staff to UNAMA's seven provincial offices created
over the last 18 months, as approved in the last budget.
We are also about to undertake an assessment, in close
cooperation with the Department of Safety and
Security, of UNAMA's field activities, with a view to
possibly opening new field offices where security
permits.

In order for our outreach activities to be credible,
they must be backed up by improved governance,
especially at the local level. We are supporting the
recently established Independent Directorate for Local
Governance, the main vehicle for improving
subnational governance, strengthening the ties between
the local and central governments. UNAMA also
supported the design of the National Justice
Programme, which is focused on increasing Afghan
capacity to deliver legal services, ensure public access
to courts and legal aid and improve public awareness
of their rights and processes of legal redress.

This initiative addresses both the extension of the
rule-of-law and local-level government, and I strongly
urge Member States to ensure that it is adequately
funded.

Finally, with regard to illegal narcotics, which I
mentioned as a key factor undermining both
Afghanistan's security and governance, I was pleased
that the JCMB was able to agree upon an
implementation plan for the counter-narcotics strategy.
The discussions during the drafting of this plan led to
the resolution of policy differences that had
undermined our common anti-narcotic efforts.
UNAMA and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime provided technical advice that helped this
consensus to emerge. We expect, in the future, to
continue providing this sort of technical advice and
policy guidance to both the Afghan Government and its
international partners. In particular, as we have often
stated, we need to focus on security sector reform and
especially on the development of the Afghan National
Police. I remain hopeful that the reform initiatives,
which have begun but have been slow to take effect,
are being accelerated under the International Police
Coordination Board, which was tasked at the JCMB
Tokyo meeting with overseeing the implementation of
those reforms.

In presenting the Secretary-General's report
(S/2008/159), I have focused on only a few of the
many issues it addresses. Looking at the future, we
must be pragmatic, but we must also be ambitious. I
am sure that soon enough Ambassador Eide will have
his own observations on the role of the United Nations
in Afghanistan, as he is familiar with the country and
the United Nations system. We look forward to the
keen judgments and suggestions he will undoubtedly
make, and I, personally, am pleased to leave UNAMA
in such capable hands.

