Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): My delegation welcomes you,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica, to our
deliberations and is delighted to see you presiding over our
meeting today. Kenya and Costa Rica have enjoyed warm
and friendly relations over the years, and I am sure that
those ties will continue to grow.

My delegation is encouraged by the progress made so
far in the implementation of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Lack of
commitment and political will had initially been a major
obstacle to moving the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina forward. Recently, however, we have
witnessed more cooperation from the authorities in the
region. This has brought about positive developments in
various aspects of the peace process.

The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) has played a crucial role in
assisting with the municipal elections held on 13 and 14
September 1997 and with the elections for the Republika
Srpska Assembly held on 22 and 23 November 1997. The
improved cooperation between the United Nations
International Police Task Force and the local police has
facilitated the implementation of the checkpoint policy since
May 1997. Significant progress has been made in the police
restructuring programme. The report of the Secretary-
General indicates that by August the number of
checkpoints approved had dropped from over 300 per day
to 15. While welcoming this very positive development,
we agree with the Secretary-General that the reduction
can only be one element of a broader strategy to promote
freedom of movement.

It is estimated that some 609,000 refugees from
Bosnia and Herzegovina are still in asylum countries,
which are seeking a durable solution. There is need to
continue focusing on efforts to facilitate the return of all
refugees and displaced persons to their places of origin in
safety and dignity. The harassment of returning refugees
and displaced persons is therefore unacceptable. It is even
worse when it is done by police officers who should be
protecting the returnees. In this regard, my delegation
commends the action taken against the Chief and Deputy
Chief of Police of Jajce as reported in paragraph 17 of the
Secretary-General's report.

The presence of mines is still a serious problem. As
pointed out in the United Nations Consolidated Inter-
Agency Appeal for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
reconstruction projects have been delayed, refugees have
been unable to return to their homes, and an average of
50 men, women and children have been injured or killed
by these indestructible, hidden weapons monthly. In this
regard, my delegation supports the efforts of the Mine
Action Centre, the European Commission, Norwegian
People's Aid, the United Nations Development
Programme and other groups in this very critical area.

More often than not, economic reconstruction forms
an integral part of the long-term settlement of disputes.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is no exception. Economic
development is an integral part of any peace process. In
this regard, we commend the efforts of the United
Nations system and the World Bank in trying to bring
about progress in the major sectors of the economy. As
the Secretary-General notes in his report, a lot has been
achieved, but much also remains to be done. The support
of the international community is therefore necessary for
Bosnia and Herzegovina to consolidate the progress made
so far.

My delegation welcomes the conclusions of the
ministerial meeting of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, held at Sintra, Portugal, on 30
May 1997, and of the Peace Implementation Conference
held at Bonn on 9 and 10 December 1997. It is our hope
that their recommendations will be taken seriously by the

 

parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina, so as to expedite a
political settlement of the crisis.

The presence of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina has been instrumental in achieving the
progress we are witnessing today. As pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report, this progress is in its early
stages and is still fragile. In this regard, my delegation
supports the extension of the mandate of the UNMIBH for
a further six months.

My delegation would like to pay tribute to Mr. Kai
Eide for his effective leadership during his tenure as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We welcome the appointment of Elizabeth
Rehn as his successor. We assure her of Kenya's support as
she continues with this important task. We also affirm our
full support for the High Representative and his staff as he
facilitates the implementation of the civilian aspects of the
Peace Agreement.

