Mr. Oyarzun (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
first to thank the Security Council presidency for
having organized today's discussion of peacekeeping

operations. I thank the Permanent Representative of
Turkey, in his capacity as President of the Council, for
having kindly invited the delegation of Spain to
participate. My thanks go also to Ms. Malcorra and
Mr. Le Roy for their briefings on the New Horizon
initiative, which is being developed in order to
continue enhancing the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations.

Spain endorses the statement made earlier this
afternoon by the Permanent Representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union and
shares the interest in enhancing the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and
continuing to convene open debates on this theme to
discuss the various challenges we face. My delegation
considers that at least three debates on peacekeeping a
year would be reasonable in order to appropriately
update the information on the initiatives under way and
to assess the level of compliance with the provisions of
resolution 1353 (2001), on measures for cooperation by
the Council with countries contributing troops to
peacekeeping operations. Spain encourages the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations to make more in-depth efforts on the
implementation of the recommendations regarding
cooperation with troop-contributing countries, as
contained in its December 2006 report (see S/2006/972).

These open debates of the Security Council make
it possible to consider in depth the various factors
affecting the maintenance of international peace and
security, primary responsibility for which lies with the
Security Council, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. But we should also recall that under
paragraph 2 of Article 11 the General Assembly can
discuss any issue relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security brought before it by
any State Member of the United Nations. The Charter thus
establishes interaction between these two principal organs,
on which I wish to say a few words.

I recall in particular Article 15 of the Charter,
which provides that the General Assembly shall receive
and consider annual and special reports from the
Security Council and that these reports shall include an
account of the measures that the Security Council has
decided upon or taken to maintain international peace
and security. It would also be desirable to improve
coordination between the Security Council and other
General Assembly bodies, in particular its Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which, as
members know, was established pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965
in order to comprehensively consider peacekeeping
operations in all their aspects.

Spain is marking the twentieth anniversary of its
participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, which began in January 1989 with the
deployment of military observers to the first United
Nations Angola Verification Mission. Since then, more
than 30,000 Spanish soldiers have participated in 20
United Nations peacekeeping operations and have
suffered 29 deaths in the course of those operations.
Spain is the eighth-largest contributor to the United
Nations peacekeeping budget. My country is
participating with a total of approximately 1,200 troops
and police officers in five United Nations operations.

Spain has welcomed with high interest the
various initiatives under way to strengthen and
improve the management of peacekeeping operations.
These include the joint Department of Peacekeeping
Operations/Department of Field Support New Horizon
initiative, about which we heard today, along with
initiatives of the Council itself and those of Member
States. In that regard, we attach high priority to
harmonizing all initiatives in order to optimize efforts
and avoid duplication. This would make it possible to
optimize and rationalize the use of resources, which is
a key goal during the present economic crisis.

Spain wishes also to stress one aspect of the New
Horizon initiative: that it is a priority to maximize the
overall capacity of operations, both in terms of
numbers of personnel deployed and in terms of
responding to the challenges posed to operations by
difficult logistical and security conditions. We must
bear in mind that the experience of countries
contributing troops and other personnel provides us
with a clearer view of what is taking place on the
ground. We cannot forget that those who truly forge
peace are the men and women at work in conflict
zones.

As the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) has already
stressed, in order to improve the effectiveness and
scope of peacekeeping operations it is essential that the
United Nations work in collaboration with regional
organizations. Peacekeeping operations are very costly,
and we must make them as effective as possible. For
that reason, in addition to using diverse conflict-
prevention measures, it is also of fundamental
importance to share tasks with other regional
organizations.

The European Union and the United Nations have
attained a high level of cooperation, as recently
exemplified by the successful handover from the
European Union military operation in the Republic of
Chad and in the Central African Republic and the
effective protection provided by vessels of European
Operation Atalanta, which is making possible the
provision of United Nations humanitarian aid to the
Somali people. Our cooperation has progressed
markedly and imaginatively, and we hope that in the
future the European Union will further strengthen its
role in all conflict-prevention, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping processes.

Possible future areas of cooperation with the
United Nations under consideration include support for
Africa's peacekeeping capacity, in particular with
respect to training, and strengthening existing
cooperation on security sector reform.

Spain recognizes the special importance of the
protection of civilians in the peacekeeping sphere. We
believe that such protection should be clearly defined
in the mandates of operations approved by the Security
Council. We attach great importance to the inclusion of
this concept in mission mandates, and consider that
these should also include provisions for the effective
oversight of compliance and that sufficient capacity for
successful implementation should be allocated.

Spain believes that it is essential that potential
contributors of troops and financial resources
participate in the integrated planning process for
United Nations peacekeeping operations, along with all
other necessary actors within the system. They should
also participate in identifying objectives for properly
assessing the exit strategy for a peacekeeping operation
in a given region or country. In our view, the consistent
involvement of all players in the integrated planning of
a peacekeeping operation is of decisive importance in
giving proper direction to a country's recovery.

Spain wishes finally to stress its recognition of
and full support for the efforts being made by the
Department of Field Support to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of logistical support for
peacekeeping missions.

I conclude by reaffirming Spain's fundamental
commitment to the principles and purposes of the

09-3860]
United Nations, especially to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

