Mrs. Adhikari (Nepal): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your country,
Pakistan, on presiding over the Security Council for
the month of January. It is indeed a commendable
initiative of your presidency of the Council to bring this
subject matter to the fore. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
for his insightful remarks. My delegation aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of the
Arab Republic of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Peacekeeping has constantly evolved into a
major United Nations activity and a vital tool for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Increased demand placed on the United Nations to
respond to growing and diverse situations is testimony
to the growing confidence reposed in the world body
as a credible multilateral organization responsible for
addressing the critical challenges to international peace
and security.

At present, peacekeeping operations have gone
well beyond their traditional modes of operation.
Supporting peace and security, providing security
guarantees, including the protection of civilians,
and political and peacebuilding support to assist
countries' transition to peace have been the principal
tasks assigned to peacekeeping missions. Many of
the important tasks pertaining to peacebuilding and
nation-building processes are directly linked with
democracy, governance, human rights, the rule of law
and development.

Peacekeeping demands a multidimensional
approach and multiple involvements of stakeholders in
a coherent and coordinated manner. It also requires a
broader, holistic strategy that synergizes peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts to address the interlinked
issues of security and development in a comprehensive
and holistic manner. It is therefore imperative to have
close coordination between the General Assembly and
the Security Council, and the meaningful engagement
and involvement of the troop- and police-contributing
countries for the success of any United Nations mission.
Country leadership and ownership can play a crucial
role in cultivating hope and fostering confidence among
people in conflict-ridden places.

As one of the leaing troop-contributing countries,
Nepal attaches great importance to United Nations
peacekeeping, in line with its foreign policy objectives.
Nepal's association with United Nations peacekeeping
is consistent and long-standing. Since 1958, Nepal
has continuously contributed peacekeepers for the
maintenance of international peace and security under
the aegis of the United Nations. Nepalese peacekeepers
have served in the most challenging missions, and more
than 60 Nepalese peacekeepers have sacrificed their
lives in the line of duty.

Based on the experiences gained along the evolving
track of peacekeeping, from truce monitoring to
peace enforcement and peacebuilding, and looking
at the challenges ahead, my delegation emphasizes
that the following key elements should receive proper
attention if United Nations peacekeeping is to be a
truly successful enterprise, without compromising the
fundamental tenets of inter-State relationships.

The Security Council must be guided by unity
of purpose and mobilize its entire political capital,
based on merit and principle, to ensure that a coherent
strategic framework is in place to achieve the desired
objectives, which must be explicitly articulated.
Peacekeeping should be guided by an integrated
three-pronged strategy. It has to stabilize the security
situation, support the national political process and
ensure economic regeneration. All three pillars need
to be strengthened in a holistic manner from the very
beginning.

A framework for consultation with troop-
contributing and police-contributing countries
on the mandating process should be substantive,
institutionalized and structured in terms of content and
timing. The comprehensive and continuous involvement
of troop-contributing and police-contributing countries
in all stages ofUnited Nations peacekeeping is essential
to make the operations effective and successful.

Civilian capacity in diverse fields is in increasing
demand in the new generation of peacekeeping
operations. We should strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations to respond to such demands with an
inclusive approach shared by all. The strong provision
of necessary resources and effective arrangements for
enablers are key to rapid deployment, as well as to the
enhancement of operational capacity.

Peacekeepers should be given clear guidance
and strong and clear-cut rules of engagement for
the effective implementation of the tasks shared.
It is essential to ensure the due accountability of
all stakeholders to the mandate of the mission. A
pragmatic training strategy is essential to conducting
mission-oriented pre-deployment training for the
troops, police, commanders and staff of all troop- and
police-contributing countries and to ensuring quality
service in the field.

Effective command and leadership in the field
are critical, and in this context my delegation
underscores that troop-contributing countries should
be provided with opportunities in leadership positions
commensurate with their contribution. The morale
and dignity of peacekeepers must be kept high at all
times through appropriate incentive structures. It
is also important that claims in respect of death and
disabilities be expeditiously cleared. Finally, the safety
and security of United Nations peacekeepers must be
given high attention.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its profound
commitment to United Nations peacekeeping and
assures you, Sir, of its continued participation in United
Nations peacekeeping missions for the sake of a secure
and stable future for all.

