Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from Arabic):
I am pleased to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, I wish ydu every
success in your endeavours. I also wish to express our most
sincere and profound thanks to Mr. Mahugu, the
Ambassador of Kenya, for having guided the Council's
work so well last month.

The international community had hardly breathed a
sigh of relief after the signing of the Al-Khalil protocol --
in spite of the lacunae in that agreement -- when the Israeli
Government announced plans for a new Israel in Jabal Abu
Ghneim in occupied East Jerusalem. These plans are in
violation of the signed agreement and represent a consistent
wish to impose a policy of fait accompli.

The Israeli Government disregards the counsel of all
those who have asked it to refrain from taking this ill-
conceived measure, showing its inability to gauge the
consequences of such an action. International public opinion
and the international community promptly denounced this
unjust decision and demanded that the Israeli Government
refrain from building the settlement and provoking the

Palestinians.

Last week, this Council adopted a very clear
position. The President of the Council at that time,
Ambassador Malingu, expressed the Council's concern
after Israel had announced its intention to take this
decision. The Council requested Israel to refrain from any
action that might endanger the peace process. It is
regrettable that the Council did not receive from the
Israeli Government the clarification requested on the steps
it intended to take. Its response contained fallacious
reasoning, as all observers of the settlement policies
implemented by Israel in the occupied Arab territories
were aware. These policies were in flagrant violation of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, decisions under
international law and even the Oslo accords.

It is clear that the building of this new settlement is
part of a plan to isolate Jerusalem from the rest of the
West Bank, change the urban environment and the
demographic composition of the population and impose a
new reality on the ground, which would thwart the desire
to see international agreements respected.

The peace process in the Middle East has been based
on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace. The Oslo
accords were in keeping with these principles and
developed a step-by-step plan for their implementation, a
plan aimed at establishing trust between the two parties in
order to facilitate the attainment of the objectives. It was
agreed that certain important subjects would be deferred
until the negotiation of the definitive settlement, given the
delicate and sensitive nature of these matters. This in no
way authorizes changing the facts on the ground or
redefining the situation in order to leave the negotiations
devoid of substance and remove their raison tl'etr'a.

East Jerusalem is an occupied land beyond Israeli
sovereignty. The annexation decision taken by Israel has
no legal validity, and any measure aimed at prejudging
the results of the final negotiations runs counter to the
text and the spirit of the peace process and jeopardizes it.

From the very beginning, Tunisia has always worked
persistently and with determination to ensure the success
of the peace process, because we are firmly convinced
that only by peaceful means can the issue of Palestine and
the Israeli-Arab conflict be resolved. Tunisia is therefore
Security Council 3745111 meeting (Resumption l)
Fifty-second year 6 March 1997

 

deeply concerned and disturbed by certain Israeli practices
that utterly contradict the agreements reached. Should they
continue, these practices would only push the region back
into a cycle of violence and confrontation.

We invite this Council to make it clear to Israel how
important it is to pursue the peace process and preserve it
from failure. This peace process is an international
accomplishment, and no party has the right to manipulate
it and jeopardize its foundations.

The question of the city of Jerusalem is a grave one
for the Palestinian people, first and foremost, but also for
all Muslims, for whom Al-Quds is the first direction of
prayer and the third of the Holy Places. Jerusalem/Al-Quds
is a highly symbolic place of very special importance from
a religious standpoint. Israel constantly attempts to weaken
this aspect by insisting on the Judaization of the city and by
placing obstacles in the way of its Arab, Muslim and
Christian inhabitants in order to encourage them to
emigrate.

The building of a settlement in Jabal Abu Ghneim,
which until 1967 was part of the municipality of
Bethlehem, is ansattempt to cut the links between Christian
Palestinians in Al-Quds and in Bethlehem, the cradle of
Christianity, and to reduce the Christian presence in the
region. At a time when the inhabitants of Al-Quds are
being prohibited from rebuilding their homes, when they
are fined for doing so, obtaining building permits has been
made dependent on their allowing Jewish extremists to lay
hands on Arab territories in the city. On the basis of this
same strange logic, the Israeli Government is establishing
a link between Palestinian acceptance of the decision to
build this new settlement and the completion of the
withdrawal of its forces from certain areas of the West
Bank by virtue of the agreement reached between the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian National
Authority, thus endangering the implementation of
contractual obligations.

It is perhaps useful to recall that whenever the world
denounced such decisions in the past, Israel hastened to
claim that its agreement to the construction of Arab
dwellings came in exchange for the building of settlements;
this is what Israel announced this time again, in an attempt
to mislead the international community. These policies are
completely illegal. Moreover these ploys are aimed at
justifying the construction of settlements, which usually
takes place in the calm that follows the storm and in the
end have no effect on the ground.

This Council must take a firm stand regarding this
Israeli policy of settlements, which undermines the
foundations of the peace process. One either respects the
principles of the Madrid Conference and of the Oslo
accords or one doesn't. Should the settlement policy in
occupied Palestinian lands, including East Jerusalem,
continue, along with continued violations of the Fourth
Geneva Convention and lack of respect for commitments,
the peace process can only be endangered.

The international community, represented here by
this Council, must condemn the construction of the Jabal
Abu Ghneim settlement and oblige Israel to reverse its
decision and adopt a policy that establishes trust, without
which no step forward can be taken to find a definitive
solution to the issue of Palestine.

