Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me first express
our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate on the first report of the
Peacebuilding Commission (S/2007/458). We would
also like to thank the Peacebuilding Commission for
the presentation of its report, as well as its
Chairperson, Ambassador Yukio Takasu of Japan for
his remarks.

Having been involved in the deliberations on the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission, and as
a member of the Commission, Indonesia is pleased to
see the Commission and the associated Peacebuilding
Fund embark upon the fulfilment of their mandates in
the first year. It has not been easy for the Commission

to address the issues of its direction and procedures
and at the same time take up the demanding cases of
Burundi and Sierra Leone. But it is obvious from the
report that the Commission has worked hard in trying
to fill the gap in the international post-conflict
architecture, which was highlighted in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome.

At this juncture, my delegation would like to focus
on some of the lessons learned in the past year and to
explore practical ways and means by which the Council,
pursuant to its role, could assist the Commission to fulfil
its goals laid out in resolution 1645 (2005).

First, the peacebuilding architecture of the United
Nations is now in place. As the conclusion of the report
of the Peacebuilding Commission pertinently states,
the biggest remaining challenge is how to concretely
implement peacebuilding strategies in the field. The
fine-tuning efforts by the peacebuilding system in New
York should have an impact on the ground that should
be felt directly by the community concerned.
Maximum effects will be achieved if the Peacebuilding
Commission focuses on being practical and results-
oriented.

Secondly, the maximum effect in the field can be
fulfilled if firm support is offered by all the principal
organs of the United Nations, the agencies of the
United Nations system and the non-United Nations
institutions concerned. Their backing will bolster the
efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission and allow the
Commission to give its undivided attention to the
profound post-conflict issues before it.

As was pointed out last week by some
delegations, including my own, during the General
Assembly's debate on the reports of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund, we expect
the Commission's Organizational Committee to take up
specific thematic issues, apart from considering them
under the country-specific format.

Thirdly, the Commission has rightly emphasized
the importance of addressing good governance, the rule
of law, security sector reform, the fight against
corruption and human rights for all - the necessary
ingredients for the formation of a pluralistic and
tolerant society. But the nexus between peace and
development is paramount, and it also needs to be
clearly incorporated in the outcomes of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Lasting peace cannot be
achieved in the absence of economic development and

an improvement in State capacity. Paying equal
attention to the issues of security, democracy and
development is key to nurturing a strong pluralistic
society.

Fourthly, national ownership is fundamental, but
it will emerge only when the post-conflict priorities of
a Government are duly respected and become the
blueprint for the relevant national and international
actors. The Peacebuilding Commission needs to
maintain this as its core principle and practice it.

Fifth, in the second year, we expect that the
Organizational Committee will expeditiously agree on
the as-yet unsettled issues and enhance focus on the
substantive factors. It is our View that the
Organizational Committee should be the focal point of
all the Commission's activities. For its part, the
Commission should avoid the misconception that there
is a different Commission for each country case and for
which there are different country-specific
configurations.

Sixth, the Council should continue to work with
the Peacebuilding Commission in developing a well-
functioning peacebuilding architecture of which the
Commission is at the core, complementary with the
role and mandates of the Council. Indonesia is aware
that some members of the Council have emphasized
previously that the Peacebuilding Commission is by
nature simply an advisory body of the Council. While
recognizing the limited nature of the Commission, the
Council should give it more space to innovatively
develop its international standing and receive needed
international media and public attention. Moreover, the
Council should encourage the Commission to reach out
and explore engagement with such non-traditional
partners as the corporate sector.

As its last point, my delegation would like to
touch upon the recent discussions in the Council on
how to put new countries on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission. That implies that the
Council should start considering a sort of internal
referral mechanism. With a View to having a flexible
mechanism, there are some approaches that could be
carefully considered when the Council draws up its
internal mechanism.

The whole process should start from the
candidate country's demonstrated willingness to be
included on the Peacebuilding Commission's agenda.
The Council can invite the candidate country to have a
prior consultation with the Council.

We recognize that it is a discretionary power of
the Council to make final referral; yet, in order to have
a smooth process of referral, the Chairman of the
Commission should be kept informed and consulted by
the Council. From that preliminary exchange with the
Commission, the Council will then be in a better
position to give its opinion on the capacity and ability
of the Commission to handle a new country. The
Council should be convinced that, by referring the
country to the Commission's agenda, the Commission
could give added value in peace consolidation. The
Council may indicate specific challenges posed by the
candidate country. Those specific challenges should be
drawn up in close coordination with the country
concerned and be based on the principle of national
ownership.

In closing, allow me to reiterate Indonesia's
commitment to the cause of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We will continue to engage with others
towards our aim of making the outcomes of the
Commission tangible.

