At the outset, I commend this important initiative taken by His Excellency Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa, President of the Republic of South Africa and current Chairperson of the African Union Commission. His leadership of the Security Council during the month of December will, I have no doubt, meet the expectations of Africa and the international community. I also congratulate Germany, Belgium, the Dominican Republic and Indonesia as their successful terms on the Security Council come to an end. This meeting is of major interest for the Niger, and undoubtedly for the other countries of the African continent and their partners as well, as it focuses on the current state of cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, in particular the African Union (AU). We are certain that our high- level discussion and exchange today will be highly valuable in terms of effectively addressing the challenges facing our continent. As everyone knows, Africa has been a priority item on the Security Council's agenda in recent years. Current statistics indicate that more than 50 per cent of the Council's agenda and 70 per cent of the peace and security situations addressed under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations concern African countries. That is a sad reality that calls for special attention and commensurate cooperation, as well as decisive and coordinated action, on the part of the African Union and the United Nations in the fulfilment of their mandates with regard to conflict prevention and resolution, peacebuilding and the development and capacity-building of African countries in all areas. We therefore welcomed the outcome of the fourteenth annual joint consultative meeting between the members of the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council, presided over by the Niger in September 2020, as well as the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/860) on cooperation between the two bodies through the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. Those reference instruments have led to a better understanding of the root causes of conflicts by highlighting the role and importance of the regional actors that already possess the mechanisms necessary for dealing with crisis situations. In that regard, I would like to commend Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union Commission, for his efforts to establish a peace and security architecture specific to the African Union in accordance with the Lusaka Master Roadmap 2016. I also want to praise the very positive role played by the Economic Community of West African States in the area of peace and mediation in the region. All this is to say that the conditions for applying the principle of subsidiarity in carrying out and coordinating peace and security operations on African soil exist, and only in this way will we meaningfully give form to the concept of African solutions to African problems, which we support. While the negotiation of various agreements under the auspices of United Nations, the African Union and other partner organizations and institutions is laudable, it is clear that such cooperation has not always been effective. As a case in point, the Libyan crisis has exposed the differences in the roles and responsibilities of the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council. The opposition of the Niger and other neighbours of our brother country Libya to any intervention there has unfortunately gone unheard. Today Libya is facing chaos, which has led to the spread of arms and mercenaries and to instability in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin, as well as an unprecedented humanitarian and migration crisis. The coronavirus disease pandemic has reminded us of the urgent importance of reforming the current system of global governance by enabling it to better mirror the fundamental principles of the Charter. The Niger therefore believes that the African continent must assume its rightful place within the organs of the United Nations, particularly the Security Council, in accordance with the Ezulwini Consensus and unquestionably in line with the aspirations of other regions of the world. The cooperation between our two organizations should also take into account all factors that might constitute a threat to international peace and security or undermine our efforts in achieving them. It is therefore essential to ensure operational collaboration between regional organizations and the United Nations, which would lead to the establishment of development agencies focused on the primary goal of tackling the root causes of security problems in crisis-affected areas. Our responsibility is not just to resolve such security issues but above all to prevent them too. The framework of our joint action should enable us to take into account new threats to peace and security such as pandemics, terrorism, the impact of climate change, cybercrime and organized crime, including through a new concept of United Nations operations. The same architecture should also enable the United Nations and the African Union to accord special attention to issues concerning young people, women and children. To that end, I would like to propose four suggestions. The first concerns a new concept of peacekeeping and _ peace enforcement operations. The second is the establishment of a mechanism to ensure the sustainable financing of peacekeeping operations led by the African Union or subregional organizations, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity. The third concerns the strengthening of cooperation between the two Councils by emphasizing the coordination of their agendas and goals through an increase in the number of regularly scheduled meetings. The fourth, as I mentioned earlier, is to ensure that African countries play a central role in the discussions and decision-making process of the Security Council, as African issues constitute the majority of the subjects it deals with.
