Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join other colleagues in thanking Ambassador Nestor
Osorio for presenting his first 90-day report on the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We appreciate the work of the Committee and
will participate actively in it under Ambassador
Osorio's chairmanship.

Iran is part of what has been defined as India's
proximate neighbourhood. We share a historical and
civilizational relationship. The two countries maintain
vibrant and lively people-to-people and cultural
relations. Iran is a major source of our energy and
hydrocarbon supplies, and is thus important for our
energy security. We are also discussing with Iran
various projects in the energy sector.

Iran, located at the crossroads of the Indian
subcontinent, Central Asia and the Middle East, is an
important country and has a role to play in regional
issues. We have cooperated with Iran on issues such as
the restoration of peace and stability in Afghanistan
and on development projects such as the construction
of the Zaranj-Delaram road in western Afghanistan.
Other areas of cooperation include trade and transit to
Afghanistan, Central Asia and beyond within the
framework of the International North-South Transport
Corridor, as well as the fight against common threats
we face from cross-border terrorism and extremism.

As a country that abides by all of its obligations
under international treaties and has strong
non-proliferation credentials, India has taken a
consistent stand on the Iran nuclear issue. We support
the right of all States, including Iran, to the peaceful
use of nuclear energy. However, the exercise of that
right should be consistent with States' international
obligations.

As mentioned in the joint communique issued at
the tenth Russia-India-China Ministerial Meeting, held
in Wuhan in November 2010, Iran is entitled to the
right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and
should, at the same time, restore international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear activities. To that end, we support the
intensification of efforts to address the Iranian nuclear
issue by peaceful means through dialogue and
negotiation. We also believe that the International
Atomic Energy Agency has a central role to play in the

resolution of technical issues concerning Iran's nuclear
programme.

We call on all sides to fully implement the
resolutions the Council has adopted. There should be
no violation of the measures mandated in those
resolutions. At the same time, every effort should be
made to ensure that the legitimate trade and economic
activities of Iran, Iranian entities and other countries
should not suffer. As a member of the 1737 Committee,
we will contribute to the Committee's work in that
direction.

