The President: I shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of Indonesia. First, I too would like to start by expressing our condolences to the Governments and the people of the Niger and France on the demise of humanitarian aid workers near Niamey, and our condemnation of that cowardly attack. Next, I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Sori-Coulibaly; the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly; and Ambassador De Almeida Filho, for their briefings. I would also like to reiterate our appreciation of and support to the work of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) in pursuing dialogue among all stakeholders, as well as to the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in facilitating the resolution of the political impasse that crippled the functioning of State institutions. Guinea-Bissau is facing political, security, and socioeconomic challenges that are further exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Against this backdrop, I would like to highlight three points. First, concerted efforts by all national stakeholders are crucial. Although the new Government has been formed and its programme approved, we feel it is important for all parties to continue dialogue to resolve outstanding issues and pursue national reconciliation. We urge all parties to put aside their differences and work together to further implement the reform agenda, as stipulated in the Conakry Agreement, the ECOWAS road map and the Stability Pact. Of particular importance is expediting the completion of urgent reforms, including the reform of the Constitution, the electoral law and the law on political parties, pursuant to resolution 2512 (2020). The second point is the importance of overcoming the immediate challenges. We are heartened to hear that security situation in Guinea-Bissau remains stable. Yet we are also concerned that the recent challenges, including those posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, seem to create an enabling environment for drug trafficking and organized crime. In this regard, we commend the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and UNIOGBIS in assisting national authorities on law-enforcement and judicial processes. We feel it is important to continue building national capacity and working to prevent crime networks from taking advantage of the current situation. We hope that Guinea-Bissau can also redouble its efforts in ensuring the functioning of State institutions, in protecting human rights and the rule of law and in improving the lives of the population. It is therefore crucial for regional and international partners to remain mobilized in supporting the country, particularly in the light of the planned drawdown of UNIOGBIS at the end of this year. Thirdly, on the drawdown of UNIOGBIS, as Guinea-Bissau is undergoing critical reforms, we need to ensure the seamless transition of UNIOGBIS tasks to the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the United Nations country team. We welcome the peacebuilding priorities outlined by the mission and feel that continuous engagement and support from the international community is crucial for subsequent peacebuilding and reform efforts. We also commend the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for the mobilization of funds to support the United Nations country team. Lastly, we would like to commend the ongoing efforts by, and sustained support from, regional and international actors, including ECOWAS, the group of five international partners represented in Guinea- Bissau and the PBC, to restore peace and stability and ensure sustainable development in the country. We wish all the best for Guinea-Bissau. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of Guinea-Bissau.
