Mr. De Mistura: The Secretary-General has
spoken powerfully about this terrible conflict and the
need to open the road to political talks that focus on
the fundamental issues for a viable transition. He has
requested that I be ready to present to the parties a draft
framework of proposals as a starting point - nothing
more than a starting point, but an important starting
point - for negotiations for a Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led political transition. And we are ready. Let
me offer now a few observations in this regard. We owe
them to the Security Council.
First, we believe that the United Nations has done
its due dilligence in order to understand the needs and
fears of all sides, even if their own starting positions
continue to be distant. Over the past two years, the
United Nations has engaged extensively with Syrian
stakeholders, whether in Geneva consultations or
in three rounds of formal proximity talks, technical
discussions, shuttle diplomacy in the region and
through the International Syria Support Group (ISSG)
and the 18 Special Envoys from all over the world,
civil society - and, frankly also to a large extent,
with the Syrian Women's Advisory Board - with
representatives of Syria. I have taken into account all
the input from these engagements.

Secondly, despite the horrors on the ground, we have
been pleasantly surprised by the fact that some points
of convergence have emerged from the intra-Syrian
talks about what essential governing princples should
frame the transition and any end-state consititutional
arrangement for Syria in the future. These commalities
demonstrate how potentially close the visions of each
side are, at least on the following point: an open, civil,
all-inclusive, non-sectarian, pluralistic, democratic,
unified State based upon the rule of law, in which all
components of Syrian society are recognized, respected
and whose fundamental freedoms are enshrined and
protected in a new constitution. These are, at least
verbally, what they seem to be agreeing upon.

Thirdly, in the third round of our intra- Syrian talks,
both sides have accepted that the agenda was indeed a
political transition. The Secretary-General referred to
the mediator's summary a few minutes ago, which in
fact has captured further commonalities on a transition
and set out the issues that need to be addressed to ensure
a Viable transition. That summary was subsequently
endorsed by the ISSG - and I am glad that we have
the ISSG; we had been waiting for it for more than a
year, and it does provide a lot of support to the Special
Envoy, as we were alone before it - as the basis for
the next round of intra-Syrian negotiations. The ISSG
urged the parties "to reach agreement on a framework
for a genuine political transition". It was within this
context that on 26 July the ISSG requested that we
develop some proposals. As soon as the talks resume, it
is my intention to put proposals to all sides as a starting
point for negotiations and as a means by which to move
to direct talks, and no longer just proximity talks. The
Secretary-General has indeed been encouraging me
and requesting that I present a draft framework to move
the sides towards a transition through negotiation.
Fourthly, any proposal that I may present would
proceed upon the basis that the conflict in Syria cannot
be resolved militarly - we say that all the time, but
sometimes fail to practice it - but rather only through
a a Syrian-owned and -led political negotiating process
between the Government and the opposition, in which
a framework is agreed based upon mutual consent,
capable of effecting a genuine and irreversible political
transition leading to a new constitution, and free and
fair elections under international supervision, while
preserving continuity - we are not looking for what
happened in Libya, for instance - and reformed State
institutions, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

Fifthly, in our View, any viable transition must
inevitably do the follwing. First, it must address how
power is to be exercised in practice by the transitional
Government, including in relation to the presidency's
executive powers and control over Government and
security institutions. This is something that the Syrians
have to decide, but they need to address it among them.
Secondly, the transition must involve power-sharing
and a phased and genuinine power-devolution exercise
during transition in an agreed manner in accordance
with good governance, principles and subject to
domestic and international guarantees. Thirdly, it
must require the creation of collective transitional
bodies to oversee a national ceasefire, humanitarian
relief, the creation of a calm, neutral environment
to enable free, peaceful political activity to occur in
relation to the adoption of a new constitution, and the
holding of free and fair elections under international
supervision. I know it seems like a dream, but that is
the plan, and if we do not do that it will not be possible
to actually get there. Fourthly, it must be accompanied
by sustained, international efforts to help reconstruct
Syria, discussions are already taking place about how
to prepare for reconstructing Syria as soon as genuinine
and verifiable transition gets under way.

Therefore, ideally, the Government would need
to understand that the transition involves a genuinine
devolution of power and not just the absorption of the
opposition into the current Government. While the
opposition should also understand that the transition is
not solely about one person or one presidency, but it is
actually related to a transfer not only of power from one
political group to another, but actually it is about how
power should be exercised differently as Syria moves
forward through Syrian negotiations.

Above all, the sides need to recognize that any
transition needs to be all-inclusive and agreed among
them - as the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex) clearly states - through mutual consent. I take
note of the inputs that we have received from both sides,
the Government and the opposition, in this process.
I also take note of the High Negotiation Committee's
description of its own recent vision statement as a
living document, and therefore a document that can
evolve. This is the kind of approach that negotiations
need to have in order to be developed.

I appeal, therefore, to the Security Council to
reflect carefully on what the Secretary-General has just
said. It was an important statement. It was a statement
that he made by choosing his words carefully, because
he feels strongly about this terrible conflict, which has
been ongoing for five years of his tenure. I have added a
few points and I hope that all Syrian parties understand
that ifpeace is to be made and they are to save their own
country, there is a need for a transition that will require
a genuine readiness to negotiate and compromise. They
should also be present at the next talks. This is an
opportunity we would like to offer them.

Let me finish by saying, because obviously we
cannot ignore the elephant in the room, that all of this
will and can be heavily affected if we build on the
agreement reached on 9 September between the two
co-Chairs of the ISSG, which gave us a lot of hope,
and on the basis of which we have been working even
harder to renew talks.

