We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing and Ms. Qaddour for sharing the information with us. My delegation is deeply concerned with the wave of suffering that is currently hitting the Syrian people. Economic collapse, food insecurity, increased unemployment, with businesses shutting down and the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), are worsening the humanitarian situation in Syria, not to mention the security situation in various areas of the country. We therefore once again urge all parties in Syria to uphold their obligations to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure and to ensure a period of sustained calm during this critical time, particularly by respecting the call for a ceasefire throughout the country. During this challenging time, military action will not help those families who are struggling for food. And during this challenging time, provocative rhetoric will certainly not help internally displaced persons and other vulnerable groups in need of water and medicine. Allow me to highlight the following points. First, there is an urgent need to suppress the spread of COVID-19 in Syria, while increasing the necessary health capacity. It is indeed troubling to hear reports of increasing cases and that the level of testing capacity remains low. More cases have been identified in north-western and north-eastern Syria. Displaced people, the elderly and other vulnerable groups living in crowded camps face higher risk. We appreciate the precautionary measures taken to contain transmission of the virus, while these can also complicate and increase humanitarian need due to restrictions on movement, commercial activities and education services. This is a very delicate situation, indeed - a situation that needs continued support from the international community. We must also not forget the high demand for water in north-eastern Syria, where the Allouk water station has been disrupted many times, affecting the water supply of thousands of people living in the area, including Al-Hol camp. Again, timely, secure and unimpeded humanitarian access must be guaranteed by all relevant parties in this regard. Secondly, there is a need to maximize the Bab Al-Hawa crossing. We note that the closure of the Bab Al-Salam border crossing might result in a more costly and less effective humanitarian response. My delegation therefore encourages strong coordination among all relevant parties to guarantee the uninterrupted delivery of increased humanitarian aid through Bab Al-Hawa. Thirdly, I turn to the importance of ensuring the safety of humanitarian workers. With the complex situation on the ground, we sometimes overlook the high risk faced by these courageous men and women. Despite the difficult circumstances, the United Nations and its humanitarian partners continue to provide life-saving assistance to millions of people in need in Syria. We thank them and salute their dedication and commitment. We urge all parties in Syria to safeguard aid workers, as required under international law. Indonesia believes that the Security Council, despite contrasting positions within it on this issue, has one common objective, and that is to save lives. We must always base our actions and decisions on that key objective - a genuine and pure humanitarian goal. Before I end my statement, let me, on behalf of my delegation, extend our utmost appreciation to Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve for his constructive and significant contribution to our collective work in the Council. We wish him all the very best in his next assignment in Geneva. Lastly, let me also congratulate you, Sir, and your team on having successfully presided over the Council during the month of July. We hope we will have a smooth sailing in August, certainly with your constructive and cooperative support.
