Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, I would
like to convey my congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. You have already done so very ably in the past
and I am sure you will do so this month as well,
although I wish I were congratulating you under
different circumstances.

Sadly, the Security Council has once again been
galvanized into action not because of the murder of
children, but because of the defence against those
murders. Once again, consequently, there is an attempt
to put the victims of terror in the dock, rather than the
murderers themselves. That recurring phenomenon is
disturbing and alarming.

On 29 September 2004, the eve of the Succoth
holiday - or the Feast of Tabernacles - which we are
still celebrating as we sit here today, two Israeli
children, Dorit Aniso, age two, and Yuval Abedeh, age
four, were murdered by Qassam rockets fired at their
home in the southern Israeli town of Sderot. The
Palestinian terror organization Hamas proudly claimed
responsibility for that attack.

The murder of those two young children is only
the latest in a continuing onslaught of such terrorist
incidents, in which the innocent civilians of Sderot and
neighbouring communities have been targeted without
respite. Those rocket attacks, like other acts of
Palestinian terror, are employed with the specific intent
of killing and injuring as many civilians as possible.

In similar incidents on 28 June, four rockets in
Sderot killed two Israeli civilians - Afik Zahavi, aged
four, and Mordechai Yosopov, aged 49 - landing near
a nursery school and damaging a nearby coffee shop.
Indeed, as part of a broader Palestinian terrorist
campaign that has brought untold suffering, more than
460 of these Qassam rockets have been
indiscriminately fired at Israel's civilian population,
causing numerous deaths, many injuries and extensive
destruction of property. Qassam rocket-fire from Gaza
continues, even as we speak, to be deliberately directed
against the civilian community, targeting and
terrorizing innocent civilians as they lie in their beds,
sit in their living rooms or take their children to school.

Terrorist groups, operating with complete
freedom and immunity from Palestinian Authority
territory, have every intention of escalating and
intensifying this campaign with ever-more
sophisticated weapons. Palestinian terror organizations
have been producing Qassam rockets in metal
workshops dispersed throughout the Gaza Strip. Hamas
has developed these new rockets using knowledge
gathered over the years by international terror groups.
The ease with which these rockets are hidden,
transported and launched and the ability to mass-
produce them have made them a weapon of choice.
Hamas is currently seeking to develop the Qassam 4
rocket to enhance the range of the missile and increase
the impact of its explosion. As a recent statement
issued by Hamas operatives declared,

"We are sending a clear message to the Zionists
that Qassam rockets will continue and will reach
their targets, God willing. And tell those
occupying Ashkelon that their turn is coming
soon."
This is an insufferable situation that no country,
including those whose representatives sit around this
table, could or would tolerate.

Despite the fact that the Palestinian Authority has
thousands of police and security personnel in the
northern Gaza Strip, they are doing nothing, and have
done nothing for years, to halt the firing of Qassam
rockets on Israeli communities. The fact remains that
the Palestinian leadership still refuses to fulfil any of
its obligations to confront and dismantle the
Palestinian terrorist network, in an ongoing and
egregious violation of basic international norms, signed
commitments and the explicit terms of the road map's
very first clauses. Instead, the Palestinian leadership
continues to offer encouragement and support for those
actions, glorifying murder as martyrdom and pursuing
a campaign of incitement to hatred and violence. The
Palestinian leadership continues to choose an alliance
of violence with the terrorists over a partnership for
peace with Israel, based on mutual obligations and
mutual compromise, and the Israeli and Palestinian
peoples pay the price of that cruel choice every single
day.

Try as some might to confuse consequence and
cause, most Palestinian representatives and most
Palestinian people know that, if not for the terrorism,
there would be no Israeli defensive action and there
would have been a two-State solution long ago. It is
that terrorism and the Palestinian leadership's
complicity in it that are the greatest single obstacle to
peace and the enemy of both the Israeli and the
Palestinian peoples. It is that terrorism, motivated by
opposition not to Israel's conduct but to its existence,
that fuels hatred and disempowers those yearning for
peace.

As Council members are aware, Israel intends to
disengage from the Gaza Strip as part of Prime
Minister Sharon's disengagement initiative, which has
been welcomed by the Quartet, most recently in its 22
September statement, and by the international
community as a whole as an important opportunity to
restart the road map process. The disengagement plan
promises greater stability and security for Israelis and
Palestinians alike and a platform from which mutual
implementation of the road map can proceed.

Against that background, the firing of Qassam
rockets and the continuation of Palestinian terrorism
constitute an attempt both to thwart the disengagement
plan and to perpetrate terrorism and violence as a
strategic tool. They represent yet another case in which
the Palestinian leadership chooses terror and the
suffering of its own people over exhausting the
avenues for peace. This Council should not allow that
strategy to be rewarded by addressing the response to
terrorism instead of terrorism itself. It must be rejected,
not appeased.

These continued rocket attacks from Gaza
constitute a grave violation of international
humanitarian law not only because they target innocent
Israeli civilians; Palestinian residents' lives are also put
at risk and held hostage to the continued and
despicable tactic adopted by Palestinian terrorists, by
which innocent Palestinians are used as human shields
and civilian areas are used as staging grounds for
terrorist atrocities. Virtually all terrorist fire directed
from Gaza against Israeli targets emanates from crowds
or residential buildings, and hundreds of explosive
charges and mines are planted within the civilian
infrastructure. In one recent grave incident on 22 July
2004, a 15-year old Palestinian boy, Hassan Jamil Al-
Zanin, was killed in cold blood by Fatah/Al Aqsa
Martyrs Brigade terrorists when he tried to stop them
from launching a Qassam rocket attack near his family
home. In yet another example of fabrication and
misrepresentation by Palestinian spokesmen, the death
of Hassan Al-Zanin was presented in a letter to the
Secretary-General as though he were killed by Israeli
forces.

These kinds of blatantly false allegations should
come now as no surprise. We have heard many of them
again today. They are part of the long pattern of
Palestinian representations that refer to murderers as
martyrs, armed terrorists as though they were innocent
civilians, and the innocent victims of Palestinian
terrorism of both sides as though they were non-
existent. It is part of a mantra constantly repeated
before this Council that is no more true for its
repetition, that ignores both Palestinian responsibilities
and Israeli rights, and that fails to recognize the
excruciating difficulties faced by Israeli forces in
trying to protect their citizens and minimize harm to
Palestinian lives when the terrorists they confront show
as little concern for Palestinian lives as they do for
Israeli ones. And yet, while this disingenuous and
disrespectful presentation comes as no surprise, it
should remind Council members of the importance of
distinguishing just claims from merely noisy ones.

In the face of this complex and gruesome reality,
Israel is compelled to act in accordance with its
recognized right and duty of self-defence in an effort to
halt the firing of these rockets and the murder of its
citizens. The Israeli Defence Forces are taking action
against those responsible for launching Qassam
missiles from amongst the Gaza civilian population.
While the present operation is broader than its
predecessors, it is relatively limited, with the aim of
refraining from deeply penetrating densely populated
areas. In that context, and faced with a brutal
Palestinian strategy that seeks to maximize civilian
casualties on both sides, Israeli forces are making
every effort to avoid harming non-combatants and their
property, in accordance with their legal obligation. But
there should be no doubt that the primary responsibility
for tragic civilian casualties lies with those terrorists
who have so heartlessly abused the protected status of
Palestinian civilians and put them deliberately in
harm's way, in direct violation of the most basic
humanitarian norms.
There has also been disturbing information that,
once again in recent days, Palestinian terrorists are
attempting to cynically exploit not only civilian areas
but also United Nations vehicles, ambulances, facilities
and personnel. This would hardly be the first time that
Palestinian terrorists have abused the immunity of
United Nations facilities and ambulances in order to
launch attacks, move weapons or transfer operatives,
thereby endangering United Nations personnel and
operations. That worrying pattern of activity is a matter
of grave concern that threatens to seriously undermine
the integrity of United Nations operations. It requires
utmost vigilance from all sides, including United
Nations officials on the ground, to do everything in
their power to prevent such misuse and to investigate
any alleged misconduct.

In that regard, today's reported admission to a
Canadian television station by Mr. Peter Hansen,
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), that members of the Hamas terrorist
organization are "on the UNRWA payroll", and are thus
being funded by United Nations Member States, is
especially disturbing and alarming. As Council
members are aware, the Hamas organization is
officially recognized by numerous States as a terrorist
organization without any artificial distinctions between
its various wings. Its countless brutal acts of terrorism
against innocent civilians, for which it has itself
proudly taken credit, have been condemned repeatedly
by United Nations Member States and by the
Secretary-General, as well as in the Council itself. It
should be recalled that, by the admission of Hamas's
own leaders, members of the political wing are
involved in planning, directing and providing the
support, infrastructure and financing for the acts of
terror for which that organization is responsible. In
recent statements, for example, Hamas's so-called
political wing has declared that the political apparatus
is sovereign over the military apparatus and that the
political leadership has "freed the hand of the Ezzedine
Al-Qassam Brigades to do whatever they want against
the brothers of monkeys and pigs".

It is precisely that support infrastructure that the
road map requires be dismantled, as the Quartet, of
which the United Nations is a member, reiterated just
on 22 September, when it called for the dismantlement
of terrorist capabilities and infrastructure. The very
idea that individuals with clear links to the Hamas
terrorist network may be on the UNRWA payroll is
totally unacceptable and should be properly
investigated.

Let me be very clear: Israel reaffirms its support
for the humanitarian work being carried out by
UNRWA and other international organizations on the
ground in very difficult conditions. Israel continues to
facilitate, to the best of its ability, the carrying out of
the mandate of those organizations, despite the
obstacles faced as a result of the continuing terrorism
and violence carried out by the Palestinian side. In the
lead-up to this operation, preparations were made in
order to respond effectively to the humanitarian needs
of the Palestinian civilian populations, including the
opportunity of providing liaison officers and the
opening of a special route to provide easy access to the
vehicles of international humanitarian organizations.
Palestinian liaison officials, representatives of the local
Palestinian council and representatives of international
organizations were notified as to the opening of that
special humanitarian route.

In addition, representatives of district
coordination offices are stationed at various points
along the route in order to provide all necessary
humanitarian assistance. Thus far, over 35 trips along
the route have been coordinated, including convoys of
medical supplies, maintenance crews, vehicles
belonging to international organizations and local
ambulances. At the same time, it is vitally important
that humanitarian activities and cooperation not be
compromised and abused by the illegal actions of
Palestinian terrorist groups.

The costs of the Palestinian leadership's morally
bankrupt strategy of terrorism are paid in the lives of
innocents, the stagnation in the peace process and the
suffering of both Israelis and Palestinians. By
entertaining initiatives that effectively reward that
strategy, the Council would only embolden extremists
and undermine the letter and spirit of the road map. As
Foreign Minister Shalom stated in the General
Assembly debate just a few days ago,

"The Palestinians are not exempt from the
imperatives of the global war on terror. On the
contrary, it is in their clear interest to join it. To
stand up against Hamas and Islamic Jihad is to
stand up for Palestinian rights, not against them."
(A/59/PV.7)

Sadly, the current Palestinian leadership has
shown that it is as incapable of being a partner in peace
as it is of offering its people reform and democratic
rule. They have preferred rhetoric at the United
Nations to responsibility at home. But that is not a path
the Council should condone by entertaining additional
one-sided draft resolutions. We would urge the Council
to stand by the side of the Israeli and Palestinian
peoples, and remind the Palestinian side, as the Quartet
recently did, that the path to peace and security lies in
the end of terrorism and in reform. It lies in taking
responsibility and not in shifting blame. It lies in
Ramallah and Gaza, not in New York.

All this week, Israeli families will celebrate the
holiday of Succoth, the feast of tabernacles. On this
occasion, let me take this opportunity to end by saying,
may God spread his tabernacle of peace over all of us
and over the people of Israel.

