Mr. Ould Hadrami (Mauritania) (spoke in French): First of all, Mr. President, I would like to
express my sincere thanks to you for giving me this
opportunity to provide the Council with a clarification
of the situation resulting from the corrective change
that took place on 6 August 2008 in Mauritania. I
would like also to thank the Security Council for its
interest in stability and democracy in Mauritania.

The Security Council, which is entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security in line
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
is an important organ to which Mauritania has always
expressed its commitment. We also reiterate our
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations and
our respect for all the agreements, treaties and
conventions concluded on behalf of the Mauritanian
State.

Today's consideration of the situation in
Mauritania requires us to update the Council on that
2

situation and the conditions under which the 6 August
2008 changes took place. I must recall that, in August
2005, the Military Council for Justice and Democracy
(CMJD) put an end to 21 years of a despotic regime
that had brought the country to the brink of explosion.
In less than two years, the CMJD had brought about a
democratic transition that was welcomed by the
international community, led by the United Nations.

The culmination of this transition came in 2007
with the universally accepted and transparent election
of the first democratically-elected President of the
Republic in the history of the country, who garnered
almost 53 per cent of the vote. The new President was
fully enabled to carry out the electoral programme for
which he was elected and for which the people had
great expectations, specifically in terms of economic
and social development in the fight against poverty and
insecurity.

A presidential election alone is not a sufficient
criterion, however, to measure the degree of success of
democracy in a country. Among other things, it is
particularly the way in which those in power carry out
their missions and how the executive power ensures the
performance of the institutions of the Republic and
how it responds to the expectations of the population
regarding security and economic and social well-being.

Instead of attempting to realize the aspirations of
the Mauritanian people, the former President of the
Republic found himself held hostage by a political
entourage, which diverted him from his most important
mission. Dangerous abuses and a series of terrorist
acts, previously unknown to Mauritania, marked the
presidency of the former President of the Republic.

It was during this time that four French tourists
were murdered in cold blood near Aleg on
24 December 2007 by operatives affiliated with
Al-Qaida, who then fled abroad but were stopped with
the cooperation of friendly countries. They were
imprisoned in Mauritania and then escaped, but were
subsequently recaptured. The ambush and murder of
three Mauritanian army officers by operatives of
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb or ex-GSPC occurred
a few days later in the north of Mauritania. On
lFebruary 2008, the Israeli embassy in Nouakchott
was the object of an attack with automatic weapons,
leaving many injured among passers-by and patrons of
a nearby restaurant.
08-46536

This rampant insecurity has injected fear and
distress into the hearts of the Mauritanian people, who
are known for their love of peace and tranquillity and
their rejection of all forms of violence, and for whom
this situation is completely unfamiliar. The economic
and social situation of the country was not very good,
much like the security situation. The prices of basic
foodstuffs kept mounting from day to day, making
these provisions inaccessible to the most vulnerable
sectors of the population. Corruption, underhanded
dealings, vote-buying, nepotism and the diversion of
public funds were an everyday occurrence.

Instead of managing the country's real problems,
the former President of the Republic entered into an
outright dispute with the majority party in the
Mauritanian Parliament, which had only asked him to
allow it to carry out its duties without constraint, as
recognized by the Mauritanian Constitution. For
example, the majority of the Parliament had requested
the convening of an extraordinary session in order to
carry out an investigation into certain public
institutions. The former President of the Republic
categorically refused this request, thus calling to into
question the principle of the separation of powers, one
of the foundations of democracy.

Mauritania, a moderate Islamic country, has never
allowed the creation of Islamic political parties, as
Islam is the religion of all Mauritanians and no group
has the right to take over the religion of an entire
people. It was under the former President's weak
exercise of power that Islamic political parties were
authorized for the first time in the country. To top off
this series of mishaps, failures and blockages, the
former President of the Republic, without informing
those concerned in advance, recklessly tired all the
country's military leaders by means of a communique
read out over the radio during the early morning of
6 August 2008. Taking into account the importance of
the military in our country, the way the military
command was eliminated constituted a useless
provocation. This action could have led to incalculable
consequences, which those who do not well understand
Mauritania and its tribal, ethnic and regional
complexity, cannot possibly comprehend.

The situation which I have just briefly described
led to the corrective change which occurred on
6August 2008. This change was supported by two-
thirds of the parliament, by the majority of the mayors
in Mauritania and by broad populist movements
08-46536
throughout the country. It has also been denounced,
however, by a minority of Mauritanians, each of whom
have every right to voice their opinions, since
fundamental liberties are guaranteed by the High State
Council.

The parliament of Mauritania has not been
dissolved, the institutions of the Republic are
functioning as normal, we have a free press, legal
political parties continue their activities without
restriction and human rights are protected. In sum, the
High State Council has quickly proven that it is more
than capable of preserving and strengthening
democracy in Mauritania.

The situation in Mauritania is stable and calm,
life is normal and the people occupy themselves with
their daily affairs. The administration is functioning
normally and there are no political prisoners. Only the
former President of the Republic, for reasons of
security, is under house arrest. Nevertheless, he has
access to press and television reports, his doctor does
not leave his side and his dietary needs are dutifully
satisfied - he has fresh camel's milk delivered daily to
his residence.

The corrective change of 6 August cannot be
qualified as a coup d'etat because all the institutions of
the Republic are functioning normally and fundamental
liberties have been preserved. Rather, the present state
of affairs is the consequence of factors which had put
the country's peace and social cohesion in danger. I can
therefore assure members of the Council that
Mauritania has not turned its back on democracy.

On the contrary, the hope, born out of the
democratic transition prior to April 2007, is still alive.
Mauritania reconfirms its commitment to democratic
values and remains convinced that democracy is the
key to development. It is important, however, to
understand that each country is different and will reach
the true realization of democracy at its own pace. It is
useless to impose a schedule which does not take these
differences into account. Such an approach is counter-
productive and will not be understood by peoples who
have their own specific methods. This current stage is
simply a phase in the development of the country's
democratic foundations. The people of Mauritania have
already begun to enjoy the benefits of democracy and
will no longer accept restrictions upon their free will.
This is why, being fully cognizant of the interests of
3
the country, the people of Mauritania fully supported
the corrective change of 6 August 2008.

Taking this into account, we believe that the
Security Council should fully understand the situation
and its realities in Mauritania. It should carry out an
objective evaluation, on the ground, of the conditions
in which the corrective change of 6 August took place,
taking the country out of an inertia which was leading
it inexorably to an uncertain future.

Indeed, a choice was made between the
continuation of a weak and unpopular regime and a
future of a country, faced with challenges of
underdevelopment, poverty and insecurity. The
President of High Council of the State, General
Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, did not hesitate for an
instant to make the choice. He has already named a
civilian Prime Minister who has, on behalf of the
Government, quickly arranged to hold free and
transparent elections, among other actions. The
international community should help Mauritania to
place its young democracy on a solid foundation in
order to combat underdevelopment. Do not side with a
power that has demonstrated its limitations and thereby
effectively open the door to a world of uncertainty.

We wish wholeheartedly for the Security Council
to contribute to the rectification of the situation in
Mauritania, taking into account the hopes of the
majority of its people and supporting the corrective
change of 6 August 2008. This would contribute to the
development of stability and prosperity of the country
and to international peace and security.

