Mr. Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): My delegation has had several opportunities to
state its Views on the situation in Liberia, a brother
country that for the past six years has been ravaged by a
devastating war.

During the Security Council's consideration of the
fifteenth progress report by the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
we listened with particular attention to the statement by
the Member of the Collective Presidency of the Liberian
National Transitional Government, His Excellency Alhaji
G.V. Kromah, and were encouraged to learn that all the
Liberian factions were determined to pursue the cause of
national reconciliation. According to Mr. Kromah,

"The principle of collective fate is today working so
heavily in favour of peace that I and my colleagues
in the Council of State consider the peace process
now to be irreversible". (S/PV.3624, p. 2)

Now, four months later, there has been no tangible
progress, and we are meeting once again in a public

 

meeting of the Security Council to continue the search for
a peaceful way to break the deadlock gripping the Liberian
factions and to put an end to the recent cease-fire Violations
that have caused many civilian deaths. Guinea Bissau is
firmly convinced that the Liberian people, like other
peoples, deserves to live in peace, and that it has the right
to raise its children in conditions of peace and security.

My delegation believes that the only solution of the
Liberian conflict is a political one. In that context, we
urgently appeal anew to all the Liberian parties to respect
the Abuja Agreement, and call on the faction chiefs to
cooperate with the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) and
UNOMIL to implement that agreement.

Despite the tragic events that are continuing in Liberia
and the resulting delays in the implementation of the Abuja
Agreement, we share the Secretary-General's view that the
United Nations and the international community must
remain dedicated to the Liberian peace process, and that
UNOMIL has a very important role to play in that regard.

In the same spirit, we call upon the international
community to give ECOMOG logistical, financial and other
assistance to enable it to fulfil its mandate, including for the
disarmament of the Liberian factions and for the adoption
of confidence-building and security measures. At the same
time we believe that all Liberian factions must strictly
respect the status of the personnel of ECOMOG, UNOMIL
and humanitarian organizations, so that they can continue
to deliver humanitarian assistance to all countries
concerned, and in particular to refugees and displaced
persons.
Guinea Bissau welcomed the 7 May meeting of
ECOWAS Foreign Ministers on the question of Liberia. We
note with satisfaction that the members of the Council of
State indicated that they would respect the
recommendations adopted at that meeting of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the West African subregion. Similarly,
we hope that the ECOWAS summit planned for the
beginning of August will take important decisions with the
participation of the leaders of all the Liberian factions.

We also hail the Government of the United States for
its initiative to set up an international contact group on
Liberia.

My delegation considers that in the final analysis it is
the Liberian people, and especially their leaders, who bear
the responsibility to achieve peace and national
reconciliation. Moreover, we call upon all States to abide
strictly by the embargo on all shipments of weapons and
materiel to Liberia established by resolution 788 (1992).

 

I wish to convey my thanks to the Secretary-General
for his efforts to lead the Liberians to national
reconciliation. I wish also to thank the personnel of
UN OMIL, ECOMOG and humanitarian organizations for
their tireless efforts to put an end to the suffering of the
Liberian people.

My delegation reiterates its support for the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the mandate of
UNOMIL be extended for a further period of three
months.

