Mr. Petrie: The report before the Security
Council (S/2010/608) provides an account of the main
advances over the past year and the challenges that lie
2
ahead for the people and the Government of Burundi. It
also outlines the proposals of the Secretarnyeneral on
the mandate and structure of the post-United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB) presence.

Political activity during the period under review
was essentially dominated by the preparation and
holding of general elections and related developments.
Based on a consensual calendar set forth by the
Independent National Electoral Commission (CENI),
the communal, presidential, legislative and collinaire
elections were held from 24 May to 7 September. The
United Nations has provided support throughout the
electoral process, including support to the delivery of
free identity cards and other forms of technical
assistance to CENI.

Meanwhile, the twin mechanisms established in
2009 to support the elections - the Consultative
Strategic Committee and the Technical Coordination
Committee - continued their activities with a
particular focus on encouraging dialogue among all
political actors. A basket fund managed by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) was
established to cover most of the electoral budget and
the Peacebuilding Commission helped to mobilize
international support.

Initially scheduled for 21 May, the communal
elections were held on 24 May, due partly to technical
challenges. With 64 per cent of the votes, the Conseil
national pour la defense de la democratic-Forces
nationales pour la defense de la democratic (CNDD- F DD)had a landslide victory in the communal elections,
followed by the Forces nationales de liberation (FNL),
which obtained 14 per cent; the Union pour le progres
national (UPRONA), 6 per cent; the Sahwanya-Front
pour la democratie au Burundi (Sahwanya-FRODEBU),
5 per cent; the Mouvement pour la solidarite et la
democratie (MSD), 4 per cent; and the Union pour la
paix et le developpement (UPD), 2 per cent.

National and international observers stated that
the elections were conducted in conformity with
international norms and that the irregularities observed
were not significant enough to call into question either
the results or the credibility of the polls.

A crucial issue was that 12 opposition political
parties, calling themselves the Alliance democratique
pour le changement-Ikibiri (ADC-Ikibiri), which
included FNL, Sahwanya-FRODEBU, CNDD, MSD
and UPD, rejected the results. They called for a re-run
10-68327
of the elections, boycotted the rest of the electoral
process, and instructed their members not to take up
their seats in communal councils.

During his official visit to Burundi on 9 June, the
Secretary-General encouraged all parties to pursue
dialogue and called upon the ADC-Ikibiri to channel its
claims through existing national legal mechanisms. In
addition, the Special Representative of the African
Union and I repeatedly engaged ADC-Ikibiri and its
constituent members to encourage their return to the
electoral process. With the exception of UPRONA,
which participated in the parliamentary elections, the
main opposition parties boycotted the subsequent polls.
President Nkurunziza was re-elected, and the CNDD-
FDD obtained a large majority in both houses of
Parliament.

(spoke in French)

A particular concern addressed in the report
concerns the threats and intimidation of members of
the political opposition. A number of opposition
leaders, included the most well known, have left the
country out of fear of persecution. Furthermore,
following persistent rumours concerning his imminent
arrest, FNL President Agathon Rwasa went into hiding
on 23 June. On 23 September, he addressed a letter to
the Secretary-General requesting his intervention in re-
establishing the legitimate leaders of the FNL.

In his report, the Secretary-General notes his
concern with respect to the prevalent climate of
impunity, in particular regarding acts of torture
identified during the reporting period. Human rights
violations continue. They are marked, inter alia, by
significant restrictions on the freedoms of expression
and association of political parties and civil society
organizations. We have also noted reported cases of
extrajudicial killings and/or politically motivated
assassinations.

Thus, State-building remains deficient in view of
the numerous challenges still to be met. However,
dialogue between the Government and the United
Nations concerning cases of human rights violations is
going extremely well. Recent developments indicate a
slight fall in the number of arrests and other politically
motivated human rights violations. Furthermore,
national consultations on the establishment of
transitional justice mechanisms have come to a close,
and the report thereon was recently published.
The Burundi National Security Council held its
third meeting on 19 November to assess the security
situation in the country. Among other things, the
Council reaffirmed the need to severely sanction the
members of the security forces found guilty of
violating the people's human rights. During the
reporting period, the security situation was relatively
stable but remains worrisome. Furthermore, rumours
regarding the development of an armed movement
have fuelled fears of a return to the violent past.

(spoke in English)

Despite the aforementioned concerns, it is
important to underscore that remarkable progress has
been made in Burundi. The elections have highlighted
the affirmation of an independent and vocal civil
society that continues to play an important role in the
country. Furthermore, the absence of large-scale
violence during and after the electoral period is
indicative of the population's political growth and of
the fact that violence is being progressively renounced
as a means of political expression. It has also
highlighted the extent to which the nature of the
violence has transformed and is no longer drawn along
ethnic lines.

The United Nations supported several
programmes and initiatives to strengthen the capacity
of women and encourage their active participation in
the electoral process. As a result, the 30 per cent
constitutional quota for women in the National
Assembly was attained and even exceeded by 2 per
cent. Moreover, 46 per cent of senators are women.
The number of women in Parliament and Government
has significantly increased since 2005.

With regard to good governance and economic
development, the Government has committed to
fighting corruption, which is a major challenge to the
country's economic development. In this regard, some
steps have already been taken, such as the dismissal of
corrupt senior officials of some public companies. The
Government also launched the drafting process for the
second poverty reduction strategy paper in the second
semester of 2010.

A most welcome development is the steady
progress recorded in the reintegration of ex-combatants.
In May, through the World Bank-supported Emergency
Demobilization and Transitional Reintegration Project,
the Government completed the payment of the final
instalment of reintegration assistance to 6,504
demobilized FNL and FNL dissident combatants in
their respective communities. Under the community
recovery programme funded by the United Nations
Development Programme, approximately 3,781 former
adults associated with FNL combatants are employed
in labour-intensive infrastructural projects.

In addition, following the release of the last
group of children associated with armed groups,
Burundi was removed from the list of countries
monitored under resolution 1612 (2005) in April.
Meanwhile, the community reintegration of 626
children formerly associated with armed groups ended
successfully on 31 July.

Another positive development is that Burundi
pursued its integration into the East African
Community (EAC). A full-fledged customs union,
which aims at eliminating internal tariffs among EAC
member States, was established on 1 January.
Moreover, on 29 April, Burundi ratified the EAC
common market protocol that provides for the free
movement of labour, goods, services, capital and the
right of establishment. Burundi assumed the presidency
of the EAC on 22 November and will lead discussions
on further integration over the next year.

(spoke in French)

At the request of the Government to redefine the
role of the United Nations in Burundi following the
2010 elections, the Secretariat has launched
discussions with the Burundian authorities. We have
also consulted with civil society, the diplomatic corps,
regional and subregional organizations, the Bretton
Woods institutions and the United Nations family in
Burundi.

Following these consultations, it was
recommended that BINUB be replaced by a lighter
structure in order to support democracy-building
efforts and to lay the foundations of sustainable
development. The Secretary-General therefore
recommends in his report before the Council today the
establishment of a United Nations office for a period of
one year under a renewable mandate.

In 1994, I was deployed to the Great Lakes region
for the first time, serving as a United Nations official
in Rwanda during the 1994 genocide. I then spent three
years in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as the
principal representative of the Secretariat to the rebel
groups active in that country. I witnessed suffering and
violence beyond compare, and I am therefore able to a
certain extent to gauge the progress that Burundi, its
people and leaders have made. This transformation is
fragile and reversible, however, and it is therefore
crucial at this critical stage that the democratically
elected authorities be supported and assisted in the
hope that they will continue to resolve their differences
through dialogue and cooperation. It is this model that
will enable Burundi to meet the political challenges it
faces and to embrace sustainable development.

As Council members know, this is my last
briefing in my capacity as Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General for Burundi. It has been an
honour to serve the Secretary-General and to enjoy the
confidence of the Security Council as I have carried
out my duties in Burundi. I should also like to take this
opportunity to convey my gratitude to the Government
of Burundi and all actors in that country for our
excellent working relationship and the trust that they
have placed in me. I cannot forget to thank our
international partners, and in particular the Special
Representative of the African Union, Ambassador
Bah - a great man of surpassing wisdom. They have
all assisted in the implementation of BINUB's mandate.

