Mr. Sarkowicz (Poland): Poland fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the European Union.
We deeply appreciate the efforts undertaken by the
respective three Security Council Committees aimed
at eliminating not only the results of terrorist activity
but also at looking into their causes and countering the
appeal of terrorism.

Poland is convinced that the United Nations
should serve as a platform to discuss and upgrade the
implementation of the international norms against
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and chemical,
biological, radiological or nuclear terrorism. To that end,
we strongly support the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). On 12 and 13 July 2012, the Government of
Poland, in cooperation with the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs and the Stimson Center, hosted
an event in Warsaw devoted to the regional aspects of
the implementation of that resolution. Throughout the
two-day conference, participants from the European
Union Eastern Partnership countries, the Caucasus and
Central Asia engaged in a conversation on their national
plans to implement resolution 1540 (2004).

An important facet of the workshop was to highlight
the interconnection between the capacity-building
necessary to combat the threat of WMD terrorism
and the measures required to fight a broader range
of security concerns: organized crime; trafficking in
illicit drugs, small arms and humans; irregular labor
migration; and trafficking in nuclear, biological and
chemical materials or dual-use technologies.

The workshop was also aimed at demonstrating a
very important aspect of the implementation of global
non-proliferation obligations. In an era of globalization,
it is of the utmost importance to take a holistic
approach to counter-proliferation and counterterrorism
efforts. That means that the international community
must engage with both the public and private sectors
to minimize the risk of the smuggling of chemical,
biological, radiological or nuclear materials and the illicit
trafficking of dual-use goods. We deeply appreciate the
fact that this aspect remains an important part of the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). The workshop was
an attempt at featuring the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) in that dual-benefit manner.

Subsequently, a regional approach to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is of utmost
importance in bringing together countries with similar
experiences and similar security challenges. Poland
will continue to support such cooperation.

