Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting at the request of my delegation.
Allow me also to thank Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe and Assistant Secretary-General Mulet for their
briefings and the Permanent Representative of Georgia
for his statement.

France has requested that this important and
urgent meeting be held because we are extremely
concerned by the current situation in Georgia. I would
like to recall the context that led us to call for this
meeting. Following 7 August, over the course of almost
a week, fierce fighting occurred in the separatist
enclave of South Ossetia and then, with the
intervention of the Russian army, throughout Georgian
territory, particularly in Abkhazia.

Historical accounts will say that it was a series of
provocations and reactions, but one thing is clear:
Georgia's actions were followed by a brutal and
disproportionate reaction by Russia. The violence has
claimed numerous victims - at least hundreds of
dead- and caused tens of thousands of refugees and
displaced persons to take to the roads. Whole villages
have been destroyed. Instability has once again flared
up on the flank of Europe, threatening peace in the
region and risking serious tensions in international
relations.

From the outset, France, on behalf of the
European Union, has undertaken massive efforts at the
highest levels to bring an end to the hostilities. The
French Minister for Foreign Affairs, Bernard
Kouchner, visited Tbilisi with his Finnish counterpart,
the current Chairman of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. President Sarkozy in turn
visited the region, where he met President Medevedev
in Moscow and President Saakashvili in Tbilisi.

The President Sarkozy's mediation on behalf of
the European Union made it possible for the Russian
Federation, Georgia and the two separatist entities to
commit, in writing, to a six-point plan, which the
European Council has also endorsed. The plan does not
resolve everything, but it constitutes the essential -
and the only - basis that we have to reach a lasting
solution. The signatories have undertaken permanently
to cease hostilities and not resort to force. They have
also committed, on the Russian side, to withdraw
immediately to their pre-7 August positions and, on the
Georgian side, to return to their usual quarters.

It is essential that arms be put down, but that does
not mean that withdrawal any less essential. We should
be clear: it is the Russian forces that are primarily
concerned. The Georgian army was dislocated by the
deployment at a surprising speed of a Russian force
with massive, excessive numbers. It was completely
driven out of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. On the rest
of the territory of Georgia, a number of its essential
bases were taken over, occupied or partially or fully
destroyed by the Russian army. I am thinking in
particular of Gori, Poti, Senaki and Kaspi. Combat
operations have ceased, the Georgian army has been
almost entirely destroyed. Russian forces must now
withdraw in keeping with the undertakings entered
into. By definition, this commitment can only be
fulfilled by Russia.

On 12 August, President Medvedev undertook to
withdraw these forces. Since no movement was
apparent, the President of the French Republic
reminded him of his commitment on several occasions.
On 17 August, he again contacted President Medvedev,
who undertook to begin the withdrawal at mid-day on
18 August. The information from the ground and that
brought to us from the Secretariat show that nothing or
almost nothing has occurred. We even understand that
new weapons have been introduced by Russia into
Georgian territory. The President of the French
Republic has met again today with Mr. Medvedev, who
assured him that the withdrawal would begin by
22 August. We hope of course that this announcement
will be given effect.

The Russian withdrawal is an essential
component for full implementation of the six-point
plan in order to achieve a lasting peace agreement and
an international mechanism to guarantee that peace.
France and the European Union are more determined
than ever to work to achieve this goal. The European
Union has expressed its commitment to working on the
ground. The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) is beginning to get involved, even if
only modestly, with the deployment of 20 additional
observers.

During this difficult period, our attention should
not be turned away from the humanitarian situation. I
would remind all parties of their commitment to
guarantee full humanitarian access on the ground.
France also would like to remind the parties of their
obligations stemming from the Sochi accords and
subsequent agreements on the necessity to maintain
order and prevent irregular forces from causing the
civilian population to suffer damage. France also
wishes to recall that it is a matter of urgency that
refugees and displaced persons must be allowed to
return promptly to their homes.

Lastly, we welcome the exchange of 20 prisoners
that occurred today through the mediation by the
Ambassador of France in Tbilisi. We hope that the
agreement of protocol signed at that time will be
extended to many further exchanges of this type.

We would like as rapidly as possible to achieve a
lasting solution which respects the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the independence of Georgia.
The withdrawal of forces is a necessary precondition.
Therefore, we have circulated to the Council today a
draft resolution that is very simple. It is necessary to
respect undertakings entered into in the six-point
ceasefire agreement. The agreement must be
implemented in good faith, and the forces, particularly
the Russian forces, must be withdrawn to their
respective positions. It is essential that the Council be
able to express in a united fashion how urgent this
necessity is. It is also essential to our capacity to

continue our collective efforts in the future to restore
peace to this region.

