Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia; the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro; and the European Free Trade Association
countries Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, members
of the European Economic Area, align themselves with
this statement.

Before making my statement, I would like to
welcome back our good friend Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste. His
contribution to this debate is most welcome and
invaluable.

The United Nations can be proud of what has
been achieved by the people of Timor-Leste. With the
assistance of this Organization, the support of this
Council and the commitment of the wider international
community, the advances made in Timor-Leste since
independence have been remarkable.

The European Union commends and supports the
efforts of the Timorese Government to consolidate the
progress made to date, especially in governance and
open leadership; the ongoing development of new
legislative and judicial frameworks, including the rule
of law; the rehabilitation of infrastructure and the
support for regional integration; the development of
planning and budgetary discipline; and, very
importantly, the commitment to democratic norms and
personal freedoms.

The European Union recognizes that a critical
element of the success so far has been the hard work of
the men and women of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), and we commend
them, and those countries that have supported them in
their efforts, for their dedication.

The European Union notes that, as determined by
the Security Council, the activities and size of
UNMISET are gradually being reduced in preparation
for the completion of its mandate on 20 May this year.
Last October, the Council heard from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, that the international community should
consider carefully the completion of UNMISET's
drawdown while also taking stock of what has been
achieved, reflecting on the remaining tasks to be
completed and deciding on the best way to fulfil the
legitimate needs of Timor-Leste in the post-May 2004
period. In that regard, the European Union notes that,
earlier this month, the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
Mr. Mari Alkatiri, wrote to the Secretary-General and
expressed his Government's wish for the continued
presence of a United Nations peacekeeping force in
Timor-Leste beyond the expiry of the current
UNMISET mandate.

As an organization, determining our approach to
the disengagement of our peacekeeping and peace-
building operations is a recurring challenge. Satisfying
the continuing legitimate needs of the country in
question must be balanced against ensuring the
continued growth of sustainable national capacities for
self-governance and self-reliance. In this regard, it is
necessary for the international community, on a case-
by-case basis, to focus on the tasks remaining and to
carry out a careful and thorough analysis of any
continuing threats to the maintenance of peace and
security, as well as of the development of the judicial
sector and the rule of law; the humanitarian situation,
including the status of refugees and other displaced
persons; the development of national security
institutions, such as police and military forces;
progress in national reconciliation; and the creation of
a favourable climate for sustainable social and
economic development.

In this regard, the European Union welcomes the
Secretary-General's dispatching of an assessment team
to Timor-Leste in January. The Union notes that the
resulting report (S/2004/117) confirms that significant
progress continues to be made and that further
advances in Timorese capacity can be expected in the
months ahead.

The European Union supports the efforts of the
Timorese Government to consolidate the political
institutions, to promote the social and economic
development of the country and to uphold the rule of
law while building a new nation. In particular, the
Union welcomes the fact that the security situation has
largely remained calm; relations between Timor-Leste
and Indonesia have been good; the development of the
country's public administration has continued to make
progress; the Truth, Reception and Reconciliation
Commission continues to provide a community-based
solution for less serious crimes committed in
connection with the political conflict; and that the
national police force has assumed responsibility for
routine policing throughout the country. In addition,
and in the context of ending impunity and promoting a
culture of accountability and transparency, the EU
notes with interest that the process of prosecuting those
accused of serious crimes has continued apace. The
European Union will continue to follow closely the
relevant trials in Dili and Jakarta.

The European Union thanks the Secretary-
General for his thorough report on the current situation
in Timor-Leste and notes that he states that,
notwithstanding the commendable and substantial
achievements, Timor-Leste continues to face a number
of formidable challenges. The EU shares the view that
further assistance will be needed to consolidate the
achievements already made. In this regard, a
continuing - though modified - UNMISET presence
after May 2004 seems to be required. The Secretary-
General's analysis and his recommendation for an
extension of UNMISET, with the appropriate
modifications to its mandate and composition, deserve
the Security Council's full consideration.

Notwithstanding the fact that the primary
responsibility for a successful transition lies with the
Timorese people themselves, it remains incumbent on
the international community to consolidate the progress
that is so evident in Timor-Leste. As is the case
elsewhere in the world, we have an obligation to the
people of Timor-Leste to continue our support for their
progress through bilateral donor programmes, the work
of the family of United Nations agencies, support from
the Bretton Woods institutions and all the instruments
we have at our disposal to consolidate their
achievements and to ensure their continued
advancement. I take this opportunity to reaffirm the
European Union's commitment to the Timorese people
to this end.

