The Secretary-General: I thank Mr. El Othmani
for organizing this important open debate on the
situation in the Sahel. Last week (see S/PV.6879), the
Council heard the presentation of my report on Mali
(8/2012/894) pursuant to resolution 2071 (2012). I know
that Council members are currently considering a draft
resolution regarding Mali. But as acute as the problems
there are, we cannot lose sight of the context of which
Mali is but a part, namely, a sustained, systemic crisis
across the entire Sahel region. What happens in Mali
can affect the entire region. Likewise, we cannot expect
to address effectively the issues in Mali, unless we
confront the challenges affecting the broader region.

I am grateful to the Moroccan presidency for
providing us the opportunity to discuss the bigger
picture. The warning lights for the Sahel region
continue to flash. Political turmoil, terrorist activity,
drug trafficking and arms smuggling are spilling over
borders and threatening peace and security.

Extreme climatic conditions and fragile economies
only add to that toxic brew of vulnerability. This year
alone, an estimated 18.7 million people have been

affected by food insecurity. Over one million children
under the age of five are at risk of acute malnutrition.
The Governments and people of the Sahel region need
our full support.

The United Nations has mobilized over $1 billion to
support the countries of the region in responding to the
immediate needs of affected populations. The recent
rainfall promises a better harvest this season, which
should help ease food insecurity. However, much more
needs to be done.

We must strengthen resilience across the region. We
know that building resilient societies and institutions
yields big returns. It increases the impact and cost-
effectiveness of humanitarian and development
assistance. Doing it right will require coordinating
United Nations system-wide efforts and linking the
existing national initiatives to region-wide approaches.

Resolution 2056 (2012) recognized the need for an
integrated strategy addressing all dimensions of the
crisis. We presented a framework during a high-level
meeting in September. I also appointed Mr. Romano
Prodi as my Special Envoy for the Sahel, who will
report to the Council more in detail. He is focusing on
four key issues: security, governance, humanitarian
requirements and development.

Let me point to just one area in the field of
development that could make a difference. Earlier
this year, I launched our Sustainable Energy for All
initiative. With the right investments and support, the
Sahel is ideally situated to be a global showcase for
solar energy. Mr. Prodi is here to provide an update on
our overall efforts and his thoughts on the way forward.

For my part, I call on the members of the Council
and the wider international community to continue to
support our efforts to support the strategy. We simply
must not relent until peace and stability have been
restored to the region.

