Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on the
assumption by the Kingdom of Morocco to the Security
Council presidency for December. I wish you every
success and assure you of my delegation's full support.
I would also like to congratulate Ambassador Puri of
India on his outstanding guidance of the Council's
work last month. Like many speakers, I would also to
thank the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Benomar, for his briefing.

I would like to focus on three points: the political,
security and humanitarian aspects of the situation.
On the political level, we welcome the efforts by the
Yemeni Government to create a political agreement
based on democratic institutions. In that context, Togo
particularly commends President Mansour's directive
of 29 November establishing the Supreme Commission
for Election and Referendum. The creation of the
Commission is an important milestone on the road to
holding the upcoming elections, in which all Yemenis
are to take part, and which we hope will be peaceful
and credible.

We believe that it is the duty of the Yemeni political
class to maintain and strengthen the achievements of
the transition so far. Such cooperation, which we call
for with conviction, can come about only through an
inclusive National Dialogue, which the international
community considers to be the best framework for
discussion focused on adopting consensual agreements
to redefine the future of the country. This national
conversation should also make it possible to address all
questions, especially those concerning Yemeni unity
and the reconciliation of all its sons and daughters.

Togo therefore urges all political and military
groups, especially Al-Hiraak and its leaders, to respond
positively and promptly to President Mansour's call to
return to dialogue, whose success could mitigate the
country's strained social atmosphere and persuade the
various players to agree on certain crucial questions.

We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
to work with Yemeni authorities to launch the National
Dialogue. His trip to Yemen on 19 November was proof
of his commitment to helping the country to resolve all
outstanding points of contention through constructive
dialogue. We urge President Mansour and the Yemeni
Government to pursue their efforts to launch an
effective National Dialogue Conference, despite all the
obstacles to its convening.

My delegation believes that the Security Council
should assist the Yemeni authorities in finding new
solutions to the claims of the southern groups, which
continue to delay the holding of the Convention. Contact
between the Government and those groups remains a
path to be explored.

As for the security situation, Togo welcomes
efforts that have led to a decrease in violence in recent
weeks. However, we firmly condemn the attack of
28 November in Sana'a, which took the life of a Saudi
Arabian diplomat and his Yemeni bodyguard. We call on
all Yemenis to renounce violence and to work together
to reconstruct their country. In response to those acts
of terrorism, it is more urgent than ever for States to
reaffirm their support for the Yemeni authorities by
persuading them to do their utmost to combat and
eradicate the scourge. This fight will be successful only
if the problem of divisions within the army is resolved,
allowing space for its restructuring.

With respect to the struggle for peace and security
in Yemen, we are encouraged by President Mansour's
promise to end child recruitment by Government
forces. Other armed groups must also renounce child
conscription, which violates the provisions of relevant
international conventions.
At the humanitarian level, the situation remains of
concern, despite the contributions of donor countries.
While thanking them for their generosity, we call on
the international community, especially the Friends
of Yemen, to strengthen efforts to improve the living
conditions of refugees. Furthermore, the international
community should take up the situation of Yemeni
women, in the light of reports that four out of five
women have seen their situation deteriorate over the
past 12 months.

