Mr. Lewicki (Poland): I promise that I will be as
brief as possible.

First of all, let me offer our condolences on the
passing away of Major General Francis Vib Sanziri
and take this opportunity to pay tribute to all the brave
Blue Helmets - both the men and women - who,
unfortunately, sometimes pay the highest price for their
service to peace and to us.

I also thank all the briefers. This interactive debate
is a very useful exercise. This year's Heads of Military
Components Conference is exceptionally timely.
We have been discussing peacekeeping over the past
years. Only last March, we held the United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial, which highlighted some of
the key challenges and dilemmas that peacekeeping
operations are facing right now.

One of those challenges involves improving training
and capacity-building. We must acknowledge that
insufficient training of peacekeepers directly affects
the mandate implementation. We must work hard in
order to provide every tool to enable peacekeepers at all
levels of the chain of command to improve the effective
performance and security of mission personnel.
Needless to say, the security of peacekeepers is of
paramount importance for all stakeholders involved in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Nevertheless,
one must not forget that it is also one of the decisive
factors of a mission's effectiveness in the course of the
mandate implementation.

Indeed, mandates are one of the topics for today's
considerations. The importance of the re-evaluation
of missions' composition and mandates, which both
need to be based on the situation and the capability
to implement them on the ground, has already been
discussed in the Council. The flexibility of the tools
used by the Force Commanders according to the current
security circumstances in order to act proactively is of
crucial importance.

I would like to ask the Force Commanders several
questions with regard to their missions. I think that this
should also be an opportunity for them to convey their
message to us, the members of the Council.

My first question, which is addressed to both
Force Commanders, is the following. From their point
of view, do the current mandates allow the Force
Commanders to operate actively and, if the situation
requires, proactively in order to fulfil the mission's
tasks? If not, what are the key obstacles hampering
smooth mandate implementation?

Secondly, as we are concerned about the situation
of people fleeing from conflict zones, I would like to
ask Maj or General Cheryl Pearce if she has experienced
challenges posed by refugees and undocumented
migrants in areas of the buffer zone?

I would also like to ask Lieutenant General Ngondi
the following questions. How does the current situation
in Khartoum influence the mission under his command,
and what is his View regarding the suspension of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in

Darfur of the handover of camps for displaced civilians
to the Sudanese military against the backdrop of
worsening violence and insecurity across the country?

In conclusion, I would like once again to express
our deep appreciation for the Force Commanders'
work, their presence here today and their sharing of
their experience.

