Mr. Motoc (Romania): Let me thank you, Sir,
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Daudi Mwakawago, for his eloquent
presentation a few minutes ago.

Of course, I wish to commend the United Nations
mission teams in Sierra Leone for their dedication and
resilience over the past six years in advancing the
peace process.

I would have hesitated to speak after the historic
decision taken by the Security Council on the creation
of the Peacebuilding Commission, but what we have
acknowledged with regard to the United Nations role
and involvement in Sierra Leone is also, in our view, a
historic moment as we note the successful completion
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and of the peacekeeping phase in
that country.

Sierra Leone represented a major test case for the
Security Council's approach to peacekeeping
operations. The transformation of UNAMSIL from the
vulnerable mission of 2000 into the robust operation
that subsequently conducted disarmament and
demobilization and facilitated the elections in 2002
was indeed remarkable. The strengthening of
UNAMSIL - which, at a certain point, stood out as
the largest active peacekeeping mission -
demonstrated the ability of the United Nations to learn
from past experience and even past mistakes. We are
pleased to see that the Secretariat has already started
extracting the best practices from that experience.

The change in the United Nations strategy was
strongly upheld by the leadership exercised by the
United Kingdom. We take the opportunity to recognize
the important contribution played by your country, Sir,
in steering the international efforts towards today's
achievements.

After the challenges faced by the Mission in the
crisis of 2000, Sierra Leone became the area in which
the Security Council showed a new resolve to sustain a
complex peace operation in Africa. We acknowledge
the innovative spirit impressed upon the Mission -
one of the first to reflect the concept of the integrated
mission. The same creative approach has been taken in
crafting UNAMSIL's exit strategy and in establishing
the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIOSIL) with a comprehensive peacebuilding
mandate.

UNAMSIL has also been involved in the first
significant exercise of concrete inter-mission
cooperation, given the fact that the United Nations
Mission in Liberia is supposed to ensure, starting next
year, the protection of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone.

This is a time to take a step back and look at the
general picture. A great deal of effort and resources
have been invested in the pacification and stabilization
of the country. As we can see today, those have born
fruit. The prospects for Sierra Leone seem promising.
Significant progress has been achieved in restoring
State authority throughout the country, rebuilding the
security sector and promoting national cohesion and
reconciliation.

Sierra Leone is now at peace, but many chronic
problems are still to be addressed. They require a
cohesive and long-term action plan involving national
actors, the United Nations and other relevant partners.
It is in that context that UNIOSIL has been created
with the main aim of supporting and coordinating such
efforts.

The potential threats to national stability should
be perceived no longer solely in security-related terms,
but rather within socio-economic parameters. The main
challenges in the post-building phase are related to
issues such as job creation, improvement in the quality
of public service delivery and fighting corruption.

Sierra Leone is still at the bottom of the Human
Development Index. The economic recovery is slow
and painful, despite the increase in diamond exports
and agricultural output. Clearly, the assistance of the
international community remains crucial to the success
of the reconstruction process.

We share the concern of the Secretary-General
about the decline in foreign aid following the
completion of the peacekeeping phase. The
mobilization of resources is also being complicated by
competing priorities, given the United Nations pattern
of making multiple requests for voluntary contributions
to other operations.

Last but not least, the continued engagement of
the international community in that country should be
matched by a renewed commitment of the national
political parties to the principles of reform and
democratic governance. As 2007 is an electoral year,
we caution about the need to avoid sterile political
disputes with possible destabilizing effects. Human
rights, the rule of law and an effective judiciary sector
must remain top priorities in the new phase. We note
with concern the stagnant situation with regard to the
establishment of the National Human Rights
Commission since the last report of the Secretary-
General.

To conclude, I would like to thank the British
delegation for preparing a draft presidential statement,
which we can fully support.

