Mr. Nejad-Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish to extend, Sir, my congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. We have full confidence that
under your wise guidance, the Council will make
progress in dealing with the issues on its agenda. I
should also like to thank you for convening this
important and timely meeting of the Security Council
at this critical time for the Palestinian people.

I would like to express the grave concern of the
Iranian people and Government over a further
escalation by the Israeli regime in its inhumane
practice of repression against the Palestinian people.
The Israeli regime, in pursuit of its bloody campaign
and racist and aggressive policy against the defenceless
Palestinians, is employing more vicious measures. The
assault against and seizure of Orient House, along with
other Palestinian offices in the city of Al-Quds Al-
Sharif is in line with the iniquitous Israeli policy of
negating the Palestinian national rights and distorting
the Islamic character of the city. As such, it pertains
directly to the sensitive issue of the status of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and must be addressed by the international
community, including the Islamic world.

The Israeli campaign of extrajudicial killings of
Palestinians on the basis of hit lists is a flagrant
violation of key tenets of natural justice and of
provisions of international humanitarian law. The deeds
and words of Israeli leadership now make it obvious
that extrajudicial executions have become part of the
regime's policy. This amounts to organized acts of
terrorism by a Government, and the international
community should not turn a blind eye to it.

Moreover, the incursions by heavily armed Israeli
forces into Palestinian areas constitute yet another
heavy-handed criminal act carried out by a
Government armed to the teeth against a defenceless
population. The destruction and the loss of Palestinian
lives that follow such incursions further exacerbate the
plight of Palestinians and add to instability in the
whole region.

The criminal acts perpetrated by the Israeli
regime further expose its true nature and negate the
Israeli pretence of peaceful intentions or a desire for
pacific coexistence with Muslims and Christians in the
region. Israel's repeated crimes and heavy-handed
approach run counter to all its high-sounding and
empty claims of seeking peace. This regime is the
principal cause of the tension and instability in the
region.

Occupation lies at the very origin of the
Palestinian conflict and overall tension and instability
in the Middle East. The shocking developments over
the past few months have made it more obvious that
unless the principal cause of conflict is effectively
addressed, the crisis could never subside. As to the real
intention of the Israeli regime, it is significant that
Israelis continue to reject the call for a freeze on all
settlement construction activities in the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip.

Not surprisingly, they continued with their Jewish
settlement activity in the 1990s, which contravenes not
only the norms and principles of international law but
even flouts the letter and spirit of the agreements they
signed with Palestinians. The significant increase in the
population and areas under unlawful Jewish settlement
in the West Bank and Gaza Strip over the past eight
years attests to the fact that Israelis have never been
serious about the so-called principle of land for peace.
In other words, it is significant that they continue to
colonize the territory from which they have been
ostensibly negotiating to withdraw.

There should be no doubt about the fact that the
continued occupation with no end in sight led to
disillusionment and, consequently, to the ongoing
Palestinian uprising. Therefore, without putting an end
to the Zionist policy of occupying others' territories,
the crisis in the Middle East cannot be brought to an
end. As all peoples are endowed with the right to resist
foreign occupation, the same right should also be fully
recognized for the Palestinian people, and the
international community should take appropriate
actions in this direction.

In the face of more repressive and arbitrary
measures adopted by Israelis and their open contempt
for the will of the international community embodied
in resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, we believe that now, more than ever, the
Council needs to meet its responsibility and take the
necessary actions to redress the situation in occupied
Palestine, thus averting unforeseen and incalculable
consequences that may induce the entire area to
devastation and bloodshed.

Recent events have further demonstrated the need
for international intervention, protection and an
observer force to be established by the Council with a
view to protecting defenceless Palestinian civilians
from ever-increasing atrocities at the hands of Israelis.
The veto last December of a draft resolution to
authorize the establishment of a United Nations
observer force proved to be a disservice to the volatile
situation in the area. The presence of such a force on
the ground could have forestalled more violence and
more bloodshed and saved so many precious lives.

Moreover, it is imperative that the heavy-handed
approach by the Israeli army, such as targeted
assassinations, armed incursions, collective
punishment, including tightening blockades and the
closure of Palestinian areas, and the resort to heavy
weapons against Palestinians, which amounts to war
crimes, cannot go with impunity. In this respect, I
would like to echo the appeal by the leaders of States
members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
at the 9th Islamic Summit held last November in Doha,
calling on the Security Council to set up an
international commission of inquiry to investigate the
massacres perpetrated by Israel, and to constitute an
international criminal tribunal in conformity with
international law in order to prosecute the Israeli war
criminals who have perpetrated those savage
massacres.

Furthermore, outrageous scenes, carried by the
media to the living rooms of people across the globe, in
which tanks, armoured carriers and helicopter gunships
engage stone-throwers in the occupied territories,
indicate that the time is ripe for the international
community to contemplate the possibility of denying
the occupying Power access to sources of armaments
and military equipment.

Never, throughout history, has a colonial Power
been able to terrorize a people into submission forever.
Here, the fundamental question is whether or not the
international community, represented by this Council,
can fulfil its responsibility of limiting the extent of
Palestinian blood and life lost and homelessness and
agony imposed before the occupiers and aggressors are
tamed and the fundamental rights of Palestinians to
self-determination in their own land are realized.

