Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): The
consideration of the situation in Angola by the Security
Council today once again indicates that the peace process
has entered a delicate stage that endangers the achievements
of the past two years, due to UNITA's dragging its feet in
the implementation of its obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol - in particular, to demilitarize and enable the
Angolan Government to restore State administration
throughout Angolan territory; to transform Radio Vorgan
into a neutral broadcaster; and to genuinely transform
UNITA itself in a meaningful way into a political party.
These requirements have not been met; there has been
meagre progress towards meeting them. The international
community expects UNITA to genuinely and
unconditionally implement these basic obligations. The
adoption by the Council of resolutions 1127 (1997) and
1130 (1997) during the past two months reflects the great
importance the international community attaches to
UNITA's respect for its obligations and to the
commencement of a new era of peace in Angola.

The delegation of Egypt has carefully considered the
Secretary-General's report on the situation in Angola. We
would like to express our appreciation for the efforts of the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, Maitre
Blondin Beye, and the United Nations Observer Mission
in Angola (MONUA), particularly since they are all
accomplishing their tasks efficiently under very difficult
conditions, which are being aggravated by the non-
cooperation of one party or another in a comprehensive
manner with the international mission. On the other hand,
we also regret that reports continue to indicate that
aircraft are still landing in airports under UNITA control
and that UNITA has resumed mining the main roads.
These practices reaffirm that UNITA is trying to project
its image as a State within the State. This is totally
unacceptable in the wake of the establishment of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, and it
also raises concerns with regard to the possible
involvement of outside parties in the Angolan crisis.
Breaking the present stalemate in the implementation of
the Lusaka Protocol is contingent upon UNITA's
demonstrating a strong political will to abandon the
option of war and to cease all practices that slow down
implementation of the peace agreement. We are also
convinced that this cannot be achieved without the
international community, particularly the Security Council
and the troika States, applying appropriate pressures on
the UNITA leadership to give effect to these objectives.

In Angola the United Nations has achieved tangible
successes that cannot be minimized. Foremost of these is
the stemming of the bloodshed among Angolans and
marshalling the UNITA forces in camps. I would like to
also mention the United Nations success in demining and
repairing bridges and roads and other elements of the
country's infrastructure. These are very important
achievements to which tribute should be paid and which
should not be thrown to the wind or jeopardized today.

During the adoption of resolution 1130 (1997) the
delegation of Egypt expressed the hope that UNITA
would use the period which ended on 30 September to
respond to the will of the international community
represented in Security Council resolutions. We also
expected UNIT A to fulfil its obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol in a manner that would give the Council the
opportunity to reconsider the measures contained in that
resolution before they were applied. Yet this, regrettably,
has not happened. And in spite of our objection in
principle to the application of sanctions, the current
circumstances and the situation in Angola, particularly the
support by the Angola Government itself for the
imposition of these sanctions, today prompts us to support
the implementation of these measures.

 

The delegation of Egypt would like to reaffirm its full
support for the recommendations of the Secretary-General
made in his report with regard to the size of the MONUA
mission, in particular the postponement of the withdrawal
of the military units and the linkage between their
withdrawal and the full implementation of the military
aspects of the Lusaka Protocol, since it is absolutely
necessary to guarantee the security of the Mission, as well
as of the United Nations personnel and other international
personnel. We also reaffirm the importance of holding a
meeting between President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi in
Angola, at the earliest possible moment, in order to get rid
of the current stalemate.

The delegation of Egypt supports the draft resolution
and will vote in favour of it.

