Ms. Batumubwira (Burundi) (spoke in French):
I am pleased to address the Security Council for the
second time in two months. I should like to take this
opportunity, Madam President, to wish you, on behalf
of the Government of Burundi and of my delegation
and on my own behalf, our best wishes for 2006.

I should also like to reiterate our gratitude to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and to the Security
Council for their tireless commitment to the cause of
peace and security throughout the world and in
particular to assisting Burundi in its quest for peace
and reconciliation. My thanks go also to the United
Republic of Tanzania, which took the positive initiative
of holding this meeting after having hosted the first
Summit of Heads of State and Government of the Great
Lakes region.

In addition, I should like to join previous
speakers in expressing my condolences to the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), the Government of
Guatemala and the families of the Blue Helmets who
lost their lives in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It is also appropriate to ask those gathered
here to think about the many victims of the tragedies
that have taken place and are still taking place in this
region.

In recent years, the Great Lakes region, to which
my country belongs, has been marked by massive
violations of the right to life and periods of paralysis
and unacceptable reverses following promises of
democratic progress. That is why this United Nations
meeting on the Great Lakes region of Africa is so
important, because it is being held at a time when a
number of countries "on the ground" have been making
undeniable progress and laying the foundations for
peace and democracy after years of tragedies and
transitional processes. Indeed, those countries -
which yesterday were in conflict and today are in
transition, emerging from conflict or even
peacebuilding - deserved substantial consultations
with the international community with a View to
appropriate support measures.

With the adoption of resolutions 1291 (2000) of
24 February 2000 and 1304 (2000) of 16 June 2000,
the Security Council has played a crucial role - which
my delegations welcomes - in organizing the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
under the auspices of the United Nations and the
African Union. Those efforts culminated in the first
Summit of Heads of State and Government of the
region, on 19 and 20 November 2004, which concluded
with the signature, in the presence of witnesses from
the region and international partners, of the Dar es-
Salaam Declaration on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region.

As a result of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration, we
can say that, after having studied the major issues, the
countries of the region have now agreed on a number
of common principles, protocols and priority action
plans that they have defined and that they are
committed to following in the common interests of
peace, security, democracy and development in the
Great Lakes region.

Having accomplished their part of the task, they
ask that the international community declare the region
a specific zone for reconstruction and development,
provided with a special reconstruction fund.
Accordingly, we should consider Zone 1 - including
Burundi, Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - which has been the source of the
interconnected conflicts of the Great Lakes region, as a
priority within that specific zone. Until zone 1 is safe
and stable, particularly in the eastern region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, everything that has
been rebuilt will remain in jeopardy, and the hoped-for
results will not be achieved.

Following 12 years of conflict, five months ago
Burundi proudly took its place once again within the
international community, as a result of a long process
of negotiations and transitions and following six
elections. For us, this is not an end but only one stage
of a lengthy process.

The welcome given by the international
community to the significant progress made by
Burundi is encouraging. I wish to assure the Council of
our commitment to maintaining this momentum and to
strengthening our resolve to consolidate the peace that
has been restored and the exercise of democracy.

We in Burundi are mindful of the fact that we
must urgently take up the tremendous challenges of
reconstruction and development. Indeed, our
institutions - democratically elected in a bottom-up
process - will be judged on the basis of whether they
can meet the minimum, fully legitimate socio-
economic needs of the people of Burundi and achieve
ongoing progress, with every day bringing greater
peace, stability and prosperity. Indeed, democracy must
lead to socio-economic progress.

Twelve years of lethal conflict and instability
have taken a heavy toll in human life and have resulted
in the displacement of numerous people within the
country and in many refugee flows outside the country,
generalized poverty - the current rate is 68 per
cent - and the destruction and degradation of the
socio-economic infrastructure. The destructive effects
of conflict can be seen in particular in the health and
education infrastructures; in the area of housing and of
the ecosystem; in food insecurity, which is exacerbated
by weather conditions in some parts of the country; the
spread of the HIV/AIDS pandemic; and the crushing
debt load for Burundi, which is now the fourth-least-
developed country in the world - and those are just
some of the issues.

Along these lines, in order to allow the
international community to help us in our efforts to
coordinate and mobilize resources, a programme of
action based on the Millennium Development Goals
will be made available. Initially, a donors conference
will be held on 28 February 2006, on an emergency
basis, which will allow us to take action very swiftly
and implement quick-impact projects to benefit a
population that has very urgent needs. After that, a
roundtable of donors is scheduled for the end of
September 2006, based on the strategic framework to
combat poverty - a document which will soon be
completed.

We are hopeful that these two forums will yield
concrete results. Our hope and our optimism with
respect to international support that is geared to our
specific needs in terms of stepping up reconstruction
and growth, economic recovery and post-conflict
development are based not only on our own success but
also on the commitment of our traditional partners and
of all of those who are working to ensure that our
shared values prevail and who, throughout the world,
understand our insistence on the existence of
interactive linkages between peace, democracy,
stability and development.

On 20 December 2005, the Security Council,
together with the General Assembly, established the
Peacebuilding Commission, which we welcome. This
is for us a very encouraging sign of the will of the
international community to promote, on a priority
basis, greater solidarity and international cooperation
leading to a substantial increase in levels of assistance
to countries emerging from conflict.

That intergovernmental advisory body - which
represents a very positive development - will find in
Burundi an operational framework managed by a
national coordinating committee for assistance,
established by the Government on 12 December 2005,
which is working in concert with our development
partners.

In November 2005, I gave a generally positive
picture of the security situation in Burundi. Reforms in
the areas of defence and security, and particularly the
integration within the Burundi National Defence Force
and national police of the former armed forces of
Burundi and of the six former armed movements that
signed ceasefire agreements with the Government,
have taken place to the satisfaction of the two parties,
and the two entities are already up and running.

Against the backdrop of the upcoming
establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, we have been freeing political prisoners,
in keeping with the recommendations of the Arusha
Agreement. In the area of good governance, an anti-
corruption law has been adopted by the National
Assembly.

With respect to the question of the Palipehutu-
Forces Nationales de Liberation (Palipehutu-FNL),
which continues to send mixed messages while
remaining intransigent and maintaining its alliance
with the Forces Democratiques de Liberation du
Rwanda (FDLR) in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a resolution of the problem will
require robust measures. That is also the view of the
Tripartite Plus Joint Commission, as set out in the
letter dated 21 October 2005 addressed to the Council
and in resolution 1649 (2005) of 21 December 2005,
which requires, among other things, the establishment
of a consistent overall strategy for the disarmament,
repatriation and reintegration of foreign combatants
operating in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We are pleased to inform the Council that
Palipehutu combatants are surrendering to the
Burundian authorities within the country and to the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to be
repatriated, proof of the isolation of that group, against
whose leadership sanctions have been imposed.

The Great Lakes region is working actively to
become an area of lasting peace and security, of
political and social stability, and of shared growth and
development. The leaders of the countries concerned
have individually and collectively made a commitment
in that respect. Burundi would like to reiterate its
determination to ensure the successful outcome of the
international conference process in the Great Lakes. In
so doing, we would like to be assured of ongoing
support from the United Nations, the Security Council
and the Group of Friends, to which we would like once
again to convey our appreciation for the considerable
assistance it has provided since the beginning of the
process.

