The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mnhamed
Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the
Council table.

The President: I have also received a request dated
21 April 1995 from Ambassador Dragomir Djokic to
address the Council. With the consent of the Council, I
would propose to invite him to address the Council in the
course of the discussion of the item before it.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1995/302, which contains the text of a letter dated 13
April 1995 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council, transmitting the report of
the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1995/319, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/1995/301, letter dated 13 April 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Croatia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and 5/1995/309, letter dated 15 April 1995 from
the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

In accordance with the decision taken earlier in the
meeting, I now invite Ambassador Dragomir Djokic to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.


