Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
My delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution just
adopted by the Security Council. I must note, however, that
we did so in spite of questioning the timeliness of the
decision.

My Government entirely understands that from the
legal standpoint the Kigali authorities wish to regain full
sovereignty. It is normal for a Government to request full
exercise of its competence to ensure the security of its
inhabitants, and for it to possess the means to do so. By
suspending the embargo against Rwanda until
1 September 1996 the Security Council has just complied
with this request.

Yet the decision we have just taken should not be
completely separated from the political context in Rwanda
and in other countries of the region. We know that the
Kigali Government has made many efforts to promote
normalization of the situation in Rwanda, and the
8 August 1995 report of the Secretary-General testifies to
this. But the report also stresses that many problems have
only barely begun to be resolved.

There are nearly 2 million Rwandan citizens outside
the borders of Rwanda. We have been saying for over a
year that the return of refugees - with the exception of
criminals, who must be put on trial - must be a priority
for the Kigali Government. We are obliged to note that,
for the moment, very few have agreed to return to their
villages. To be sure, the fault lies in part with the militias,
which continue to pressure these innocent civilians, but
the situation in Rwanda does not really encourage their
return.

There continue to be large numbers of arrests; the
conditions of detention are tragic; there is a near absence
of dialogue between the refugees and the Kigali
authorities: none of this is likely to make Rwandan
expatriates return home. We think that the decision to lift
the embargo will be an added deterrent, which is why we
would have preferred a gradual lifting of the embargo that
dealt on a priority basis with equipment for maintaining
order, and especially for equipping the police and the
gendarmerie.

But we have no wish to despair. We hope that the
authorization to import weapons, now granted to the
Government of Rwanda, will be used in a measured, well-
advised way, and that the additional flows of weapons
will not increase tension among the countries of the
region, as some signs seem to indicate they will.

The international community must continue to give
its full support to the Kigali Government to enable it to
complete the work of national reconciliation and
reconstruction to which it has committed itself. If we

 

want to avoid new disasters, we must make rapid progress
towards that goal.

My Government remains convinced that the rapid
organization of a regional conference on peace, security and
development would lay a solid, indispensable foundation for
the restoration of stability in the Great Lakes region. That
is why we await with interest the report the Secretary-
General is to make to the Security Council within one
month.

For its part, the French Government remains fully
prepared to participate in a constructive initiative that would
allow the reintegration of all Rwandans into their homeland,
the restoration of democracy and the resumption of progress
in that part of Africa.

