Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Let me start, Sir, by
expressing regret that this meeting represents the twilight of
your very successful presidency. At midnight tonight you
will retire from the helm of our Council and, as your
professional fate has it, we learn that you will also be
retiring from the diplomatic service of your great country.
Allow me to extend to you my delegation's best wishes for
the future.

I doubt if there is any member of this Council who
does not share the frustration we must all feel at the failure
to date to find a solution to the tragedy of Liberia. Yet we
in the Botswana delegation continue to hold firm to our
conviction that it would be unconscionable for the Council
to lose hope in the search for peace in Liberia. The
intractability of the situation in that tortured country is no
doubt discouraging, but it would be wrong for this Council
to give up trying to find a solution to it. We should not fail
to use the opportunity within our grasp to give impetus to
encouraging political developments in the area. The Abuja
summit meeting of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Heads of State and Government
of the Committee of Nine on Liberia brought about
dialogue among the Liberian parties and political leaders.
The assessment of the ECOWAS Heads of State and
Government was that:

"a substantial measure of agreement had emerged
among the parties on nearly all the issues that had
remained unresolved" (S/1995/473, annex 1, para. 6).

The Security Council should encourage this process, as it
holds a considerable degree of hope for peace in Liberia.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Nyakyi, last week informed the Council that
the people of Liberia would very much like to see a
continued presence of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Liberia (UNOMIL). The primary victims of the tragedy
in Liberia are the civilian population. They have been
subjected to all forms of atrocities. Their most fundamental
human right, the right to life, is violated with impunity.
There is no one to protect them, as they have lost control
of the political process to the rule of the gun. The United
Nations is their source of hope, and the presence of
UNOMIL assures them that the international community
is actively engaged in the search for solutions to their
tragedy. The States of the subregion that have committed
substantial human and material resources to the pursuit of
peace in Liberia have clearly stated that the contribution
of UN OMIL to the peace process in Liberia far outweighs
its numerical strength.

The Economic Community of West African States
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) has played an enormous
role in alleviating the pain and suffering of the Liberian
people. It has contributed to new experience in the
responsibilities of regional organizations in the
maintenance of peace and security under Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. My delegation strongly
believes that their efforts provide important lessons for
future peace-keeping operations and deserve the full
support of the Security Council and the international
community as a whole.

The draft resolution before us outlines a number of
pertinent issues. It draws the attention of the political
leaders of Liberia to the readiness of the Security Council
to restore the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) to its full strength and to contribute to
post-conflict peace-building in their country provided that
they demonstrate a corresponding readiness to place their
country and people above their differences by taking
urgent steps to install a Council of State which, in the
view of my delegation, would facilitate agreement on the
other issues stated in paragraph 4 (b) and (d) of the draft.
We call upon the Liberian parties and political leaders to
cooperate fully with the Ministers of the Committee of
Nine of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to resolve outstanding issues within the
period of the extended mandate of UNOMIL.

The international community should play its part to
help the peace process in Liberia. The Liberian parties
continue to receive arms and ammunition in violation of
resolution 788 (1992). The Heads of State and
Government of the Committee of Nine on Liberia of the
Economic Community of West African States have
appealed to the international community to provide
appropriate assistance to enable them to monitor the land
and sea borders of Liberia. The States in the subregion
have a pivotal role to play in the monitoring and
stemming of the flow of arms to Liberia. We welcome
their commitment to report violations of the arms
embargo to the United Nations sanctions committee. The
positive response of the international community would

 

therefore contribute substantially to addressing one of the
root causes of the endless fratricidal war in Liberia.

It is the sincere hope of my delegation that the
Liberian parties and political leaders will rise to the
challenge of the moment by seizing the opportunity to make
peace for the sake of their people. It would be most
unfortunate if selfish, personal interests were to continue to
occupy centre stage in that country. This extension of the
UNOMIL mandate may be their very last chance.

