Mr. Cohen (United States ofAmerica): Ithank you,
Sir, for calling this meeting on today's important topic.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and participation in today's meeting.

The link between natural resources and conflict
is complex, and the United States shares the concern
that in many instances, as noted by the Secretary-
General, the poor management of natural resources
by Governments can contribute to corruption, conflict
and violence. It is unfortunate that today's Council
briefing has been deliberately framed to ignore internal
State mismanagement of natural resources. Despite
the potential for natural resource endowments to bring
prosperity and social development when properly
managed, we unfortunately see far too many examples
of countries where natural resource wealth does not
translate into improved livelihoods for citizens.

Nowhere are the dangers - indeed, threats to
peace and security - posed by the mismanagement
of natural resources more apparent than in Venezuela,
where millions of citizens of that once wealthy country
have been driven into poverty by the rapacious
corruption of a kleptocratic regime. Instead of serving
as a source of wealth to improve the livelihoods of
Venezuela's citizens, the State-owned oil company
Petroleos de Venezuela, S.A. exists today primarily as
a vehicle for embezzlement and looting by Maduro and
his inner circle. This has created a situation of scarcity
and economic instability that has generated massive
refugee migration flows. With its oil sector in decline,
Maduro's regime has turned to another valuable
resource to plunder, Venezuela's gold deposits.

In Venezuela's mining regions, illegal and
unregulated mining is now resulting in rapid
deforestation and pollution, without regard for the
environment or the indigenous populations. We have
no doubt that the proceeds from this illicit mining
are lining the pockets primarily of Maduro and those
closest to him. The effects of the crisis in Venezuela
extend far beyond its national borders and the resulting
humanitarian crisis has placed the burden on the
entire region.

Similarly, in Iran we see the country's rich
endowment of natural resources siphoned away from
activities that could benefit the Iranian people and
used both to enrich Iran's elite and to fund Iran's
destabilizing activities abroad. Iran has used the
proceeds of its oil and gas trade to build missiles
capable of delivering weapons of mass destruction,
increase internal repression, finance terrorism and fund
destabilizing activities in Lebanon, Syria, Yemen and
Iraq. For these reasons, we are working with countries
that import Iranian crude oil to cut their purchases
substantially, and we are pleased that so many countries
and companies are moving to stop such imports.

In South Sudan, the Government has been
collateralizing future oil sales to secure foreign loans
in violation of the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, signed in 2015,
and the revitalized peace agreement signed last month.
The money has been used not to feed the people but
rather, again, to enrich elites and extend the conflict,
including attacks on innocent civilians.

In the cases of Venezuela, Iran and South Sudan,
the destabilizing effects of natural resources are not
the result of the activity of external armed groups,
multinational companies or foreign interests; rather,
they are the direct result of decisions taken by the
leaders of those countries to engage in corruption and/
or use the proceeds from their natural resource wealth to
fund destabilizing activities that threaten international
peace and security.

There are steps we can take as a Council to
improve our chances of ensuring that natural resource
wealth translates into greater prosperity. For example,
the United States supports the Kimberley Process
as a constructive international initiative that fosters
transparency in the diamond trade and has contributed
to a marked reduction in - in fact, almost the complete
elimination of- the trade of conflict diamonds since
its establishment. We support meaningful reform of the
Kimberley Process to ensure its long-term health and
relevance. Specifically, at this year's plenary session we
will seek an expanded definition of a conflict diamond
to include diamonds linked to conflict or Violence,
regardless of the perpetrator.

Finally, United Nations sanctions regimes remain
a critical tool for addressing the destabilizing impact
of the trade in illicit resources. As members of the
international community, States must do more to
strengthen the implementation of United Nations
sanctions regimes that seek to eliminate trade in
natural resources that contribute to conflict. If we work
together to cut off those flows and support cooperative
efforts to improve the oversight of natural resources,
together we can help prevent natural resource-related
issues from contributing to conflict.

