Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her
comprehensive briefing and the sixth report on the
activities of her Office persuant to the relevant Security
Council resolutions on the situation in Libya.

Since the referral of this situation to the ICC,
the Libyan authorities have always declared thir
readiness to cooperate with the Court in accordance
with mechanisms established by the Security Council,
including the sanctions regime, and to try those who
committed violations against the Libyan people in
accordance with just laws that guarantee justice and
promote national reconciliation and transitionaljustice.
The Libyan authorities have always supported the ICC
and declared their readiness to cooperate with it to
guarantee justice for victims, as reflected in the report
by the Prosecutor on the implementation of resolution
1970 (2011).

Earlier this month, a memorandum of understanding
was signed between the Office ofthe Libyan Prosecutor
and the ICC Prosecutor, a step we welcome. The Libyan
Government has also pledged that trials at the national
level will focus on high-level officials who committed
crimes against humanity, while other investigations
will take place in the context of national reconciliation
and transitional justice.

All claims filed against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi should be dealt with through
a clear commitment by the Government to cooperatae
with the ICC. That was demonstrated when the Court
decided not to accept the case against Al-Senussi,
believing that the Libyan authorities would be able to
conduct a trial in accordanec with international law. It
is in that context that we understand the focus by the
Libyan authorities on giving priority to the national
judiciary in dealing with all cases affecting its people,
with due respect for Libya's sovereignty and with
Libyan laws that respect international fair-trial norms,
so as to try senior officials for grave human rights
violations, ensure justice for victims and promote
transitional justice and national reconciliation. That
would help Libya overcome the legacy of the past and
build an open, democratic society that is inclusive of all
Libyans and meets all their basic needs.

In view of the transitional period in Libya, the
international community should cooperate with and
support the Libyan Government in all its efforts to
ensure justice for all Libyans, fight impunity, promote
the rule of law and address both internal and external
security threats. We should all do our utmost to
demonstrate to the Libyan people that we and the whole
world are committed to helping them to establish peace
and stability in the country.
The Kingdom of Morocco would like to reiterate
its full support for the Libyan Government in carrying
out its important responsibilities. We call upon the
Security Council and all the friends of Libya to provide
the necessary assistance to enable the Government
to deal with the great challenges still facing that
brotherly country, in particular problems having to
do with security concerns, the smuggling of weapons,
controlling the border, immigration and so on, in
a manner that respects human rights and promotes
national reconciliation. We have also expressed our
willingness to cooperate with our brothers in Libya in
the areas of institution-building and transitional justice.
We underscore the fact that a free, democratic and
independent Libya is necessary for all of us to achieve
the necessaqry unity among countries of the region and
to face the challenges of terrorism and violence in the
Sahel and in Sub-Saharan Africa.

