Mr. Abdel Aziz (Egypt)(interpretation from Arabic):
The Council is discussing the question of Liberia. This is
in line with the hopes raised at the last ministerial
meeting of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Committee of Nine, held at Monrovia
on 13 and 14 February, that the Liberian factions would
meet their commitments under the Abuja Agreement on
a peaceful settlement in Liberia and that they will give
priority to national considerations and to the national
interest of the Liberian people.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
includes positive observations; the military component of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) has been
supplemented with new forces from Mali and Ghana; the
disarmament of factions continues; ECOMOG intends to
continue its serious searches for arms that remain in the
hands of the factions and to confiscate them; and
ECOWAS is cooperating with the United Nations in
establishing the framework for the Liberian elections to
take place on 30 May, which will include the
revitalization of the political parties. On that last point,
we welcome another positive step: the understanding that
has been reached between the United Nations and
ECOWAS on United Nations assistance in the electoral
process. We fully support the Secretary-General's
recommendation on the means to increase the size and
broaden the role of UNOMIL.

Over the past six years, the ECOWAS countries
have made great efforts which deserve encouragement and
support. Their latest decision to increase the size and
effectiveness of ECOMOG, despite the difficult economic
conditions of those countries, is clear evidence of their
determination to go forward to achieve peace in Liberia.
It is also proof that regional arrangements have been
sufficient to play an important role. However, for
ECOWAS to undertake that role, Liberia and ECOWAS
need the support of the international community. In that
respect, we thank the countries that have lent financial
and technical assistance to ECOMOG and to the United
Nations Trust Fund for Liberia. We hope that this

 

assistance will continue so that ECOWAS and ECOMOG
can fully carry out their functions.

The Egyptian delegations supports the draft resolution
before the Council, which would extend UNOMIL's
mandate for three months, to the end of June. We will vote
in favour of the draft resolution. We are convinced that the
settlement process in Liberia has reached a turning point.
We hope that the elections will take place on 30 May, as
planned. We hope that the Liberian leaders will cooperate
in making the necessary preparations, including the
installation of the independent Elections Commission,
following the successful example of Sierra Leone.

A long road will lie before Liberia even after the
holding of elections. There are difficult tasks ahead; to
absorb 800,000 refugees who are dispersed in neighbouring
countries; to reintegrate demobilized combatants into civil
society; to build State institutions and infrastructure
destroyed by the war, including the Supreme Court; and
other tasks. The international community, which stood by
Liberia during its wartime difficulties, will certainly support
it during peacetime so that Liberia will be able to restore its
regional and international position.

