Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I should like to join my
colleagues in welcoming you, Sir, and to say that we are
honoured by your presence here today. Indeed, your
presence here is inspiring because your life is an example
in the struggle for the values of human rights and
democracy. I also wish to congratulate you and Ambassador
Andjaba on the timely initiative of holding this meeting,
which reflects the devotion of Namibia to creating a more
just and more humane international order.

The statement made on 29 June last year by the
President of the Security Council reflected a wide
consensus on the need to address the plight of children
affected by armed conflicts. This consensus made it
possible to take a step further this year through the
negotiation of a draft resolution on the matter. It is
important to stress that these are groundbreaking
developments that deserve praise.

The paradox is that the positive trend represented by
the readiness of the Security Council to keep on its agenda
the issue of children and armed conflict is a direct result of
the deteriorating situation on the ground. Unfortunately, our
efforts still fall short of what is needed to end the grievous
suffering of children affected by armed conflicts.

We are grateful to Mr. Otunnu for his devotion to the
cause of children and for his personal contribution to the
significant progress that has been achieved in safeguarding
their rights in areas of conflict. His reports paint a dire
picture of the situation on the ground and emphasize the
need for a broad-based approach to this issue. I very
strongly support his views on the need for an endeavour of
application to be launched so as to ensure that international
norms and values are turned into practice.

The Security Council must play its part in a much
broader strategy to address the various dimensions of this
urgent and dramatic problem. First of all, in dealing with
situations of armed conflict, the Council should not lose
sight of the special humanitarian needs of children. It is of
paramount importance that the Security Council take into
account the effects on the welfare of children of measures
adopted under Article 41 of the United Nations Charter.
Therefore, humanitarian exemptions may have to be
considered as appropriate.

Children are particularly vulnerable to gross
violations of humanitarian law and constitute an easy
target for all sorts of abuses. When discharging its
functions in matters related to international security, the
Council should bear in mind the imperative of bringing to
an end the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflicts in violation of international law.

We are aware of the importance of the four
policy-related keywords concerning the use of children in
armed conflicts: disarmament, demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration. However, let us not forget
those who are maimed, psychologically traumatized and
orphaned regardless of their direct involvement in
belligerence. No doubt, a greater degree of system-wide
coordination within the United Nations is also essential in
this regard.

The Security Council must work in close
coordination with the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, given their pivotal role in
assuring appropriate assistance to children in need,
especially in the context of post-conflict peacebuilding.
We should also acknowledge the valuable work carried
out by other United Nations agencies, such as the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). Most
of this work is undertaken under extremely difficult
circumstances and within limited budgets.

I believe that the assistance provided by
humanitarian workers sets an example for us all. Let us
strive to assure that their abnegation serves to inspire our
efforts at the national and international levels. Brazil will
continue to lend its firm support to the development of a
coherent strategy to meet the special needs of children
affected by armed conflicts.
We look forward to the completion of the drafting of
an optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflicts aimed at raising the minimum level of protection
provided for in that Convention. In this connection, we
have expressed on several occasions our concern at the
use of landmines, which account for a great deal of
deaths and casualties among children. Along with the ban
of landmines, it is necessary to set in motion
comprehensive programmes of mine clearance and mine
awareness.

 

Also in the field of disarmament, we should pay
attention to the flow of small arms and light weapons as
well. The attention that should be drawn to such kinds of
weapons has to do not only with their deadly potential,
which has already proven to be enormous, but also with the
fact they are easily carried by child soldiers.

Political will and decisive action are required if we are
to successfully prevent the children of the next generations
from being stolen and their future ravaged by warfare. It is
Brazil's hope that our efforts, on all the fronts I have just
mentioned, shall be commensurate with the magnitude of
the challenges before us. In this endeavour to protect our
children from armed conflicts, it is the human condition
itself that is at stake. Let us strive to ensure that children all
over the world are the bearers of hope and confidence in a
better future for all, and not victims of the perversity that
humans are often capable of.

