Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China thanks Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary- General Lowcock for their briefings and appreciates the Organization's efforts to advance the Syrian political process and improve the humanitarian situation in the country. A political settlement is the only way to end the conflict in Syria. The United Nations should continue to advance the Syrian political process in accordance with the Syrian-led, Syrian-owned principle and resolution 2254 (2015). Last week, Special Envoy Pedersen visited Syria and held talks with the Syrian Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Al-Moualem. China supports the Special Envoy in his effort to strengthen communication with the Syrian Government and heed its legitimate calls. The independence of the work of the Constitutional Committee should be maintained. It should not be subject to external interference, and neither should there be an artificially preset time frame. It should be left up to the Syrian people to find a way out of the crisis. The members of the Constitutional Committee should show political will and, in the spirit of compromise, take active part in dialogue in a concerted effort to uphold Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territory integrity. The complex situation in north-west Syria is both a security issue and a humanitarian issue, which can be traced back to the time when terrorists controlled Idlib. Listed terrorist organizations must be resolutely eliminated, in accordance with Council resolutions and international law, using agreed _ standards. Weapons collected in the course of combating terrorist organizations should be scrutinized for their origin, and the channels used to supply terrorist organizations with weapons should be eradicated. A database should be established for foreign terrorist fighters in order to address that problem. Measures should also be taken to prevent them from fleeing to other countries and regions to continue their criminal activities. China supports the United Nations in helping displaced civilians. We hope that the parties concerned will continue to seek a comprehensive and long- term solution to the Idlib issue through dialogue and negotiations. China is deeply concerned about the overall humanitarian situation in Syria due to years of war, broken infrastructure, economic sanctions and other reasons. The living conditions of the Syrian people are dire. The international community should provide the United Nations with adequate funding and resources to ensure the provision of humanitarian supplies to the people in need throughout Syria. At the same time, they should lend support to the Syrian Government for reconstruction efforts in areas with a relatively stable security situation, with a view to repairing housing and other civilian infrastructure, restoring medical and educational facilities and clearing explosive remnants of war. That is the only way for more Syrian people to step out of the shadow of war and gradually move towards leading a stable and orderly life.
