Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy for his presentation and
welcome the fact that Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra is also here with us for this debate. We are
also grateful for the presentation by Mr. Antonio on
behalf of the African Union and to Mr. Prodi for his
contribution and for the work of the United Nations-
African Union panel under his leadership.

The issue of United Nations support to African
Union (AU) peacekeeping under a United Nations
mandate is important. The United Kingdom welcomes
the opportunity to debate it here in the Council.

Peacekeeping plays a vital role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
recent years, we have seen an increase in both the scale
and complexity of the challenges. The United Kingdom
supports the efforts under way to develop a more
effective and strategic approach to peacekeeping.
Given the range of challenges faced not only in
peacekeeping but also in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and mediation, the role of regional and
subregional organizations is becoming increasingly
important. We therefore welcome the enhanced
relationship between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union, as outlined in resolution 1809 (2008).

Since the adoption of that resolution some
18 months ago, there has been much consideration of
the different ways the relationship can be enhanced.
We have also seen concrete examples of practical
support from the United Nations to the African Union,
notably on the African Union Mission in Somalia. The
report of the panel chaired by Mr. Prodi (S/2008/8l3),
which the Council debated in March, was an important
contribution to the debate.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2009/470) is
the latest step in this work. It provides a number of
useful ideas for how the two organizations can
continue to develop their strategic and operational
relationship. As the Secretary-General observes in his
report, building sufficient institutional capacity in key
management, support and strategic planning functions
represents a major challenge for the African Union. We
welcome his suggestions to help build African Union
capacity, and in particular his proposal for a capacity-
building road map. That should form part of the wider
African Union strategic plan for 2009-2012 in order to
underpin African ownership and responsibility and
ensure synergy with the African Union's overall
development.

Building African Union management capacity,
including resource management, is essential not only to
managing immediate and future peacekeeping
demands, but also to enabling a more effective
partnership between the African Union and donors. We
also need to see harmonized reporting requirements for
donors.
The United Kingdom supports the development
of African Union peacekeeping capability both
bilaterally and through international partners, which
includes support for the Africa Standby Force, regional
training centres and African Union political offices. As
Ambassador Araud has already told us, the European
Union, as the main financial partner of the African
Union, is providing substantial additional support -
€300 million of funding for African Union capacity-
building through the Africa Peace Facility, of which the
United Kingdom contributes over €45 million. We
recognize the need to work towards enhancing the
longer-term predictability, sustainability and flexibility
of financing for AU-led operations under a United
Nations mandate.

The Secretary-General highlights a range of
potential options in his report. We would not rule out
any of these options at this stage. A proposal for
establishing a standing flexible trust fund within the
framework of the existing African Union Peace Fund
has the potential to provide rapid funding for AU
operations as well as for longer-term needs.

We welcome the Secretary-General's intention to
establish a joint task force on peace and security, which
will review immediate and long-term strategic and
operational issues. We also welcome the other
proposals to develop the interaction between the
United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission. We look forward to further Council
discussion of these issues.

We remain committed to continuing to assist the
development of the African Union's capacity to deliver
peace and security in Africa.

