Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank His Royal
Highness Crown Prince A1 Hussein bin Abdullah II
of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for convening
this important debate and for his valuable statement. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General and the
previous speakers for their insights today.

The United Arab Emirates fully shares the View of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan that young people
should be seen not only as victims, but also as agents in
building and delivering a positive agenda that counters
extremism and Violence and offers hope in the wake of
the destructive war waged by the forces of intolerance
and hatred. Many speakers today have noted the range
of socioeconomic root causes that might make youth
vulnerable to recruitment and radicalization. These
include the significant and growing "youth bulge"
globally and the stress it is placing on basic services such
as education, unemployment, perceptions of injustice,
individual alienation or community grievances.

In the Middle East region, the unresolved and
brutal conflicts in countries such as Syria, Iraq, Libya
and Yemen, and the long-standing Israeli occupation,
have led to further Violence and fractured the global
security order. These crises have left political vacuums,
which have exacerbated extremism, leading to spillover
effects that have destabilized the entire region.

From the perspective of the United Arab Emirates,
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) exploits
all of the factors described today in order to draw young
people towards them to wage war against innocent
civilians. Inflicting human suffering in the name of
religion is a clear violation of Islamic teaching and
doctrine. Considerable financial, communications and
travel support networks that span the world sustain ISIL
and other extremist and terrorist organizations. Those
recruited as foreign fighters in Syria by ISIL come
from more than 90 countries. More thorough research
is required to identify and address the full range of
drivers of the form of extremism that confronts us.

The United Arab Emirates has developed a
comprehensive strategy to implement its Vision
regarding the importance of severing the links
through which youth move towards extremism and
our conviction that youth are the primary resource in
building our nation. The strategy rests on the following
pillars: support for the equal right to education,
including girls; encouraging critical thinking in the
educational process; building a knowledge economy
that promotes innovation and prepares young people
for the modern labour market; and encouraging our
youth to take leadership and greater responsibilities in
all areas.

Our strategy also focuses on denying the use of
social media as a propaganda and recruitment tactic.
We recently launched the United Arab Emirates-United
States Anti-Daesh Online Operations Centre to counter
the exploitation of online media through monitoring
and analysis, and proposing credible religious counter-
narratives. Additionally, we promote the values of
tolerance and moderation by partnering with respected
religious leaders and academic institutions. For
example, in Afghanistan, the United Arab Emirates
has invested $20 million in a programme that provides
imams in rural areas with training in the true and
moderate teachings of Islam. In Abu Dhabi, we have
established the Muslim Council of Elders to promote
Islam's peaceful values and teachings worldwide.

Furthermore, we support youth throughout our
region, particularly in conflict-affected and transitional
countries. We partner with national and international
organizations to provide high quality health-care and
education services for refugees from Syria and Iraq.
And we remain firmly committed to providing full
support to Egypt through youth-focused programmes.
As Egypt is home to 30 per cent ofthe youth population
of the Middle East and North Africa today, we firmly
believe that Egypt's stability is the cornerstone of the
region's stability.

I would like to propose some recommendations to
the international community in countering extremism
in the long-term.

First, we must deny the conditions on the ground
that allow extremism to spread in transitional States.
When mass atrocities take place, we should take swift
and collective action through the Security Council.
Secondly, we should utilize the existing and emerging
legal frameworks to counter extremist recruitment and
financing channels, and ensure the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Thirdly, we
should encourage long-term investments in education
and health, especially in humanitarian and fragile
settings. Fourthly, we should develop programmes that
empower mothers to serve as the first line of defence
for families and children against misperceptions and
extremist thinking.

We must recognize the nexus between the
development and security agendas, prioritize our
commitments to young people and address their
economic, political and social concerns. Let us unite
in support of the more than 1.8 billion young people
globally to help them meet their aspirations and develop
a better future, together.

