Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman and Secretary
General Stock of INTERPOL for their briefings.

Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council shoulders the main responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
For many years, the Council has used a combination of
measures, including sanctions, in response to various
security threats and in pushing for a proper settlement
of the relevant issues through peaceful means and has
had positive results. In its practice, the Council has also
continued to evaluate its experiences, both positive and
negative, and has gradually formed a complete system
for sanctions implementation through the important
role it has played.

Meanwhile, in formulating, applying and enforcing
sanctions, the Council is also facing a series ofproblems
and challenges. In addition, a small number of countries
act at will according their domestic laws and impose or
threaten to impose unilateral sanctions against other
States, which is not only in violation of the principle
of sovereign equality among Member States but also
undermine the authority of Council sanctions.

As to how the Council can best utilize the
mechanism of sanctions, I would like to make three
points.

First, the pre-eminence of the Charter of the United
Nations over sanctions should be safeguarded. The
Council should strictly comply with the provisions of
the Charter and adopt a prudent and responsible attitude
on the question of sanctions. In coping with situations
of concern, the Council should give priority to such
tools as mediation, good offices and negotiations. The
enforcement of sanctions should be predicated on the
exhaustion of other non-coercive means and should be
in keeping with the principles of the United Nations
Charter and relevant international law. Sanctions
should not be a tool for one country to use in pursuit of
power politics. The domestic law of one country should
not become the basis for sanctions against other States.
China is opposed to any practice ofimposing sanctions
on other countries on the basis of one's domestic law.

Secondly, we should adhere to the overall pattern
of sanctions serving political settlements, as sanctions
are not the goal but the means. The Council's sanctions
should be based on the overall goal of achieving a
political settlement of the issue in question. In the
course of the formulation, application and enforcement
of sanctions, the need for a political settlement should
be taken into account at all times and the actions taken
should be truly conducive to an easing of tensions
and to furthering the efforts for mediation and good
offices by the countries and regional organizations in
question. Sanctions should not be carried out for their
own sake, much less interfere with efforts for political
settlement - that would be penny wise and pound
foolish and would put the cart before the horse.

Thirdly, it is imperative to maintain the existing
sanctions implementation system. Currently, sanctions
are generally an effective tool for the Council. An
implementation system has taken shape, which is
comprised of implementation by Member States,
guidance and supervision by the sanctions committees
and professional support by the panels of experts. Since
imposing sanctions is a power given to the Council
by the Charter of the United Nations, at is imperative
for Member States to maintain their ownership of
the issue of sanctions. As the various sanctions
regimes have been established in response to various
situations, discussions on sanctions should focus on the
differences among the various sanctions regimes, and
the implementation of sanctions should be tailored to
specific situations, and we should avoid one-size-fits-
all approaches.

Meanwhile, the improvement and perfection of the
existing system of sanctions implementation should
prioritize increasing the relevance and effectiveness of
the sanctions, and efforts should be made to minimize
the negative impact of sanctions on the general
population and third-party States. The Council should
notjust add sanctions; it should also reduce them. In the
light of the developments in the countries in question, it
should regularly assess sanctions results and, based on
the needs, amend, suspend and ultimately lift sanctions.

As a permanent member of the Security Council,
China has consistently adopted a prudent and responsible
approach towards issues involving sanctions and has
been pushing for greater relevance and effectiveness
in the Council's sanctions regime in order to serve the
overall interest of the political settlement of the relevant
questions. We are ready to join the other members of
the Council and the wider United Nations membership
in pushing for a Security Council that will better
fulfil its responsibilities and contribute positively and
constructively to the maintenance of common security
and lasting peace around the world.

