The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Guinea-Bissau in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/ 174, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council recognizes some
progress made in some areas in Guinea-Bissau,
including the electoral process, and urges all political
actors in the country to show unequivocal
commitment to a peaceful electoral process, leading
to peaceful, transparent, free and fair elections, by
refraining from inspiring or promoting any sort of
ethnic or religious hostilities, particularly with a View
to obtaining political gains. In this regard, the
Council strongly condemns any attempts to incite

violence and to impede ongoing efforts towards
peace, stability and social and economic
development.

"The Security Council expresses its growing
concern at recent political developments in
Guinea-Bissau, in particular the decision by the
'Partido da Renovacao Social' - PRS - to select
ex-President Koumba Yala as its presidential
candidate. Any decision, such as this, that challenges
the Transitional Charter has the potential to
jeopardize the successful conclusion of the
transitional process and forthcoming presidential
elections.

"The Security Council expresses also its deep
concern at the fact that peace efforts have not yet
generated sufficient social and economic benefits for
the population that could discourage the use of force.

"The Security Council stresses, at the same
time, the urgent need for international support to the
electoral process. It recalls previous appeals for
increased international assistance to Guinea-Bissau,
including to the forthcoming presidential elections, as
part of an urgently needed peacebuilding strategy in
that country.

"The Security Council calls upon Guinea-
Bissau's international development partners,
including all concerned agencies of the United
Nations system, to cooperate fully with the
Government of Guinea-Bissau, which has been
fully engaged in the implementation of the
Transition Charter and in efforts to promote
transparency and good governance. It welcomes,
in this regard, the holding on 11 February 2005,
in Lisbon, of the 'Meeting of Guinea-Bissau's
Partners to prepare for the Roundtable
Conference' and stresses the importance of strong
participation in the Donor Roundtable Conference
scheduled for October 2005.

"The Security Council welcomes initial
measures taken by the Chief of General Staff
regarding the process of reform of the Armed
Forces and the promotion of reconciliation among
the military. The Council further encourages full
inclusiveness and renewed commitment to
reconciliation in the Armed Forces, and
development of constructive civilian-military
relations based on the Armed Forces as an
institution subordinated to the elected civilian
authorities. In accordance with its mandate in This statement will be issued as a document of
resolution 1580 (2004), it reaffirms UNOGBIS's the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/14.

role in encouraging and supporting national

efforts to reform the security sector." The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting me at 5.45 pm.

