Mr. Djangone-Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I wish at the outset, on behalf of my
delegation, to congratulate you sincerely, Sir, on
Denmark's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. You are
presiding over the work of the Council at a time when
the United Nations is discussing the great challenges
facing the world: collective security, development and
respect for human rights. I can assure you that my
delegation supports all your initiatives. I wish also to
thank you for having organized this debate on a topical
theme, to which my country, Cote d'Ivoire - which
has been at war since 19 September 2002 - attaches
great importance.

Further, I salute the Secretary-General's
determination constantly to reassert the role of the
Organization in peacebuilding and the maintenance of
peace in the post-conflict phase.

All the steps the Council has already taken in the
sphere of post-conflict peacebuilding in countries
emerging from conflict have proven to be extremely
effective. These relate to restoring the rule of law and
confidence in the impartiality of the judicial, security
and penal systems; to arms embargoes; to the process
of certifying the origin of natural resources in countries
being assisted; to subregional efforts to monitor the
movements of ex-combatants and the trafficking in
women and children. Such measures have been useful
for the long-term maintenance of peace wherever they
have been implemented.

The same applies to the commitment to quick-
impact projects during peacekeeping and the linking of
crisis resolution and peacebuilding measures.

The emphasis must now be on enhancing overall
coherence and constantly making sure that the
stakeholders' work is consistent and that there is
complementarity, as well as close cooperation among
all national and international actors.

Any peacekeeping programme needs to include a
priority component of arms control. The proliferation
of small arms and their uncontrolled circulation is
without any doubt an important fact or that complicates
and prolongs conflicts, particularly in Africa. The
resurgence of rebel movements and the rise in
organized crime in our countries have been made
possible because of the proliferation of and illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, and the
eradication of these weapons requires the support of
the international community.

Given the multitude of conflicts and their
complexity, it is more necessary than ever before that
States combine their efforts to deal with this
phenomenon. Success will not be assured or lasting
unless the embargo on importing weapons is
strengthened by identifying, on the one hand, the licit
and illicit supply lines of weapons and resources that
fuel conflicts, and, on the other, all national and
external interests in the conflict.

We all recall the recommendations on the threat
of conflict between States and the threat of conflict
within States, as contained in the report of the High-
level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change; in
recent months those recommendations were the subject
of broad-based consultation and discussion. There is no
doubt that the strategy to be formulated at the
September summit which we all eagerly await will
make it possible to strengthen the consensus that
should guide our action. Pending those conclusions, we
must continue to think about various ways to give new
momentum to the work of the United Nations in the
areas of peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

Cote d'Ivoire, exhausted and shaken by war, has
clearly embarked resolutely on restoring domestic
peace. This fortunate process, which we owe to the
mediation of the African Union, led by President
Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, would benefit if it were
assisted and strengthened by measures that are being
discussed in the Security Council right now. Cote
d'Ivoire is counting on the international community to
support us in our difficult post-conflict reconstruction.
Unless there is major investment in post-disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration - unless there is bold
action to help out development - it is obvious that
there is a risk of relapsing into crisis. It is by making
these investments that peace may be built on a lasting
basis.

Clearly, peacekeeping operations, although very
useful, are not enough in themselves to guarantee a
return to peace and future peacebuilding. These
operations have to go hand in hand with development
activities, which should be tailored by the specialized
agencies and the United Nations programmes to
support the efforts of the authorities of the country
concerned.

It is with this in mind that my delegation supports
the welcome proposal of the Secretary-General to
establish a Peacebuilding Commission.

I cannot conclude my statement without
reaffirming the fervent desire of Cote d'Ivoire to
continue to receive assistance from the United Nations
in organizing and holding the upcoming general
elections, particularly the presidential election to be
held in October of this year. I should also like to
convey once again to the United Nations and, in
particular, to the Security Council the gratitude of my
country for steps already taken and those being
envisaged with perfect complementarity of action by
the various stakeholders in resolving the crisis in Cote
d'Ivoire to guarantee that these elections will be free
and transparent.

Furthermore, I would be grateful to you,
Mr. President, if you could relay the message of Cote
d'Ivoire to countries that contribute troops and other
resources to bring about a return of peace to my
country.

