Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank C6te d'Ivoire for having
made the Sahel a priority of its Security Council
presidency. We strongly support that choice because
we are convinced that the challenges facing the Sahel
region call for an ambitious and coordinated response
by the international community within the framework
of the priorities set by the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.

I thank the Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General for the Sahel, Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw; the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Ion
Jinga; the Vice President of the World Bank for Africa,
Mr. Hafez Ghanem; and the representative of the Sahel
Alliance, the Director General of the Agence Francaise
de Developpement, Mr. Remy Rioux, for their briefings,
which illustrate the extent of international mobilization
in support of the Sahel that exists today. They also show
how complementary and coordinated the respective
actions of the various stakeholders on the ground are.
France is convinced that our collective commitment
to the stabilization of the Sahel must necessarily be
based on joint action on the political, security and
development pillars.

First and foremost is the political pillar, for there
can be no lasting stabilization in the Sahel without the
full implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, which is becoming increasingly
urgent. The Security Council has established a robust
framework to support the Malian parties in that
regard, in accordance with the terms of the Peace
Agreement itself. Recent progress, including the
effective launch of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, is encouraging but must be
further consolidated. We believe that the international
community must use all those levers by the March
deadline set by resolution 2432 (2018). The sanctions
adopted a few minutes ago against three individuals
obstructing the implementation of the Peace Agreement
are a case in point. They mark an important moment in
time - the international community is taking concrete
action against those who seek to prevent peace in order
to continue to prosper at the expense of the general
population. Those measures will be complemented by
other such measures in the future, if necessary.

Secondly, we must consider the security
pillar - because there can be no stability in the Sahel
without a merciless fight against the terrorist groups
that threaten the populations and the stability of the
States of the region. In that regard, we must continue
to enhance the partnerships among the various security
forces deployed in Mali and the Sahel - national
armies, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force, Operation Barkhane
and the European missions - each of which has its
own added value and all of which pursue the same
strategic objective.

It is also our responsibility to strengthen
multilateral support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
which is an innovative and sustainable response by
the G-5 States against a threat to international peace
and security whose causes and implications extend
beyond their subregion. As the Council recalled in its
press statement of 15 November (SC/13584), the Joint
Force must now continue its operations while building
on the funding already disbursed, which will allow
the Council to review its international support in the
near future.
Finally, with regard to the development pillar, there
can be no stability in the Sahel without the creation of
sustainable prospects for the people of the Sahel, and
in particular for its youth. We all must act within the
framework established in the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, which is intended to serve as a
compass in order to avoid any dilution or duplication of
effort. In that regard, we welcome the work carried out
in recent months to update and revitalize that Strategy,
particularly under the leadership of the Deputy
Secretary-General.

The Sahel Alliance is fully in line with the
guidelines set by that shared framework. It is a space
for coordination among major donors that aims to
deliver aid in a faster, better coordinated and more
targeted way to the most vulnerable populations,
including in areas that have proven difficult to access
for development. That effort can be successful only in
close coordination with the Sahel countries, because
a development strategy devised exclusively in the
northern capitals will not succeed. That is why, in early
December in Nouakchott, the Sahel Alliance announced
that it would provide €1.3 billion in funding for the
G-5 Sahel Priority Investment Programme, which was
created and designed by experts on the Sahel. Of that
sum, €266 million has been set aside for projects set to
begin right away in the Joint Force's most vulnerable
regions of operation.

The United Nations has a central role to play on
each of those elements by ensuring the coherence
and effectiveness of everyone's engagement. That
includes coordinated action by all actors in the United
Nations system in efforts ranging from prevention to
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. The Peacebuilding
Commission has a major role to play in strengthening
that integrated approach. It can help to strengthen
coordination among the different pillars of the United
Nations system, but also among the United Nations,
the region, Governments and societies in the Sahel. We
hope that the Commission will continue to mobilize on
the Sahel issue, as it did a few weeks ago at its annual
session. I would also like to welcome the increasing
and especially relevant and useful involvement of the
Peacebuilding Fund in the countries of the Sahel.

France will continue to raise the various aspects of
the issue of the stabilization of the Sahel in the Security
Council. The permanent link between our political,
security and development efforts is essential in that
regard. The Council can count on our determination to
provide responses to the challenges facing the region.
That responsibility falls on us all.

