Ms. Becker: I am honoured to address the Council today on behalf of the Watchlist of Children and Armed Conflict, a global network of human rights and humanitarian organizations devoted to protecting and promoting the rights of children in armed conflict. In 1996, when Gracga Machel delivered her seminal study on the impact of armed conflict on children (see A/51/306), she deplored the fact that up until then, no peace treaty had ever acknowledged the existence of child soldiers. Without such recognition, she said, there could be no effective planning for peace. Since then, the Security Council has repeatedly called for the inclusion of child protection in peace processes. But in reality, peace agreements that address child protection are still rare. They are the exception, not the norm.The Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict conducted an analysis of ceasefire and peace agreements to assess how well they addressed child protection. We were pretty discouraged by the results. We looked at all the documents in the Department of Political Affairs peace agreements database, going back to 1999, the year when the Security Council first took up the issue of children and armed conflict. The documents included peace and ceasefire agreements as well as declarations and other communiques. We found that of 444 documents, fewer than 18 per cent included child-protection provisions, and many of those did so only in the most general way - for example, by calling for the protection of women, children and other vulnerable groups. This simply is not good enough. We know that children suffer disproportionately in war; they also benefit less in peace. Peace processes and agreements do more than end war. They establish a framework for transition and the political, social and economic agenda for peace. They establish priorities for post-conflict investment and resource allocation. When children are excluded, their needs and their rights become invisible. The result is underinvestment and a lack of critical programming. In such circumstances, we cannot be surprised if new grievances emerge and former child soldiers take up arms again. Addressing the needs of conflict-affected children in peace processes is not just a moral or a legal imperative - it is crucial to a durable peace. Our experiences with peace processes to date highlight some critical gaps. Peace agreements are most likely to address the issue of child soldiers, but they often fail to address justice for child soldiers as victims or accountability for the leaders who recruit them. This failure contributes to impunity and continued cycles of recruitment and re-recruitment. Provisions on children associated with armed forces or groups are sometimes too narrow, focusing only on child combatants and failing to include girls or those who did not bear arms. In Liberia, for example, community groups needed to advocate after the signing of the 2003 peace agreement to ensure that disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) efforts included all affected children. Despite the years of attention to the issue of child soldiers, some peace agreements still fail to address them at all. The 2015 Bamako Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, for example, does not mention the issue or include children in its DDR provisions, despite high-level advocacy by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict. Peace processes also fail to include channels for child participation. In South Africa, for example, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission found that few children approached it to tell their stories until they convened special hearings for children and youth. Once organized, those hearings drew enormous input. Libya is another missed opportunity. In 2018, more than 75 public consultations for peace were held across the country, involving more than 7,000 Libyans. Special consultations were held for women, for university students and for the displaced, but none were specifically designed to include children. Institution-building often ignores children. Guatemala's peace agreement, for example, included provisions to strengthen the justice system for adults, resulting in funding, training and monitoring. But justice systems for children were never even considered at the negotiating table and received no resources. Some take the view that general provisions to benefit the population at large will automatically trickle down and benefit children, but our experience is that that is not the case. We have learned that specificity is essential. In that regard, we also have some good examples to learn from. One of the first peace agreements to address children was the 1999 Peace Agreement between the Government of Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary United Front of Sierra Leone. It called for particular attention to child soldiers, including the mobilization of resources and their inclusion in DDR efforts. That paved the way for the formal demobilization of nearly 7,000 children. Later studies found that the response in Sierra Leone was far more effective and integrated than in many other conflicts and that children who were demobilized appeared to be doing as well as other children in their communities. As the Secretary-General mentioned earlier, Colombia is a particularly good model where an explicit agreement on the release of children under the age of 15 by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo helped build trust between the parties ahead of the Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict and the Construction of aStable and Lasting Peace. The peace agreement itself references children dozens of times, with detailed provisions regarding health, early-childhood education, food security, including school feeding programmes, and a truth, justice and reparations system mandated to pay special attention to crimes against children. Some peace agreements have included specific protections for schools, which are often targeted during armed conflict or used for military purposes. For example, the 2002 ceasefire agreement between Sri Lanka and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam stipulated that, within 160 days, school buildings occupied by either party would be vacated and returned to their intended use. In 2016, based on broad consultations and analysis, Watchlist prepared a checklist for provisions related to children and armed conflict in ceasefire and peace agreements. The checklist inspired the United Nations and Member States to develop the guidance that is being launched today. Some of the key components that we identified include the following: prioritizing child protection in the agendas of peace talks from the very beginning; ensuring that all parties explicitly agree to end the six grave violations against children, including by naming them as violations of ceasefire agreements; including specific provisions for children associated with armed forces or groups, including adequate resource mobilization and inclusion in DDR processes; including protections for education, including agreements by parties to vacate and rehabilitate schools that have been used for military purposes; ensuring that children's needs and rights are adequately addressed and resourced in post-conflict programming, including their physical and mental health needs, education and vocational and economic opportunities; ensuring that transitional justice, accountability and reparations mechanisms specifically address violations against children and solicit children's views; and ensuring that monitoring and implementation mechanisms for peace agreements address all child protection provisions and provide for civil society participation to promote transparency and accountability. We welcome the new guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict and encourage the Secretary-General to ensure its broad dissemination within the United Nations system. Finally, the Security Council can also help ensure child protection in peace processes. We urge the Security Council to take the following steps: first, request that all conflict analyses include an assessment of the impact of armed conflict on children to ensure that such issues are dealt with at the beginning of any peace effort; secondly, ensure that country-specific resolutions on peace processes emphasize the need for explicit and comprehensive provisions for child protection; thirdly, urge mediators, the United Nations, parties to conflict and other stakeholders to ensure the meaningful participation of affected children and that their views are taken into account; fourthly, ensure dedicated and adequately resourced child protection capacity in United Nations peace operations and political missions; fifthly, request the Secretary-General and United Nations Special Envoys to ensure that child protection is addressed in all reports on peace processes and the monitoring and implementation of peace agreements; and, lastly, as a foundation for accountability, insist that the Secretary-General's annual list of perpetrators of violations against children be accurate and evidence based, utilizing the data collected by the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict established through resolution 1612 (2005). We appreciate the Security Council's attention to this important issue.
