Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, let me join other
delegations in condemning the recent terrorist attack in
Burkina Faso and in expressing our condolences to the
families and loves ones of the victims.

Let me also thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his very comprehensive
briefing and for highlighting a number of challenges
facing United Nations peacekeeping missions. I will
touch upon three major points in my intervention,
namely, first, the implementation of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative; secondly, the significance of
predeployment training; and, thirdly, the role of women
in peacekeeping operations.

Poland was not only one of the first Member States
to endorse the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, but indeed
also considers it as guidelines to improve United
Nations peacekeeping. At the high-level meeting held
in September 2018 in New York (see S/PV.8362), the
President of Poland, Mr. Andrzej Duda, underlined
the newness of the contemporary challenges to
peacekeepers. He cited terrorism, climate change and
the development of new weapons as factors influencing
and shaping the current operational environment.
All of them have to be taken into consideration in
the mandates of peacekeeping operations in order to
improve performance and effectiveness.

Almost one year ago, the Secretary-General hosted
a high-level meeting on Action for Peacekeeping to
renew commitments to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We can now ask ourselves how the situation
has changed in the past 12 months. The answer is not
an easy one. On the one hand, there has been progress
in terms of the safety of peacekeepers, as shown in the
chart distributed by Mr. Lacroix. On the other hand,
we still see urgent need for a useful gaps analysis that
would allow for a better understanding of what the
actual situation on the ground looks like. It is necessary
to have this precisely identified so that integrated
planning and prioritization can be conducted. That may
help us better allocate resources.

We would like to reiterate our strong support for
tailored predeployment training and adequate equipment
for troop and police units. As our own experience has
proven, such mission-specific preparations are essential
and have to be based on a complete operational,
political, geographical and security picture. The
preparation process for the Polish component to the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
clearly demonstrates how we can realize the
Declaration of Shared Commitments through extensive
investment in predeployment training, responsible
partnership between troop-contributing countries and
the United Nations, and the actual implementation of
recommendations from strategic documents. We are
more than happy to be back in UNIFIL.

As highlighted by Mr. Lacroix, one of the main
obligations set out in the Declaration of Shared
Commitments pertains to the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all stages ofpeace processes.
That is also the case with regard to the challenges and
opportunities in terms of mandate implementation.
Poland believes that only strengthened fulfilment of
the principles underpinning the women and peace and
security agenda will significantly improve our efforts to
effectively find a long-lasting, sustainable resolution to
conflict situations. In that context, we must mention the
significant role of women peacekeepers in addressing
charges of sexual exploitation and abuse. We recognize
their profound role in prevention and awareness-
building during predeployment training as well as in
conducting investigations when allegations are made.

As a strong proponent of the women and peace and
security agenda, we have focused also on the meaningful
representation of female soldiers in our UNIF IL
contingent. The Polish UNIFIL company will be 7 per
cent female, one of the highest percentages in UNIFIL,
and will exceed the overall mission representation,
which currently stands at approximately 5 per cent.

I would like to conclude by expressing our strong
support and gratitude to all peacekeepers, women and
men. Their sacrifice and dedication help bring hope
and peace to millions ofpeople facing daily threats. We
owe them our recognition and reassurance.

