Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed; the Director
General of the World Health Organization, Mr. Tedros
Adhanom Ghebreyesus; the Director-General of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, Mr. Jose Graziano da Silva; and the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien
for their briefings.

We also thank you, Sir, not only for having
convened this meeting, but also for having come up
with the format including the relevant experts who have
provided briefings on the situation in Yemen, thereby
giving us a broad idea of what is happening not only
from the humanitarian, food and health perspective,
but also with regard to the political situation and the
tragedy that the Yemeni people are enduring.

The situation in Yemen remains critical, and the
statistics - such as those concerning the cholera
outbreak, as described in the latest briefings presented
to the Council in May (see S/PV.7954) - have surpassed
projections to an alarming extent. According to
information published by the International Committee
of the Red Cross on 11 July, it is estimated that more
than 313,000 people are suspected to be ill with cholera,
while to date more than 1,700 people have lost their lives
to the disease. That statistic is four times greater than
the figure recorded by the World Health Organization
(WHO) - 361 persons - for the months of April and
May. Even more concerning is the fact that the number
of those who have succumbed to cholera in Yemen
alone - 1,304 - is greater than the total number of
deaths resulting from the disease in the entire world in
2015 , as reported by WHO.

That terrible situation is but one of the many
aspects arising from the conflict in Yemen, and it
has been exacerbated by the lack of access to water,
sanitation and basic services, and, above all, by the
precariousness of the availability of medical services
to the population - as illustrated by the statistic cited
today that only 45 per cent of hospitals are operating
while lacking the resources necessary to respond to
the tragic situation. Unfortunately, added to that is the
disturbing lack of food; according to the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, more than
17 million people are living in food insecurity, ofwhom
7 million - as Mr. Graziano da Silva mentioned - are
at risk of famine.

It is important to recall that, according to the
29 June report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the conflict
has resulted in approximately 2 million internally
displaced persons, while 18.8 million people -the most
vulnerable cross-section of the population and at the
greatest risk of falling ill from malnutrition - require
access to humanitarian assistance. In that regard, we
note with great concern that even though the Council
expressed its position on the subject in presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/7 on 15 June, humanitarian
assistance deployed in Yemen continues to be affected
by the imposition of restrictions and arbitrary unilateral
measures between the parties involved in the conflict.
We also continue to be alarmed by the constant threat
of aerial attacks on civilian infrastructure, which limits
and obstructs access to humanitarian assistance, which
the Yemeni population needs.

We reiterate our call on the parties and actors
involved in the conflict to comply with and respect
the provisions of resolution 2140 (2014) and to make
every effort to commit to a sustained dialogue leading
to an inclusive, orderly and political transition directed
and led by the Yemeni people, which satisfies their
legitimate demands and aspirations, while respecting at
all times the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Yemen.

In today's briefings, we have heard all of the
consequences ofthe conflict. Ibelieve that it is important
for the Security Council to also analyse the causes and
the situations that led to the conflict. The representative
of Uruguay made several statements with which we
fully agree. It important for us to receive reports after
investigations pertaining to those responsible for the
bombings and those providing weapons to the parties.

Although we can incessantly repeat that there is no
military solution to the conflict, the fact that we have
said it does not mean that we are going to end the military
offensives. Regrettably, this is a war that continues to
be passed over in silence. It is not part of the day-to-
day reality outside of the Chamber. That fact is not only
striking, but also clearly shows the limitations of our
work on the Security Council. We hope that, beyond
our statements and declarations, we will be able to take
a specific action so that, only a few weeks from now, we
will not sit down again merely to hear that the situation
is deteriorating and the conflict escalating.

