Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation supported resolution
2009 (2011), just adopted, based on our policy of
addressing the issue of rebuilding post-war Libya
exclusively under the auspices of the United Nations
and the Security Council.

The main task of the United Nations mission
established today will be to support the transition
process in Libya. The establishment of peace in Libya
through political and diplomatic channels is an
absolute priority. It is important that the resolution
reflects the Council's intention to consider, in the near
future, the issue of lifting the no-fly zone over Libyan
territory, in particular because in a number of cases the
zone has been violated arbitrarily. We reiterate that the
main purpose of creating the no-fly zone was to protect
civilians.

Unfortunately, the Council's mandate for
conducting the operation in Libya was disregarded,
resulting in air strikes that also targeted civilian
facilities and killed civilians. Now, in view of the new
realities on the ground and in the air, maintaining the
no-fly zone no longer makes sense. The lifting of that
ban must be included among the international
community's efforts to normalize the situation and
address the aftermath of the Libyan crisis.

At this stage, we must also focus on the pressing
problems in the human rights sphere. We must carry
out a thorough investigation of all facts related to
human rights violations during the conflict in Libya. It
has become increasingly clear that crimes were
committed by all parties to the conflict from its very
outset. Evidence has been uncovered of mass murders
of detainees, torture, forced disappearances and
arbitrary detentions. Of particular concern is the
situation faced by nationals of African countries who
have suffered wholly unjustified persecution and
violence. We expect relevant steps to be taken by the
new Libyan authorities. The declaration on creating a
new democratic Libya should be backed by real steps
by the National Transitional Council confirming its
commitment to tolerance and promoting the process of
national reconciliation.

