Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Please allow me to
begin by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto; the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury
Fedotov; and Ambassador Djani, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), for their insightful briefings.

In that regard, I would also like to commend
UNAMA's personnel and Mr. Yamamoto for their
vital contribution in supporting Afghanistan's efforts
towards restoring peace and stability in the country,
especially given the challenging circumstances in
which they operate.

We would like to highlight the following three
points in our statement: first, the peace process;
secondly, the role of women; and, thirdly, the security
situation in Afghanistan.

First, regarding the peace process, South Africa
believes that the only way for Afghanistan to achieve
durable peace and stability is through a comprehensive
and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned political
process leading to a negotiated settlement. My
delegation is of the opinion that any engagement or
peace initiative towards lasting peace and security in
Afghanistan should be considered, including that of
the United States of America or other parties of the
region. However, it is also important that all sectors
of the Afghan Government and society be included in
those discussions to ensure that a comprehensive and
inclusive peace is established and sustained.

Secondly, on the role of women, South Africa
strongly believes that an integral aspect of those
engagements is the inclusion and participation of
Afghan women. That would safeguard the significant
progress and gains achieved regarding women's and
girls' rights and provide the necessary views and voices
of all segments of Afghan society. We welcome the
Government of Afghanistan's efforts to advance the
promotion and protection of women's rights and urge that
this commitment continue during future discussions.

In that regard, we welcome President Ghani's
appointment of Ambassador Raz as the Permanent
Representative to the United Nations. We hope and
have no doubt that she will continue to fly her country's
flag high and that she will be a shining example of what
the women of Afghanistan can achieve. Equally, we
join Ambassador Raz in thanking Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed and the Executive Director
of UN-Women for their visit to the country in July and
their engagement with the women and the Government
of Afghanistan in the area of women and peace
and security.

Peace in Afghanistan can be achieved only by
the Afghan people themselves. My delegation urges
all stakeholders to work towards that noble and
achievable goal.

Thirdly and finally, on the security situation in
Afghanistan, South Africa is deeply concerned at
the levels of violence and insecurity in Afghanistan,
especially attacks targeting innocent civilians through
the use of improvised explosive devices and suicide
attacks. The ongoing violence only erodes the positive
progress made in recent years. As the Secretary-
General stated, those deplorable acts cannot bejustified
and must come to an end. We pay tribute to those who
have sacrificed their lives in assisting Afghanistan on
the road to peace and stability.

The effect of that violence is particularly felt by the
most vulnerable in society, notably women, children
and those living with disabilities. We call on all parties
to ensure the protection of civilians and to adhere to
their obligations under international humanitarian
and international human rights law. My delegation
continues to condemn the unlawful recruitment and
use of children in armed forces and groups and calls
for their immediate release and reintegration into
Afghan society.

In conclusion, the Afghan people are expected
to go to the polls on 28 September and exercise their
hard-won right to choose their own President. In that
regard, South Africa calls on all participants in the
election process to work together to ensure that the
elections go ahead as planned as mandated by the
Afghan Constitution. We hope that with the necessary
cooperation and support among the parties, the
presidential elections will be credible, free, fair and
transparent, and that the 9.6 million registered Afghans
can go to the polls as scheduled.

