Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): It is a great honour to be
invited to address the Security Council and a great
pleasure to be here once again among friends.

Today we reach another important milestone in the
fruitful cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
in the efforts to resolve crisis situations in our subregion.

Since the outbreak of the current crisis in Sierra
Leone following the violent overthrow of the Government
of President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah on 25 May 1997, by

 

a sector of the military in that country, the international
community has been unanimous in its condemnation of the
coup d'etat. The United Nations, the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and ECOWAS have all demanded
that the junta step down so that the democratically elected
Government in Sierra Leone can be restored without delay.
We note with satisfaction that this position has not changed,
and we urge earnestly that this principled position taken by
the Security Council remain unchanged.

The initial round of talks between ECOWAS and the
junta aimed at a peaceful resolution of the crisis was both
encouraging and fruitful. However, the negotiations fell
through during the next round due to deliberate stalling and
acts of bad faith on the part of the junta, whose
representatives reneged on the commitment which they had
made earlier. Worse still, the regime announced its
intention to remain in power for four years. The situation
in Sierra Leone, which was bad enough at the inception of
the coup d'etat, has since then deteriorated considerably.

Members of the Council are by now well aware of the
scorched-earth policy pursued by the junta in Sierra Leone.
Although the ECOWAS Committee on Sierra Leone
responded to further and often confused feelers from the
other side to resume negotiations, those efforts are yet to
materialize because of the continuing intransigence on the
part of the junta. It is clear that the welfare of the people of
Sierra Leone has no place in the mind of the junta.

Faced with this situation, ECOWAS was left with no
option but to adopt a set of measures in the form of
sanctions and embargo as a means of pressuring the regime
in Freetown to appreciate the futility of its situation and
agree to re-engage ECOWAS in a constructive dialogue
which would ensure the early reinstatement of the
legitimate Government of President Kabbah.

The decisions and actions taken by ECOWAS to
resolve the Sierra Leonean crisis are guided by the
following main considerations.

First, the situation in Sierra Leone is a clear threat to
international peace and security, in view of its potential to
destabilize the entire subregion.

Secondly, the subregion will want to avoid another
costly and long drawn-out engagement, with the attendant
massive humanitarian problems and tragedies, similar to
what it experienced in Liberia.

Thirdly, while ECOWAS is sufficiently seized of the
matter, the support and endorsement of the United
Nations are needed. Both organizations have learned
valuable lessons in Liberia which can be usefully applied
to the resolution of this crisis. The message must be made
very clear to the junta in Sierra Leone that it is
completely isolated and its future is bleak.

As the draft resolution acknowledges, ECOWAS is
the body closest to the situation on the ground. It also has
a mechanism, in the form of its Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), already in place to carry out an effective
monitoring and implementation of whatever measures are
agreed upon. We therefore welcome the inclusion in
paragraph 8 of this draft resolution of an enabling
authorization of the Council to ECOMOG to carry out its
tasks as mandated by the ECOWAS summit. We reiterate
our strong appeal to all members of the international
community to assist ECOMOG to carry out those tasks by
providing it with logistical assistance and vital
information, in addition to ensuring that there are no
violations of the measures by any member State or entity.

Following the adoption of this draft resolution, and
in fulfilment of the commitment made by my Foreign
Minister, Chief Tom Ikimi, when he briefed Council
members on 19 September 1997, the ECOWAS
Committee on Sierra Leone intends to hold a meeting in
Abuja on 9 and 10 October in order, among other things,
to map out its strategy for resuming the stalled
negotiations. In this regard, we hope that those who have
leverage with the Koroma regime will bring it to bear so
that its representatives will now come to the negotiating
table in good faith and with a new commitment to the
peaceful resolution of the crisis.

Finally, let me, on behalf of the Chairman of
ECOWAS, General Sani Abacha, thank all members of
this Council for their constructive approach to the
consideration of this draft resolution. Of course, we in
ECOWAS wanted additional and stronger measures
included in the text. However, we regard this draft
resolution as a positive development and we believe that
what is important is that the message of the international
resolve to restore constitutional order and peace in Sierra
Leone be heard loud and clear by all concerned,
especially the junta. In our view, the draft resolution
which the Council is about to adopt adequately conveys
that unambiguous message.

