Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes this briefing and thanks
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his comprehensive briefing on the
activities of UNAMA and recent developments in the
political and security situation in that country. We also
thank Ms. Sima Samar, Chairperson ofthe Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, for her
informative briefing.
My delegation notes with satisfaction the
completion of the candidacy verification procedures by
the Independent Election Commission, approximately
three months before the presidential election in
Afghanistan. We encourage the Independent Election
Commission to continue to diligently register voters on
the electoral lists with a view to organizing the election
planned for 28 September, and to step up its efforts to
raise the awareness of voters and political actors on the
instructions for use and the guarantees offered by voting
machines in order to avoid the malfunctions observed
during the parliamentary elections of 20 October 2018.

My delegation believes that the progress made must
be strengthened by the commitment of all stakeholders
to creating an environment conducive to a free,
transparent and credible presidential election. Cote
d'Ivoire notes with concern the ongoing threats and
deadly attacks by the Taliban and the local branch of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, which could have
a negative impact on the turnout rate, as seen during
the parliamentary elections. We therefore call on the
international community and the troops of the Resolute
Support Mission to be vigilant and take preventive
security measures during this crucial electoral period
for the country's future. Cote d'Ivoire also urges the
candidates to refrain from any action likely to lead to
tensions that couldjeopardize the electoral process.

My country welcomes the appointment of women
to head the Independent Election Commission and the
Electoral Complaints Commission by President Ashraf
Ghani. It encourages the Afghan authorities to continue
their efforts to increase the participation of women in
institutions and the peace process, in accordance with
the outcomes of the national conference held in Kabul
on 12 December 2018.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the establishment of
a leadership council for peace, whose task is to
contribute to the restoration of stability in Afghanistan.
The leadership council, together with the loya jirga
consultative forum, should serve as crucial tools for
strong national ownership of the process to emerge
from the crisis.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes all initiatives aimed at
facilitating dialogue among all Afghan parties. We
would also like to stress the importance of the support
of UNAMA and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for negotiations with the Taliban
with a view to involving them in the peace process. My
delegation also welcomes the efforts of the United States
Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation,
Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, to initiate peace talks between
the Afghan Government and the Taliban.

My country remains concerned about the security
and humanitarian situations in Afghanistan, where the
widespread use of explosive devices and the systematic
obstruction of humanitarian assistance in the Taliban-
controlled provinces represent real challenges. To
that end, my delegation welcomes the assistance that
the United Nations and its partners are providing to
the affected populations and urge the international
community to continue its humanitarian financial
support for Afghanistan.

The complexity of the multifaceted challenges
facing Afghanistan, including the fight against
corruption, terrorism and drug trafficking, requires
the continued attention of the international community
and significant support for the Afghan Government.
Cote d'Ivoire also calls for the continued presence of
the troops of the Resolute Support Mission and for the
funding pledges for the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces until 2024 to be met.

The latest developments in the situation in
Afghanistan give us reason to believe that political and
security instability is not inevitable and that peace in
the country is possible. That will be as a result of the
will of the Afghans themselves to write a new page of
peace and prosperity in their history.

In conclusion, my country expresses its support
for the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the UNAMA staff, the United
Nations specialized agencies, regional and international
organizations and all partners working to restore peace
and stability in Afghanistan.

