Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize this
open debate on an issue of paramount significance to
international peace and security. The growing threat of
terrorism and violent extremism is indeed a common
challenge that calls for a common and collective
response from States and the international community
as a whole. In that regard, it is appropriate to recall the
2005 World Summit Outcome, which states:

"We strongly condemn terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, committed by whomever,
wherever and for whatever purposes, as it constitutes
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security" (General Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 81).

It is against that backdrop that the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy was adopted in 2006
with a view to promoting comprehensive, coordinated
and consistent responses at the national, regional and
international levels. By adopting the Strategy, we, the
Member States, agreed, among others, to refrain from
directly and indirectly encouraging terrorism and to
take appropriate measures to ensure that our territories
are not used for terrorist installations or training camps
or for the preparation or organization of terrorist acts
intended to be committed against other States or their
citizens.

We also agreed to deny safe haven and to bring
to justice any person who supports, facilitates,
participates or attempts to participate in the financing,
planning, preparation or perpetration of terrorist acts
or provides safe havens. It must be emphasized that
those obligations have not always been adhered to. We
therefore need to ask ourselves today how far we have
gone in terms of translating the Strategy into concrete
actions. In numerous instances, a double standard
is clearly apparent, thus undermining our efforts to
respond to the threat posed by terrorism in an effective,
coherent and coordinated manner.

It is no exaggeration to state that terrorists groups
and their affiliates seem to have better cooperation
among themselves than do Member States that claim
to be fighting terrorism. The concept note (S/2014/787, annex) gives an accurate account of the networks
established by those terrorist groups across many
regions, using the Internet and social media to spread
their extremist ideology and recruit foreign fighters.
Non-profit organizations are also sometimes used or
abused as fronts for the financing of terrorism, and that
is a major concern that came out clearly at a meeting
organized by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe held in Bratislava on 28 October
2014. It is therefore unthinkable that one could reverse
the tide of terrorism and violent extremism without
forging genuine, practical and effective cooperation at
all levels. Sadly, we do not see such cooperation, and
frankly speaking, there is a lot of hypocrisy in that
area, which is tragic in the light of the gravity of the
situation and the mortal danger it represents to the
global community.

We in Africa have had some useful experience in the
fight against terrorism. Our continental efforts started
back in the days of the former Organization of African
Unity (OAU), which culminated in the adoption of the
OAU Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism. What has been lacking, however, has been
practical cooperation and effective implementation of
the existing legal instruments. It is in the light of that
fact that the African Union Peace and Security Council
met, as mentioned in the statement of its 455th meeting,
which was held in Nairobi in September 2014 at the level
of heads of State and Government. The outcome of the
Summit provided a practical framework for flexible and
action-oriented processes for intelligence-sharing and
security cooperation, a framework building on existing
national and regional efforts to fight terrorism. In that
context, Ethiopia has already established practical
cooperation and is coordinating its efforts with
countries in the subregion through intelligence-sharing
and the exchange of valuable experiences.

Let me conclude by reiterating Ethiopia's commitment
to enhancing effective international cooperation in
combating the scourge of terrorism.

