Mr. Apata (Nigeria): Nigeria is very pleased to
see you, Mr. Minister, personally presiding over these
important deliberations of the Security Council. Your
presence is a demonstration of your personal
commitment, and that of your Government, to ensure
that, at the dawn of a new millennium, Africa embarks
on the rapid socio-economic transformation of its
societies and is no longer an item on the agenda of the
Security Council.

We welcome the various ministers who addressed
the Council this morning. Their presence -
particularly the presence of those from outside the
continent 4 testifies to the commitment of the
international community to assist Africa in tackling
various problems it faces. On behalf of the Nigerian
delegation, I thank them for their contribution to this
debate.

Nigeria warmly welcomes the newly elected
members of the Council: Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea,
Mexico and the Syrian Arab Republic. We also
welcome the Secretary General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), His Excellency Mr. Amara Essy.
Nigeria aligns itself with the thrust of the statement he
gave this morning.

On behalf of the Nigerian delegation, I wish to
thank those delegations that have expressed
condolences to our Government and our peoples on the
recent tragic events in Lagos. We appreciate those
expressions of support.

For many States on our continent, the promises of
prosperity remain unfulfilled, 40 years after
independence. In fact, many parts of the continent are
characterized by poverty, decaying infrastructure, the
scourge of HIV/AIDS and conflict situations. In the
face of these challenges, African leaders have
embarked on serious efforts aimed at finding lasting
and sustainable solutions to key problems of socio-
economic development. The efforts of President
Bouteflika, which brought about the end of the
Ethiopia-Eritrea conflict; those of the leaders of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in addressing the problems of the Mano
River Union; those of the leaders of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
in seeking the peaceful resolution of the conflicts in
Somalia and the Sudan; and those made in the context
of the Lusaka peace process in relation to the conflicts
in Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are some of the exemplary steps taken by our leaders in
trying to rid Africa of conflict situations. The successes
achieved so far in Sierra Leone, Burundi, the Central
African Republic and Guinea-Bissau are largely due to
their peacemaking efforts. We salute their perseverance
and achievements. While it is "not yet Uhuru" in these
countries, we nevertheless acknowledge that significant
progress has been made towards sustainable peace.

We recognize that our continent is the weakest
link in the global chain. This recognition, among other
factors, prompted African leaders to redouble their
efforts at the dawn of a new millennium to move Africa
out of external debt, conflict situations, preventable
communicable diseases and poverty. The New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) is
therefore a bold and imaginative initiative on the part
of our leaders to accomplish the objective of
transforming African societies in the political, social
and economic domains for the sole purpose of
improving the lives of our peoples. While they accept
that the primary responsibility for accomplishing this
huge task is theirs, they also recognize that they cannot
do it alone, particularly in this era of globalization.
That is why the emphasis is on partnership-
partnership between Government and non-
governmental organizations; partnership between
public and private sectors; partnership between
Government and all segments of society and - this is
of crucial importance - partnership between Africa
and the international community.

In this regard, it was very instructive when those
leaders declared that they would no longer allow
themselves to be conditioned by circumstances,
resolved to determine their own destiny and invited the
rest of the world to complement their efforts. We
therefore invite the international community to
complement them in a profound and transparent
manner.

Nigeria, which chairs the Implementation
Committee of NEPAD, is determined to facilitate the
early realization of the objectives that are very much at
the heart of NEPAD. They include: strengthening the
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution at the regional and continental levels;
promoting and protecting democracy and human rights
in their respective countries; restoring and maintaining
macro-economic stability in their economies by
ensuring discipline in the implementation of fiscal and
monetary policies; promoting the development of
infrastructure, agriculture 4 including its
diversification into agro-industries - and
manufacturing to serve both domestic and export
markets; and revitalizing the educational and medical
training institutes, giving high priority to tackling the
problems of HIV/AIDS, malaria and other
communicable diseases.

On the issue of cooperation with regional
organizations, Nigeria commends the efforts of the
Security Council in building the necessary level of
synergy with ECOWAS, IGAD and the Southern
African Development Community in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts in their respective
subregions. However, we urge the Security Council to
intensify its support for the various regional initiatives
in the maintenance of peace and security in Africa.

In order to strengthen the existing cooperation
between the United Nations and the OAU, the Nigerian
delegation urges that greater assistance be given by the
United Nations to the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution, and appeals
for financial and logistical assistance to subregional
organizations in order to enhance their effectiveness.
Nigeria endorses the use of inter-disciplinary fact-
finding and confidence-building missions to volatile
regions, and particularly commends the visits of the
members of the Security Council to conflict areas in
Africa, as well as the utilization of the services of
special envoys by the United Nations Secretary-
General in addressing conflicts on our continent.

The outstanding contribution of such mediators as
former President Nelson Mandela is an affirmation of
the raison d'etre for the continuous use of eminent
personalities as mediators.

We also welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Office for West Africa. In our view, this will
facilitate cooperation and collaboration between the
United Nations, ECOWAS and leaders of our
subregion, particularly in the area of peace and
security.

The Secretary-General, in his report entitled "The
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa", drew attention
to the importance of economic sanctions and arms
embargoes as an effective tool for conflict prevention
and resolution. Our experience has shown that conflicts
are stimulated, prolonged and sustained by the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
illegal exploitation of natural resources. We strongly
support the outcome of the Conference on Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons. We invite the
Council to study this report and explore how the
recommendations and conclusions could be
implemented in our efforts to prevent conflicts.

The decision by the Security Council last year to
impose sanctions on illicit diamonds and other natural
resources emanating from such conflict areas as Sierra
Leone, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Angola is an important measure that will hopefully
contribute positively to the peace process in these
countries. However, the Council is urged to always
take into account the views of subregional leaders prior
to the imposition of sanctions on any country or
countries, group or groups and individual or
individuals in their subregion. The high-level
consultations between the members of the Security
Council and the ECOWAS ministerial Mediation and
Security Committee last year, prior to the imposition of
sanctions on Liberia, are commendable, and the
Council is urged to institutionalize such an approach in
its working methods.

Finally, Nigeria is of the view that warlords and
their cohorts who have committed crimes against
humanity, should be brought to justice under
international law. Nigeria's support for the Special
Court in Sierra Leone is anchored in the strong
conviction that bringing such criminals to justice will
send an important message to those who may harbour
similar intentions that they would not escape justice.
We appeal to the Council to ensure that this Court is
funded from the regular United Nations budget rather
than through voluntary contributions.

