Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Thank you, Mr.
President, for arranging this meeting today, and thanks
also to Ambassador Chowdhury for the impressive
introduction that he has just given to our debate. It is a
particular pleasure to see the members of the Panel of
Experts sitting behind him today.

The report of the Panel is welcome and thorough.
Its members have worked hard and methodically over
the past few months to produce a document that pulls
no punches. Their findings on continuing violations of
the United Nations arms and diamond embargoes on
Sierra Leone are disturbing in the extreme.

We strongly welcome the Panel's endorsement of
the concept of a global certification scheme for rough
diamonds. In this context, let me emphasize our strong
support for last year's General Assembly resolution
55/56, on conflict diamonds, which the United
Kingdom co-sponsored, and our commitment to
participating fully in international efforts to take this
important work forward as a matter of priority. We
want to see a simple, workable international framework
in place at an early date. The aim of this framework
should be to protect the legitimate diamond trade and
enhance its reputation, while dealing a death blow to
the illicit diamond trade.

We support the Panel's recommendation that the
Government of Sierra Leone should act to enhance the
credibility of its certification regime. The steps
necessary include auditing dealers, developing support
systems to bring small artisanal miners into the formal
diamond industry and developing transparent methods
of ensuring that diamond profits are used to benefit the
people of Sierra Leone.

The United Kingdom would like to see a greatly
enhanced capacity within the United Nations
Secretariat for supporting the Council and the sanctions
Committees on all aspects of sanctions, including their
design, implementation, monitoring and enforcement.
This could include action to profile the arms brokers
and intermediaries responsible for supplying weapons
to the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). We hope that
the informal working group on sanctions will make
recommendations to this effect.

On the role of arms-exporting countries, the
United Kingdom urges all Member States exporting
arms to make thorough checks on the proposed end use
of arms exports at the time of licensing. These checks
should include querying suspect end-user certificates
with the countries concerned and circulating details of
false end-user certificates to other countries for
information. We support the Panel's recommendation
for closer cooperation between the Security Council
and the World Customs Organization.

The Panel's report usefully identifies a number of
individuals and companies involved in sanctions
violations and a number of countries from whose
territory such violations are taking place. The United
Kingdom will look very seriously at any hint that
United Kingdom citizens and companies might be
involved in violating sanctions and will investigate
fully where necessary. We urge other States to do the
same and to ensure that violation of United Nations
sanctions is a criminal offence in their domestic
legislation.

We are alarmed at the malign role played by
individuals such as Victor Bout in the illicit arms
supply chain. We call on the Governments of all
Member States to ensure that their territory is not being
used as a base of operations for such people. There
should be no sanctuary for sanctions busters.

We note with particular concern the Panel's
conclusion that Liberian President Charles Taylor is
actively involved in fuelling the violence in Sierra
Leone through both financial and military support. The
Panel has also found that the bulk of RUF diamonds
are smuggled out of Sierra Leone through Liberia and
that Liberian-registered aircraft are being used for
illicit arms deliveries.

In the light of these findings, there can no longer
be a shadow of a doubt that President Taylor has
callously been prolonging the conflict in Sierra Leone
for personal gain. As a result, tens of thousands of
innocents have been killed or maimed. This cannot be
allowed to continue. The United Kingdom welcomes
recent statements by President Taylor announcing his
intention of halting support for the RUF and of acting
on certain of the Panel's recommendations. But these
overtures to the international community are, frankly,
too little too late. In the meantime, we hear increasing
reports of Liberian support for recent attacks by the
rebel movement in Guinea, which have left hundreds
dead. Liberian actions are threatening the stability of
the entire region. It is high time for the Security
Council to act.

The United States and the United Kingdom are
therefore co-sponsoring a draft resolution now under
negotiation in the Security Council which would
impose, under Chapter VII of the Charter, a range of
measures on Liberia designed to put effective pressure
on President Taylor and his associates to change their
ways. These measures have been carefully crafted to
have minimal consequences for ordinary Liberians,
while making Liberian support for the RUF more
difficult. They include a ban on Liberian rough
diamonds, a ban on flights by Liberian registered
aircraft, a new arms embargo, a selective travel ban on
senior Liberian officials and a ban on the import of
Liberian timber. We hope that those present in this
Chamber will recognize the reasons why it is
imperative that the Security Council should impose
these measures as quickly as possible. The draft
resolution makes clear that sanctions will be lifted as
soon as the Council sees an end to Liberian financial
and military support for the RUF in Sierra Leone and
for armed rebel movements in other neighbouring
countries.

Ultimately, it is for President Taylor to recognize
that he can no longer hide behind statements of
innocence. The quicker he realizes this and shows a
commitment to the well-being of the Liberian people
and regional peace, the sooner Liberia can be brought
back into the international fold.

The Panel deserves our warmest congratulations
for a very thorough piece of work, but there is much
still to do. We believe that its mandate should be
extended for a further period to enable it to make
further investigations into support for armed rebel
groups in this region and to continue to turn the
international spotlight on the dark world of sanctions
busting. We hope that the current team will be willing
to devote more time to this extremely important task.

