Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, for his
briefing. I thank him and the team of the United Nations

Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
efforts.

Afghanistan is now moving into the transformation
decade, which shows clearly that it is headed towards a
better future for its citizens. The period ahead is replete
not only with opportunities but also with challenges,
some of which could pose a threat to the future of
Afghanistan. The Afghan people themselves must
confront those challenges with determination, and this
effort will depend first and foremost on the competence
and performance of the new Government. It is also
important to pursue dialogue and consultations among
the Afghan factions. The reconciliation process has
been marked by a number of incidents of attempted
sabotage, threatening territorial integrity and peace
in Afghanistan. That is one of the greatest challenges
facing the new Afghan Government, which must
address this issue as a top priority.

We attach great importance to the fact that the
Government is pursuing the national reconciliation
process in order to make progress towards a
comprehensive reconciliation in Afghanistan. On
that basis, we would urge the implementation of the
reform processes that have been announced by the
President of Afghanistan since he took office. Some
of those measures were announced during the London
Conference last year, and they can strengthen stability
in Afghanistan. In this regard, we hope that the new
Afghan Government will be formed as soon as possible
and that the reform process will be accelerated.

The political and security process in Afghanistan
must be supported by economic, social and educational
measures. Despite the progress that has been made
in those areas in Afghanistan, the Government must
redouble its efforts in order to protect its citizens from
the various threats and from terrorist activities. It must
also strengthen and speed up the implementation of
measures aimed at combating corruption and protecting
human rights. The Government must also reform
the various security and civilian sectors and work to
find a solution to the problem of internally displaced
persons. We call on the Government of Afghanistan to
make greater efforts with regard to the empowerment
of women at all levels, and also to guarantee that the
perpetrators ofhuman rights violations are pursued and
brought to justice.

We encourage the Afghan Government to hold
strategic talks with neighbouring countries so as
to strengthen cooperation in various areas. We
also urge Afghanistan's neighbours to strengthen
mutual confidence-building measures and to support
Afghanistan through security cooperation efforts and
regional processes. Such projects, after all, are in
everyone's interest.

The Afghan forces will be in charge of security
and the fight against drug trafficking and terrorism
following the end of the mandate of the International
Security Assistance Force. This will be a real test for
the country, especially given the fact that summer is
coming. The international community must continue to
support the Afghan forces so that they can eradicate
such phenomena.

Finally, we call on the international community
and all donor countries to continue their support for
Afghanistan and to provide it the necessary support so
as to guarantee development and stability in the country,
with full respect for the principles of neutrality and
sovereignty and for humanitarian principles. We call
on the Afghan authorities to appropriately manage all
international assistance and call upon them to ensure
that such assistance reaches its intended beneficiaries.

We would also like to express our appreciation for
the work done by United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, which has been undertaking its
mandate under difficult conditions, and we encourage
it to continue its support for the Government in the
framework ofresolution 2210 (2015), which we havejust
adopted. We therefore await a review of peacekeeping
operations in Afghanistan in the context of the
comprehensive review of peacekeeping operations to
be carried out by the Secretary-General.

We call on the Afghan Government to take hold of
the reins of power and implement the transformation
decade.

