Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): My delegation associates
itself with the statements to be made later by the
representative of Pakistan on behalf of the Group of 77
and China and by the representative of Cuba on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

I would like to take this opportunity to highlight
some pertinent points relating to the issue before us.
While my delegation can agree with the objectives of
this debate relating to raising awareness of future
potential risks and threats that the international
community faces with regard to energy, security and
climate, we also believe that it should not create a
precedent for the future work of the Security Council.
We consider that this issue is being addressed, and
should be addressed more effectively, in other forums
of the United Nations system, including the
Commission on Sustainable Development, which will
deliberate on the issue of energy and climate change at
its fifteenth session.

My delegation is of the View that future threats to
security posed by climate change must be prevented.
We therefore call on all States to adhere to the Rio
principles, especially the principle of common but
differentiated responsibility, Agenda 21, the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
and the Kyoto Protocol. In this regard, developed
countries should immediately implement their
commitments, particularly with regard to means of
implementation. Without that, the adverse impact of
climate change will not only continue to cause a
deterioration in the environment, but also increase
poverty and impede economic development, which are
closely linked to potential security threats.

Realizing the formidable challenges ahead of us
on issues of energy and climate change, we should
seize the opportunity to reach global consensus on
ways to adapt to and mitigate climate change in the
relevant forums. The upcoming fifteenth session of the
Commission on Sustainable Development in New York
in May, and particularly the thirteenth session of the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change - to be
held in Bali, Indonesia, this coming December - are
two very important forums in which the issue of
climate change and energy should be deliberated.

We believe that the success of the deliberations at
those two meetings would contribute to creating an
environment conducive to preventing the potential
negative effects of climate change to security.

