Mr. Sevilla Borja (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): We
are very pleased that the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Sweden, a country that throughout its rich modern
history has always striven to maintain peace in the
world through respect for international legal standards,
has been presiding over today's important debate on
preventive diplomacy - that is, the prevention of
conflicts in the maintenance of sustainable peace,
a timely issue that the Government of Sweden has
fittingly presented for our consideration.

There is no greater or more important priority for
the international community than peace. According to
the Charter of the United Nations,

"the peoples of the United Nations determined

to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war"

decided to organize legally and to create the United
Nations as

"a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in
the attainment of these common ends",

whicharebasicallythree-to maintaininternational
peace and security, to develop friendly relations among
nations in order to strengthen universal peace, and to
achieve international cooperation on development,
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all. There can be no doubt that the Organization has
achieved remarkable success during its first 70 years
in helping the world to avoid a dreaded new global
conflagration - in other words, an aggravated reprise
of the two previous wars that "twice in our lifetime
ha[ve] brought untold sorrow to mankind", as the
Preamble to the Charter has it.

However, those seven decades of the second half
of the twentieth century and the beginning of the
twenty-first have been cruelly marked by the outbreak
of many terrible, smaller wars that we have not been
able to prevent, avoid or suppress. Let us recall some
of them - though not all, because the list would be
very long - Korea; Viet Nam; the colonial wars,
especially in Africa, whose consequences continue
to this very day, as the Council's agenda shows; the
Middle East and Palestine; the Balkans; Afghanistan;
Iraq; Libya; Syria, and so on and so forth. Those wars
are the result of a lack of respect for the Charter and
of the hegemonic decisions taken by the great Powers.
Those who led those wars have, unfortunately, gone
unpunished, thanks to the politics of power and to the
unjust and anti-democratic composition and hegemonic
prerogatives ofa few countries on the Security Council.

Today humankind and civilization are facing
an unprecedented situation that is a serious threat to
peace - the onslaught of barbarism in the form of
criminal terrorist attacks by non-State actors. We
should not fail to point out that that phenomenon has its
causes and origins in the same deplorable hegemonic
practices and abuses of power of the few who in their
irresponsibility have created and supported such
criminal gangs. This new situation, which brings
bloodshed and humanitarian crises in its wake, is a
clear example of the importance of finding political
solutions to prevent conflicts before they explode.

Ecuador believes that, in order for the United
Nations at this new stage in its life - beginning with
a new Secretary-General and the adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development - to be effective
in its fundamental task of maintaining international
peace and security, it should at the very least meet the
following six requirements.

First, every State, especially the great Powers,
should renew its political commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter, particularly the obligation
to refrain from the threat or use of force in settling
international disputes.

Secondly, the Security Council must be
democratized once and for all by making it appropriately
representative and geographically equitable, eliminating
the prerogatives of the few and strengthening the role of
the General Assembly.

Thirdly, the Security Council must be more
effective in using preventive diplomacy - that is,
preventing and avoiding conflicts before they occur. As
the concept note (S/2017/6, annex) prepared by Sweden
for today's debate points out, we now have

"a Security Council that is seized primarily
with addressing the crises of the day rather than
preventing the conflicts of tomorrow."

That is why we enthusiastically support the first
administrative and functional measures that Secretary-
General Antenio Guterres took based on the view that
there is no conflict that cannot be solved politically
through the use of diplomacy and peaceful means for
settling disputes under international law.

Fourthly, peace and security are intrinsically
linked to sustainable development. There can be no
peace while hunger and poverty persist, or while there
is no decrease in inequality. Fair societies are peaceful
societies, and that is true both domestically and at
the international level. The most effective preventive
diplomacy would be the immediate implementation
of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals set out in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, for
which political commitment is key in our efforts
to guarantee financing, technical cooperation and
technology transfer.

Fifthly, we fully support efforts in the field of
disarmament, an issue that seems recently to have
been overlooked.

Sixthly, and finally, the following examples are
flash points for potential international conflicts:
continued colonial domination over territories while
the colonizers seek to take domestic legal steps to
maintain their dominion; territories subject to foreign
occupation; and the presence of military bases of one
country in the territory of another. The resolution of
those situations once and for all must be part of our
new commitment to conflict prevention, so that we can
deliver sustainable peace.

I echo the words pronounced by Antonio Guterres
after he was sworn in as the ninth Secretary-General of
the United Nations. Prevention requires that we address
the root causes through the three pillars of the United
Nations: peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights. That must be our priority in
everything we do.

