The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Ugarte for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.

I should like at the outset to thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his participation in this open
debate and his introduction of his report (S/2017/414)
on the protection of civilians and the implementation of
resolution 2286 (2016) on the protection of civilians and
medical assistance in armed conflicts.

I also thank the Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Ms. Christine Beerli,
and the Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy of
Human Rights Watch, Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte, for
their participation and informative perspectives, which
have allowed us to appreciate, with admiration, the
difficulties and risks that medical personnel face in
areas of armed conflict.

Uruguay aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Spain, as well as that
to be delivered by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection
of Civilians.

It is an honour for me to preside over this open
debate of the Security Council and to address a topic to
which my country attaches particular important. In our
first presidency in January 2016, we discussed this issue,
which is the main component of Uruguay's extensive
and active participation in peacekeeping operations.

A year since the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), parties to conflict continue to increase attacks
and bombings on hospitals and medical personnel in
various settings, such as Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan,
South Sudan and Iraq. It is also those parties who block
humanitarian access and even illegally seize medical
materials and instruments intended to serve the civilian
population. That indicates that there is still a long way
to go for an effective implementation of resolution 2286
(2016).

Uruguay shares and supports the Secretary-
General's vision, expressed in his report, for
strengthening the protection of civilians in armed
conflict through collective action. Making that
protection more effective will require the joint efforts
of the Organization, Member States and civil society,
whose work in conflict zones is fundamental and which
my country recognizes as an invaluable contribution.
States must also adhere to and respect international
treaties relevant to the topic at hand, such as the Geneva
conventions and their Additional Protocols. In addition,
national legal frameworks on the protection of hospitals
and medical personnel need to be strengthened.

I want to emphasize the importance of investigating
attacks on medical facilities when they occur and
ensuring that those responsible for those attacks are
held accountable. According to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, intentionally directing
attacks against hospitals and places where the sick
and wounded are grouped constitutes a war crime.
However, in order to be able to judge those crimes,
it is necessary to collect and analyze reliable and
extensive information, as well as conduct independent
and impartial investigations into specific incidents.
It is an obligation on the part of the international
community to identify and punish the perpetrators.
States should ensure that complaints of serious
breaches of international law relating to the protection
of medical care in armed conflicts are systematically
and effectively investigated.

In the face of the current international situation, all
parties - States and non-State actors - should give
access to the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry established by the Additional Protocol to the
Geneva Conventions, as well as to fact-finding missions
established within the framework of the United Nations
in order to carry out the corresponding investigations.
Given the gravity of the crimes that we are discussing,
the Security Council must assume its responsibility and
decide on the application of sanctions or the referral
of cases to the International Criminal Court. We are
all aware that most attacks on hospitals and sanitary
facilities do not constitute collateral damage. Rather,
the attacks are deliberate and coldly calculated actions.

The most devastating attacks are those carried out
by air forces, particularly those that employ the tactic
of carrying out consecutive attacks. They launch a first
attack that is followed by a second bombing that hits the
relief personnel, in addition to the hospitals where the
wounded are being treated. In none of those scenarios
do the so-called rebel forces have their own air force.
Those with air forces are the States involved in conflicts.
Therefore, the primary responsibility lies with those
States, including those that supply and sell aircraft to
forces on the ground, or authorize their own thriving
and prosperous businesses to engage in the supply and
sale of aircraft and their corresponding weaponry.

In 2016, the world arms trade reached its highest
level since the end of the Cold War, and international
transfers of heavy weapons have increased steadily
since 2004. The Congressional Research Center of the
United States estimates that the value of world arms
sales reached $80 billion in 2015. It also indicates that
73 per cent of those sales were made to developing
countries, in other words, poor countries, countries that
should spend their money on other things instead of on
weapons. Furthermore, the Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute indicates that the five
permanent members of the Security Council provided
75 per cent of the volume of the total arms exports for
the 2011-2015 period.

Controlling the international arms trade is an
obvious necessity, the first preventive step that should
be taken. The international community took that first
step with the signing ofthe Arms Trade Treaty in August
2015, thereby attempting to regulate such trafficking in
a more responsible fashion. Nevertheless, a significant
number of the main producers, exporters and recipients
of armaments have not even signed the Treaty, so its
practical effectiveness is gravely compromised. We call
on all Governments to strengthen the regime of general
and complete disarmament and to ratify the Arms Trade
Treaty, so that we can have an international arms trade
that is responsible with regard to conventional arms,
including small arms and light weapons, their parts,
components and ammunition.

The current level of violence and the unbridled
hatred that is being expressed in several regions of the
world mean that the respect for values and fundamental
humanitarian principles is increasingly being violated.
We see the helplessness of the international community
when it comes to reacting to barbaric acts that we
believed had been relegated to the depths of history.

The universal conscience trembles at the mere fact
that hundreds, thousands, perhaps millions of innocent
people, who quietly live their everyday lives, could,
one day or another, fall victim to the lethal power of
nuclear or conventional weapons. That is unacceptable.
Women and men of good faith cannot resign themselves
to accepting such a situation with their arms crossed,
waiting for new fatalities. We must act with realism,
with pragmatism. The measures we adopt must have
timelines for execution, design and for perfecting
monitoring and control mechanisms.

We cannot allow the repetition of such tragedies to
dull our sensibilities and leave us indifferent. Let us
take as an inspiration the example of the thousands of
humanitarian and health workers who tirelessly and
courageously risk their own lives to defend civilians.
On Tuesday in this very Chamber (See S/PV.7947),
we paid tribute to the personnel of peacekeeping
operations who had fallen in the performance of their
duty. We know that the problem will not be solved in a
day, but only by bringing about a greater awareness in
our societies, accountability, respect and strengthening
international humanitarian law will we start taking the
necessary measures.

Uruguay, as a small country both in population
and in territory, but with a great tradition of peace and
democracy, wishes to make its voice heard in defence
of a more fraternal and peaceful world. It is a dream,
but a dream is the beginning of all things. Then come
the plans, the timelines, the actions. But the first thing
is the dream. A dream that motivates, enthuses and
gains the support of the multitudes and arouses hope.
Even when everything seemed impossible, Martin
Luther King was able to turn around a sad tale of
unjust discrimination. But first, he enthused people.
He did not say, "I have a strategic plan", but he said
"I have a dream". His words may sound strange in
an environment like this - where, by definition, we
manage international politics in terms of a very stark
realism that verges on disenchantment - but none of
the great achievements of humanity throughout its long
history would have been possible without a dream first,
before venturing into boldness and illusion.

In conclusion, allow me to recall the following
quotation from a speech entitled "The Chance for
Peace", made by a former President of the United States
of America, Dwight Eisenhower, in April 1953:

"Every gun that is made, every warship
launched, every rocket fired signifies, in the final
sense, a theft from those who hunger and are not
fed, those who are cold and are not clothed. This
world in arms is not spending money alone. It is
spending the sweat of its labourers, the genius of its
scientists, the hopes of its children".

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Mr. Sergiy Kyslytsya, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.

