Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and all the Force
Commanders for their respective briefings on the main
challenges in today's peacekeeping operations. I wish
to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the brave men
and women who are serving in different peacekeeping
missions around the world.

I want to focus on the unprecedented challenges
peacekeeping missions are facing today, as the Force
Commanders of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur have already explained to us.

Peacekeepers are increasingly being deployed
to protect civilians and support complex political
processes amid ongoing fighting and high-risk situations
characterized by asymmetrical threats. Targeted attacks
against peacekeepers and innocent civilians are not
only on the rise, but they have increasingly continued to
become the norm rather than the exception. This point
has already been highlighted by my colleagues, but it
needs to be repeated because of the magnitude of the
challenge we are facing.

The recent attacks that led to the deaths of
peacekeepers in Mali, the Central African Republic
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo are a clear
indication that such threats are growing in scale,
frequency and complexity. It is therefore imperative
that peacekeeping missions undertake reforms and
adapt to the changing security dynamics. In that regard,
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
review has certainly made important recommendations,
and their timely implementation will certainly go a long
way in making United Nations peace operations fit for
purpose. That, at least, is our view of the matter.

Devising the right political strategies and
operational approach has also never been at critical as
it is today. In that regard, I would like to suggest the
following suggestions, and will be pleased to hear the
comments of the Force Commanders. I subscribe to
the view expressed by the representative of the United
Kingdom on the need to be frank in this exchange
of views.

My first suggestion has to do with what has been
reiterated by many on numerous occasions, that is, the
need for pragmatic and flexible interpretation of the
basic principles of United Nations peacekeeping. The
traditional peacekeeping versus peace enforcement
debate should, at a minimum, be looked at in a more
nuanced manner. Peacekeepers cannot, and should not,
remain indifferent in the face of significant threats to
themselves or to innocent civilians, whom they are
supposed to protect.

The Force Commander of MINUSMA referred to
the robust use of force. How much flexibility do United
Nations peacekeeping principles allow for resorting
to the robust use of force? In our view, peacekeepers
should have a robust mandate with a clear concept
of operations and rules of engagement based on a
thorough situational analysis, threat assessment and
planning. That will allow them to have a robust posture
in defending themselves and protecting civilians in
the face of mortal danger. However, having a clear
mandate, concept of operations and rules of engagement
is not enough.

Therefore, the third point is that peacekeepers need
to have the necessary capability that is credible enough
to deter spoilers who threaten the mission's mandate
and civilians, as well as the peacekeepers themselves.
Being adequately equipped also has a deterrence value
that is rarely taken into account. We would welcome
comments from the Force Commanders on this point.
We need to ensure that peacekeepers have adequate
equipment, including force enablers and multipliers to
be able to counter hostilities and fulfil their mandate
effectively in an asymmetrical environment. That has
already been mentioned by the Force Commanders,
and emphasized in particular by the MINUSMA Force
Commander. Peacekeepers must also receive adequate
training and acquire the necessary skills to operate in
volatile security situations.

Fourthly, although the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO)
(see S/2015/446) recommended that United Nations
peacekeepers should not undertake counter-terrorism
operations, it did not rule out such a possibility by
capable regional forces and/or ad hoc coalitions
authorized by the Security Council. For instance, the
African Union (AU) and its regional mechanisms have
shown greater commitment and readiness to deploy
forces in asymmetrical environments. The African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is a case in point.
Hardly any other mission exemplifies the need for
greater partnership than AMISOM. - a Mission that is
operating in one ofthe most hostile environments - and
let us not overlook the real meaning of what the Mission
does on behalf of the international community.
AMISOM. peacekeepers are facing asymmetrical
attacks almost daily, and yet they are underfunded and
in a dire logistical predicament. Maybe that applies
to other missions as well. Of course, AMISOM. is
not a United Nations peacekeeping force, but the
experience it has had is germane to our discussion here,
particularly with respect to counter-terrorism activities.
In that regard, it would be useful to hear the opinions
of the Force Commanders of how peacekeepers should
overcome the challenges posed by terrorism.

From our perspective, on the basis of the principles
of complementarity and division of labour, the United
Nations should be ready to share the burden with AU-
led peace support operations, among others, through
the provision of a financial and logistical package. In
that connection, the relevant recommendations made
in the HIPPO report are a step in the right direction.
It is absolutely necessary that they be translated into
concrete action.

We know that the points I have raised are easier
said than done. We have no illusions that the strategic
and operational challenges will be easily overcome.
But in the light of the seriousness of the matter, it is
imperative that they be addressed as promptly as
possible. Otherwise, the commitment to the protection
of civilians will remain mere words repeated ad
nauseam, with little meaning in the real world, where
so many need protection in practice, not theory.

Before concluding, I would like to express my
appreciation to the Force Commanders for their
briefings and for their work to contribute to peace and
stability in Africa. We are grateful for what they and
the troops under their command are doing by way of
discharging their responsibilities. I look forward to
hearing their comments.

