Mr. Nambiar (India): I shall try. This meeting
will represent the first open debate in the Security
Council on Iraq since the outbreak of hostilities on 20
March 2003. We thank you for providing the general
membership of the United Nations with an opportunity
to communicate their views on this most critical issue
involving international peace and security.

The situation relating to Iraq has evolved rapidly
over the past few weeks. India's position advocating a
peaceful resolution of this issue has been consistent
and is well known. The peace and prosperity of that
region is as vital for India as for any other country,
given our long-standing political, cultural and
economic ties with the countries of the region.

India recognized the validity of the unanimous
decision of Security Council resolution 1441 (2002),
which provided for the disarmament of Iraq. The
resolution also reaffirmed the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq, Kuwait and the
neighbouring States. Resolution 1441 (2002) provided
a stringent regime of inspections designed to meet the
international community's desire to disarm Iraq of its
weapons of mass destruction.

We believe that securing Iraq's cooperation with
the inspections process and its compliance with all
relevant Security Council resolutions should have been
the main focus of the Council's efforts. That,
unfortunately, did not happen. As it is, we are now
presented with a situation in which some members
have decided to proceed unilaterally.

My country received reports of the
commencement of military action in Iraq with the
deepest of anguish. In the circumstances, we sincerely
hope that the military campaign, which was unjustified
and avoidable, will be short-lived. We strongly urge
that all possible efforts be made to bring hostilities to
an early end. We also call upon all parties involved in
the war to meet their obligations towards civilians
under international humanitarian law. We are
concerned about the human lives involved - Iraqi and
others. We are also concerned about refugee flows. The
international community should ensure that the
sovereignty and integrity of Iraq are fully preserved, as
should be its secular traditions. Sectarian and ethnic
conflict should not be allowed to divide the country.
The right of the people of Iraq to determine their
political future and to exercise control over their
natural resources should also be fully respected.

The Secretary-General has already drawn
attention to the increasingly difficult plight of the 1.7
million residents of the city of Basra. We wish to
support any effort designed to provide relief to the
civilian population of this city and other parts of the
country in need of urgent assistance. We also support
the decision of the Secretary-General to hold a meeting
of United Nations relief agencies today to coordinate
humanitarian relief efforts in Iraq.

We have tried to follow the deliberations of the
Council on the Secretary-General's proposal to provide
humanitarian assistance to Iraq by adjusting the
mechanism of the oil for food programme. We believe
that approved contracts for supplies to Iraq under the
oil for food programme would be the logical priority
for delivering immediate assistance to the Iraqi people.
The international community must quickly get involved
in restoring peace in Iraq and in the eventual
reconstruction of the country and in alleviating the
plight of its long-suffering people. We urge the Council
to display the required unity and collective will to be
able to assist the Iraqi people in this endeavour.

India has already announced its willingness to
fully participate in the reconstruction and rehabilitation
of Iraq and its people, which will inevitably be required
as a result of the current conflict. Our long-standing
friendship with the people of Iraq would demand
nothing less of us; we would be happy to discharge our
duty in sharing this burden.

One can have differences over the necessity of
war, but one cannot have differences about the urgent
need for restoring peace. War is sometimes waged
unilaterally, but peace must be built together. We call
upon all members of the Security Council and, indeed,
all Members of the United Nations to remain resolute
in their efforts to secure a lasting peace and a stable
future for the people of Iraq.

