Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to express my thanks to you, Madam
President, for the initiative you have taken in
convening this meeting. My thanks also go to the
Secretary-General for the report he submitted to the
Council.

I am taking part in the discussion to offer some
very specific ideas relating to the way in which the
Security Council has handled the item before us today.
This year the Arria formula was used to permit
participation by non-governmental organizations at a
meeting with the members of the Security Council,
during which the item now before us was discussed. I
would like to underscore above all the important role
played by non-governmental organizations in this field.
However, we have some procedural points that we
would like to make.

Nowadays, thanks to intensive discussion in the
Open-ended Working Group on the Reform of the
Security Council, it has become plain that the use and
interpretation of the Arria formula continues to give
rise to disagreements among Member States. Following
yesterday's meeting it is probable that these differences
will become even more accentuated.
As we have been able to understand it, the new
Arria formula applied by the Security Council consists
in a process of confidential and informal consultations
without official records, permitting members of the
Security Council to hear views and obtain and
exchange information with non-governmental
organizations working on issues that the Council, by an
expansive process of absorption, has decided to adopt
as being within its purview. Nevertheless, it is a further
example of the way in which Member States that do
not belong to the Security Council are deprived of the
opportunity to participate in the discussion, negotiation
and further development of items peculiar to the
General Assembly.

The implementation and use of this new Arria
formula pose general questions for the work of the
United Nations. For example, will this be the beginning
of the end of the mechanisms for the acceptance and
consideration of non-governmental organizations, such
as the Committee on Non-Governmental
Organizations? To whom will the non-governmental
organizations participating in future meetings under the
new Arria formula be accountable? Why was it not
disclosed in advance which organizations would be
participating in the new Arria formula meeting?
According to what criteria were they selected? Are
there impediments for these organizations if they wish
to address Member States in an open-ended format?
Were they dealing with confidential issues that
warranted such a closed meeting?

We value the report of the Secretary-General, as
we have already noted, in particular section IV, on
integrating the protection of children in peacekeeping
operations, and section V, on post-conflict issues,
which seem to be the most relevant to the natural
purview of the Security Council's action. In this regard,
the Council might be more appropriate than the
General Assembly when it comes to achieving tangible
results in these fields. Likewise, we recognize the
important work of the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. At the same time, we note the
outstanding work being done by UNICEF.

I think we could ask ourselves how effective the
Security Council has been in handling this issue. It is
difficult to identify management indicators whereby
this could be established. The fact is that today, while
we are discussing this issue in the abstract, many
concrete events are taking place in areas that fall within
purview of the Council. On the ninth of July, for
example, it was reported that during an attack carried
out by a hundred armed people on a school in a town in
an African country whose situation is a matter before
the Council, one child died, four others were seriously
wounded and 21 were abducted. Is the Security
Council, therefore, called upon to do something more
in a case such as this?

I would like to conclude my statement by inviting
the members of the Organization to continue the
dialogue on children affected by wars. But we should
remember that the time has come to think of them as
peace-builders. Whenever we have discussions such as
we are having today, we tend to think of children as
objects, and this is appropriate when one is regarding
them as innocent victims of armed conflict. However,
as adults, the time has come for us to think of children
as vital actors in the building of peace. Colombia will
be stressing this approach at the Millennium Assembly,
together with other important aspects such as the need
to make the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict applicable as soon as possible.

