Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Since I am taking the
floor for the first time as the newly appointed Ugandan
Ambassador to the United Nations, I would like to take
this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
also congratulate you on your wise stewardship of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).

Who is a terrorist? In our view, a terrorist is
someone who uses indiscriminate violence by not
differentiating between armed forces and civilians,
between combatants and non-combatants.

Terrorism in all its manifestations has become a
threat to the well-being of mankind. It knows no
boundaries. It is naive to think that one is not
immediately affected by acts of terrorism in another
country because that country is far from one's own
borders. There is spillover. Tourism is affected. The
economy takes a nosedive. Jobs are lost. The energies
that would be harnessed to advance science and
technology for the benefit of humankind are instead
diverted towards devising measures to fight terrorism.

All countries should therefore pool their efforts to
fight the menace of terrorism. An array of techniques
can be employed in this fight: education, for instance,
can inform would-be terrorists that carrying out a
suicide bombing will not take them to heaven. Good
deeds can take one to heaven, and in this regard, the
religious leaders of the world have a positive role to
play. But in some circumstances, it might be necessary
to resort to force to deal with terrorists and their
sponsors, be they individuals or countries.

In Uganda, we have experienced terrorism of a
horrendous kind. A group of terrorists led by Joseph
Kony has for a long time terrorized northern Uganda.
Since 1986, a total of 25,000 children have been
abducted. They have been maimed. Women and girls
have been raped. Sometimes, human beings have been
cooked and eaten. Just a few days ago, 45 children
were drowned by these terrorists. More often than not,
these terrorists have their bases and safe havens in
neighbouring countries. Those countries must be made
to realize that it does not pay to harbour terrorists. The
international community should therefore hold them
accountable. We call for international cooperation in
eliminating this menace. We call on the Security
Council in particular and the international community
in general, to make available resources to dismantle
those bases, wherever they are. Those fanatical
terrorists have no political agenda to advance beyond
primitive barbarity.

In the fight against terrorism, we should also look
at the underlying causes. While poverty per se may not
cause individuals to resort to terrorism, it may provide
an environment in which terrorism flourishes. Hence,
poverty eradication, as emphasized in the Millennium
Development Goals, should feature prominently in the
fight against terrorism. Good governance, the rule of
law and fundamental freedoms should be the goals that
countries pursue and implement so that there is no
pretext for some people to resort to violence because
they are denied those basic rights.

The threat posed by terrorist acts to international
peace and security is real. Member States should work
together to eliminate that threat. Uganda will continue
to support the Security Council, especially the work of
the CTC and the international community, in order to
fight and defeat terrorism in whatever form or guise it
may appear.

In Uganda, we are putting in place mechanisms to
fight terrorism, and we need support, both technical
and financial, to implement and consolidate those
mechanisms.

