Mr. Al-Khatib: I thank the Security Council for
this opportunity to brief it once again on the situation
in Libya and on my continuous efforts to establish and
maintain a dialogue with all sides concerned on
implementing resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973
(2011). Let me start by highlighting the latest
significant developments in Libya.

Most recently, intense fighting has expanded into
the south and west of the country. Heavy fighting has
continued between pro-Al-Qadhafi troops and the
opposition forces in the western region, the Western
Mountains and Nalut district, including the cities of
Yafran and Zintan, as well as in the south-eastern part
of the country, including Kufra and J alu.

Fighting has broken out in the Western
Mountains. As a result, clashes spilled over into the
eastern Tunisian city of Dehiba during attempts by
pro-Al-Qadhafi and opposition forces to control the
key border post on either side of the Libyan-Tunisian
frontier, the Dehiba-Wazin border crossing. The
Tunisian army has strengthened its positions on the
southern border with Libya. Thousands of ethnic
Berbers have fled from Libya into Tunisia. In the
remote south-eastern corner of the country, the regime
forces have allegedly advanced and seized control of
the town of Kufra. Furthermore, pro-Al-Qadhafi forces
stormed the oasis town of Jalu, south of Ajdabiya, on
Sunday, 1 May.

For the past few months, as the Council is aware,
fighting has continued to intensify in the western city
of Misrata, which is the third-largest city in Libya and
the main gateway before reaching the Libyan capital,
2

Tripoli. Despite Colonel Al-Qadhafi's televised
statement on 30 April that he was ready for a ceasefire
and negotiations, provided NATO stopped its planes,
Tripoli has declared a sea blockade on the besieged
city of Misrata.

Last Saturday afternoon, 30 April, I received a
message from Colonel Al-Qaddafi, reporting that
NATO had bombed his family's home and had killed
his son, Saif Al-Arab, and some of his grandchildren
and that he and his wife had survived the attack.
Colonel Al-Qaddafi called on the international
community to act, saying that the current situation was
no longer tolerable.

I responded by expressing my condolences to
Colonel Al-Qadhafi, his family and all the Libyan
families that had lost children and loved ones. In
addition, I stated that his tragic loss highlights the need
to immediately stop the use of force in a manner that
would open the path to a political solution, consistent
with the legitimate demands and aspirations of the
Libyan people.

The United Nations premises in Tripoli were
ransacked later that night. The United Nations
humanitarian mission in Tripoli had to leave
temporarily due to the overall security situation. The
Government sent another letter to me on 2 May,
expressing its regret over the damage done to the
United Nations building in Tripoli. It apologized for
the incident and reiterated the important role of the
United Nations, especially concerning the humanitarian
aspects.

As Mr. Pascoe briefed the Council extensively a
few days ago on the humanitarian situation in the
country, I will provide only the latest updates. More
than 665,000 people have fled Libya since the
beginning of the conflict. As hostilities in the
Nafusa/Western Mountains continue, fighting in Zintan
and Nalut and around Wazin has led to around about
39,000 people crossing into Tunisia to date, and more
than 21,500 since 21 April.

Sea mines were discovered offshore of Misrata on
30 April. Reports indicate that Government forces are
bombarding the port area and other parts of Misrata. A
ship belonging to the International Organization for
Migration (IOM) has been prevented from docking
since Saturday to evacuate about 1,000 people, mainly
African migrants and dozens of wounded Libyan
civilians. The International Committee of the Red
11-32033
Cross has suspended sea operations temporarily. To
date, IOM. has evacuated about 12,000 people, mostly
third-country nationals, from Misrata. IOM. estimates
that a further 500-1,500 people need to be evacuated.

Since my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6509), I understand that members have been
briefed extensively on the Doha and Cairo conferences
by the Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs. Therefore, let me start
from that point onwards.

On 17 April, I visited Tripoli for the third time. I
was accompanied by Under Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie Amos, and we met
with senior Government officials, including the Prime
Minister, Mr. Al Baghdadi Ali Al-Mahmoudi, Foreign
Minister Abdulati Al-Obeidi, and other senior officials
to further discuss the political and humanitarian
situation in Libya in light of recent developments. The
Libyan Government signed a humanitarian agreement
with the United Nations to allow international
humanitarian access to all areas of Libya that are
affected by the conflict. The Government agreed that it
would allow safe access to humanitarian workers to
provide assistance to those in need and allow foreign
workers to leave the country if they wished to do so.

I went to Benghazi again on April 29 to meet with
the Interim Transitional National Council (TNC). I am
grateful to the Italian Government for facilitating and
providing the necessary assistance for this particular
trip. I met with the Chairman of the TNC, Mr. Mustafa
Abdeljalil, and several other Council members. I also
met with the international community and donors in
Benghazi, as well as with United Nations staff members,
whose humanitarian work is very much appreciated.

In all my meetings and discussions with the
Libyan authorities and the TNC, I strongly and
continuously reiterated the calls of the Secretary-
General and the international community for the full
implementation of resolutions 1970 (20110 and 1973 (2011), and condemned the use of force against the
civilians of Libya. I stated that the Government must
take full responsibility for meeting the aspirations of
its people and ensuring the full implementation of
Security Council resolutions. In this context, I urged
the Libyan authorities to guarantee the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to all those in need, especially
in Misrata. I reiterated the call for the full
implementation of a real and verifiable ceasefire as a
first step of an inclusive political process that would
lead to a truly genuine national dialogue and political
transition. Concerning Misrata, I urged the
Government to stop all military action immediately.

I attended the meeting of the African Union (AU)
Ad Hoc High-Level Committee on 25 April. In
addition to meeting with the Foreign Ministers of the
High-Level Committee, I met with senior officials of
the African Union, Libyan Government representatives,
including the Libyan Foreign Minister, and opposition
representatives. The AU Committee stands by its
position that the Libyan parties should come to the
negotiating table as part of a political process to
discuss issues of major concern, including a ceasefire,
in the framework of the resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011), and that the African Union should play a
major role in monitoring a ceasefire mechanism, in
close cooperation with the United Nations.

The role of the African Union, along with other
regional and international organizations, is critical. I
continue to reiterate the need for the United Nations
and regional organizations, including the African
Union, the League of Arab States and others, to work
together to find a lasting solution to the Libyan crisis.

On 28 April, I met with the Turkish and Italian
Foreign Ministers to discuss the ongoing crisis in
Libya in the framework of resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011). In Ankara, I exchanged views with the
Foreign Minister of Turkey on the implementation of a
ceasefire and the way forward to bring about a solution
to the situation in Libya. He reiterated Turkey's
determination to fully coordinate all diplomatic activity
regarding the Libyan crisis with the United Nations.
The Government of Turkey has been at the forefront in
providing humanitarian assistance, carrying hundreds
of injured people from the Libyan city of Misrata to
Benghazi last month on humanitarian ships.

I met with the Foreign Minister of Italy on
28 April. We stressed the urgent need to protect
civilians and assist the Libyan people to meet their
legitimate demands and aspirations, while emphasizing
the need to continue facilitating a coordinated
international approach to providing humanitarian
assistance to those in dire need.

Let me move on to the positions of the Libyan
parties on a ceasefire. The Libyan authorities and the
TNC alike have informed me that they are ready and
willing to implement a ceasefire, provided that the
other party does the same. Both sides have stated that
they are ready to cease all hostilities if there is a
genuine desire on the part of the other party to do the
same in a just manner.

However, for the Libyan authorities, a ceasefire
must be accompanied by an end to the attacks by
NATO in order to pave the road to national dialogue.
They have told me that if NATO attacks were to stop,
the Libyan Government would be in a position to hold
discussions about elections, democracy and
constitutional reform. The Libyan authorities have
stated that the way out of this impasse is to determine a
specific date and time for a ceasefire under the
supervision of impartial monitors, at which time the
indiscriminate bombings against the military and
civilians must stop simultaneously. Government
officials have also agreed that the United Nations
should coordinate an international monitoring
mechanism for the ceasefire, in close collaboration
with the African Union.

The TNC, on the other hand, has indicated to me
that a ceasefire would not be sufficient to end the
conflict in Libya if it is not directly linked to the
departure of Colonel Al-Qadhafl and his family. The
TNC has made it clear that its position is that no
negotiations will take place with either Colonel
Al-Qadhafi or his family.

I have emphasized to both parties that a real and
verifiable ceasefire should be part of wider measures,
to include lifting the siege on all cities, especially
Misrata and Zintan; withdrawing military forces from
all cities; allowing immediate humanitarian access and
assistance to all cities under military attack; releasing
all detainees; resuming delivery of basic supplies,
including water, electricity, medical supplies, fuel and
communication services, to all parts of the country; and
securing the passage of foreign workers stranded in
these cities.

As for their willingness to start a national
dialogue, the Government authorities have said they
are willing to engage in a national political dialogue to
discuss all relevant reforms in the country with all
those concerned. In addition, they have stated that
national legal institutions have started to investigate
the events that led to the crisis, in an attempt to comply
with Security Council resolutions.

The TNC has provided a road map for a
transitional process. They have called upon the
international community to recognize the TNC as the
legitimate and sole interlocutor between the Libyan
people and the international community. The road map
mentions the next steps that they envisage in the
political and economic domains.

On the issue of frozen assets, the Libyan
Government has stated that it is presently facing severe
humanitarian shortages as a result of the assets freeze
imposed by paragraph 17 of resolution 1970 (2011).
They have expressed grave concern about the impact of
certain aspects of resolution 1973 (2011), especially on
the delivery of basic goods and services to the general
population. In that context, the Government has
requested that it be allowed to use frozen assets for the
basic needs of the Libyan people. They have also
protested the sale of crude oil.

As the Special Envoy to Libya, I am in constant
contact with leaders and interlocutors, in a formal and
an informal manner. I will continue to exert every
effort to try to find a lasting solution to the Libyan
crisis, in accordance with the Security Council's
resolutions. In order to be successful in that endeavour,
it is important to strengthen a sense of convergence of
goals and process among all actors who are working
towards a peaceful solution to the Libyan conflict.
Each country and regional organization that has
undertaken efforts to find a lasting solution brings with
it special assets and perspectives. I will therefore
continue to engage with Member States and regional
organizations to ensure that those efforts are unified
and that they send a coherent message.

My immediate task is to continue to undertake
urgent consultations with the authorities in Tripoli and
Benghazi, and with other concerned interlocutors, on
the key elements of resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973
(2011) - which are, unrestricted access for
humanitarian assistance wherever it is needed, an
immediate ceasefire and a political process that meets
the aspirations of the Libyan people.

The establishment of a United Nations and other
humanitarian presence in Benghazi and the 17 April
agreement signed with the Libyan Government on
humanitarian assistance are the first steps necessary for
that objective. In that regard, humanitarian ceasefires
need to be part of the negotiations to ensure the
provision of protection and humanitarian assistance to
vulnerable populations, preserve humanitarian space
and promote better respect for international
humanitarian law.
11-32033
A real and credible ceasefire must be agreed upon
to suspend aggressive actions and killings of innocent
civilians, including women and children. A ceasefire
must be declared either formally or, in a first step, as
part of an informal understanding between the
opposing forces in Libya. Both sides have expressed
their agreement on the need for a verifiable ceasefire. I
am working with experts in the United Nations and
with representatives of regional organizations,
especially the African Union, on the specific modalities
that could be involved.

The challenge in the communications and
negotiations is a multifaceted and sensitive one that is
time-bound, where the difficulty lies in how to link a
credible and verifiable ceasefire with a lasting political
process that remains inclusive of all relevant parties.
The main difficulty at this stage is getting all sides to
agree on the essential elements of a political process
that meets the aspirations of the Libyan people. To
achieve that, I hope to have the Council's continued,
full and unhindered support.

