Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): I would like to start
my statement by expressing our deep concern at and
our condemnation of the cowardly murder of six staff
members of the International Committee of the Red
Cross in an ambush in Orientale Province on 26 April.
My Government conveys its sincere condolences to the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Colombia and Switzerland, and to the families
that have been so sadly affected. We stress the urgent
need to ensure that the safety and security of
international relief workers and of United Nations
peacekeeping and other personnel will be among the
Council's priority tasks in the region.

Turning to the work of the Panel of Experts on
the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, allow me to say that we are grateful to you, Mr.
President, for arranging this meeting of the Security
Council, which enables countries with a direct interest
in this issue and countries accused of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate and to help shape
the Council's action in this regard.

We are pleased to welcome the Foreign Minister
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Foreign
Minister of Uganda, the Special Envoy of the President
of Rwanda and the Minister for Finance of Burundi to
this meeting; we have listened carefully to their
remarks.

We also would like to thank the Chairperson of
the Expert Panel, Ms. Safiatou Ba-N'Daw, for her very
useful and informative briefing and for all the work
that has been done by the Panel in fulfilling its
mandate, assigned through the statement of the
President of the Security Council dated 2 June 2000
(S/PRST/2000/20). Allow me to reiterate Ukraine's full
support for that statement and for the other relevant
Security Council decisions, the goal of which is to put
an end to the illegal exploitation of natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which fuels the
conflict in that country.

We think that the nature of the Panel's report is in
sharp contrast to that submitted to the Council in
January, as it contains numerous recommendations,
including coercive measures, which are the result of
the Panel's review of the basic forms of illegal
exploitation of natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and of the collection of
extensive data on the structures engaged in such
exploitation and their financial, commercial and
transport activities.

It is of great concern to Ukraine that, according to
the report, the illegal exploitation of natural resources
of the country, in particular diamonds and other
strategic minerals, is considerable. We call upon all
Governments concerned to take immediate steps to end
such activities and to ensure compliance by their
individuals and corporations with legally acceptable
standards of business.

It is of equal importance that they also provide
full cooperation with the Panel in collecting
information on all activities of illegal exploitation of
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as well as in identifying the links between such
activity and the continuation of the conflict in that
country. This matter should be a principal focus of the
Security Council.

We believe that the Security Council should also
pursue an approach that links efforts aimed at cessation
of the illegal exploitation of natural resources and the
achievement of the desired political objectives in the
context of the process of the implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.

In assessing the overall situation, my delegation
believes that it would be responsible on the part of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Panel of
Experts for a final period of three months and to let the
Panel complete its action plan.

My delegation feels that the Security Council
should be given an opportunity to consider the whole
situation in question before it decides on the proposed
recommendations in this regard. We look forward to
receiving the Panel's final report.

Finally, I would like to express my delegation's
full support for the statement that you, Mr. President,
will make at the end of this meeting. We are hopeful
that it will build on the international community's
efforts to restore the peace and normality that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo so sorely needs.

