Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank the delegation of Gabon for its initiative
to convene this open debate on the impact of illicit
arms trafficking on peace and security in the Central
African region. I would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Migiro for her statement, as well as
Mr. Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and Mr. Sylvain-Goma,
Secretary General of the Economic Community of
Central African States, for their briefings.

As indicated in the concept paper prepared by the
Mission of Gabon for this debate (S/2010/143, annex),
the proliferation of and illicit trafficking in small arms
and light weapons is a destabilizing element that
affects the security and humanitarian situation and the
economic and social development of the Central
African region. We are pleased to note that, keenly
aware of the adverse impact of illicit arms trafficking
on regional stability, peace and development, countries
of the Central African region are taking active steps to
respond to that scourge and have achieved some
results.

However, the negative impact of illicit arms
trafficking continues to be pronounced in the region. It
cannot be neglected in any way. In that connection, I
would like to emphasize three points.
First, we support Central African States in
continuing their active efforts to combat illicit
trafficking in arms. On the basis of the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons and in line with its particular situation, each
State may wish to draw up a complete set of rules and
regulations on the production, possession, transfer and
stockpile of small arms and ensure their effective
enforcement. Countries of the region should also
strengthen coordination and cooperation to effectively
monitor the trade in small arms and light weapons and
to combat illicit transactions. Regional and subregional
organizations should play a greater role in coordination

regional cooperation in that regard.

Secondly, we call for greater attention by the
international community to the illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons in the Central African
region. Support for Central African countries in
effectively combating the illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons will have a beneficial effect on
reducing conflict in that region. Of course, in the long
run the fundamental way to eliminate conflict is to help
Central African countries develop economically,
eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development
so as to root out the breeding ground for illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons.

Thirdly, China believes that the Security Council
should actively and steadily continue its work in this
regard. In recent years, the Security Council has held
many open debates and adopted presidential statements
on the question of small arms and light weapons. In its
consideration of questions on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict; women, peace and security;
and children and armed conflict, the Council has also
stressed the importance of small arms and light
weapons. In our View, the Council should coordinate its
work in this field with that of other relevant bodies.

The Council must also continue to strengthen its
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and the
Economic Community of Central African States, in
advancing peace processes in Central Africa with a
view to creating an environment conducive to
combating the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons.

China has always been opposed to the illicit
manufacture of and traffic in small arms and light
weapons. We sympathize with the people of Central

Africa, who have suffered immensely as a result of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. We are
willing to work together with the international
community towards an early and appropriate solution
of this problem. We also wish to thank the Gabonese
delegation for having drafted the concept paper
(S/2010/ 143) and support the adoption by the Council
of the draft presidential statement on the impact of
illicit arms trafficking on peace and security in the
Central African region.

