Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, we want to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. We also thank Mr. Riad Malki
and the representative of Israel for their briefings.

Some question the frequency with which we
address this issue in the Security Council. If that
frequency were a function of progress made, perhaps
our meetings would not be justified, since the few
advances that have been made have been generally
modest, and certainly not linear in nature. But if the
frequency is tabulated as a function of the magnitude
and intensity of changes, then our meetings are fully
justified. A region that for forty years valued continuity
over change has seen a frenzy of events since 2011 that
point towards change, and even profound change. As
with any transition, the consequences and outcomes
of such change cannot be predicted, but at least they
should be carefully monitored.

Today, I will not address the bigger picture, but
will focus instead on two topical issues: the situation in
Syria and the peace process in the Middle East.

With regard to the situation in Syria, the work of the
Council throughout most of the past year was focused
on the search for a political solution to the conflict that
has gripped that country. Despite the efforts, first by
Kofi Annan and then by Lakhdar Brahimi, throughout
all those months we witnessed an increase in the use
of violence by both the Government and the armed
opposition, leading to the deaths of thousands of
innocent civilians, the suffering of millions of people
and a humanitarian crisis of grave proportions.

Guatemala continues to believe strongly that the
only solution to the conflict in Syria is rooted in a
commitment by both parties to lay down their arms and
negotiate a political exit. We understand that the logic
of war, which seems to prevail with both parties - the
Government and the armed opposition - prevents an
easy solution. But it is clear that the prolongation of
the armed struggle will only serve to increase sectarian
hatred among the people, with the additional risk of
spreading to neighbouring countries. In that context,
the involvement of the international community will be
essential.

Any transition agreement in Syria must be the
product of an inclusive process led by the Syrian people
in which the rights of all are respected. We believe that
any transitional Government must have the support
of all the Syrian people and must be the product of a
democratic electoral process. Here it should be made
clear, however, that those responsible for all crimes
committed in Syria, whoever they are, must be punished
for their actions. Atrocities of the magnitude of those
that have occurred in Syria cannot be allowed to go
unpunished.

Let me turn now to the Middle East peace process,
including the Palestinian question. In 2013, 20 years
will have passed since the signing of the Oslo Accords.
It is very sad to recognize that we are no closer today
to the solution of two sovereign States, living in peace
within secure borders, than we were back in 1993.
But the frustration built up over those 20 years by the
lack of progress and by the deterioration linked to the
proclivity of each party to blame the other for the lack
of progress makes it today more urgent than ever to
give that Vision a chance finally to become reality.

At least for our part, we have not given up hope.
When we consider the options for addressing what
in our jargon is known as "the Palestinian question",
the option of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
in peace and harmony within secure borders must not
to be seen as an unattainable dream, but rather as the
best and most viable option within reach. To achieve it,
it is of course the parties directly involved who must
show the political will and commitment to negotiate
the content and scope of a final agreement. Direct
negotiations between the parties is without doubt the
only way to reach lasting agreements.

Until such negotiations occur, the international
community must urge both sides to avoid any act,
action or provocation that may hinder the possibility
of a return to the negotiating table. This includes, of
course, preventing the firing of rockets from the Gaza
Strip into Israel, but also freezing the expansion of
Israeli settlements in the occupied territory, as such
settlements are illegal under international law. It is
alarming that the Israeli Government continues to
promote the construction of new settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including in such
sensitive areas as that known as E-l. The decision of
the Israeli Government to withhold funds from tax
revenues intended for the Palestinian Authority that
are intended to pay civil servants' salaries falls into the
same category.

In other words, all the acts that on a daily basis
threaten to crush the possibility ofa lasting solution are
unjustified and undermine any hope that these peoples
may enjoy a life ofpeace and security. It is unjustifiable
that the decisions of Governments and armed groups
perpetuate hatred and separation between peoples who
so desperately need to live together.

For all these reasons, we affirm that the
international community, through the United Nations,
has the obligation to condemn any and all violations,
including with respect to security, and to take all
actions necessary to put an end to such transgressions.
The parties cannot be expected to act responsibly when
others deliberately avoid condemning their actions.

Finally, my delegation believes that only by
respecting the rights of each of these peoples and with
a firm commitment to seek a peaceful solution will
both be able to live together within strong and secure
borders.

