Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): The Security Council has
before it today two draft resolutions. The first relates to the
Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium reached by the Government
of the Republic of Croatia and the local Serbian community
on 12 November 1995. The second concerns the continued
monitoring of the demilitarization of the Prevlaka peninsula
by United Nations military observers.

The Security Council's consideration of the draft
resolution on the Basic Agreement represents the
culmination of weeks of intensive work and consultations.
In this endeavour, we have benefited enormously from the
observations and recommendations of the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, for which my delegation
is especially grateful.

There can be little doubt about the complexity of the
task that has been entrusted to the Council by the Basic
Agreement. The apparent generality of some of its
provisions has posed a particular challenge, since the
Council must be devoid of any ambiguity in
implementing this Agreement.

It is in this perspective that the Indonesian
delegation has examined the draft resolution, in particular
those parts relating to the mandate of the military and
civilian components of the prospective United Nations
Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia
(UNTAES) and the relationship between UNTAES and
the multinational implementation force (IFOR).

The fulfilment of the mandate of the military
component of UNTAES - namely, supervising and
facilitating the demilitarization; contributing to the
maintenance of peace and security in the region; and
facilitating and monitoring the voluntary and safe return
of refugees - will not, of course, be without challenges.
The Indonesian delegation is confident, however, of the
operation's ability to effectively overcome them. We
should like to underline in particular that the draft
resolution provides for the Council's reconsideration of
the mandate if at any time it receives a report from the
Secretary-General that the parties have significantly failed
to comply with the terms of the Basic Agreement. We
deem this to be important not only because it provides the
Council with the flexibility to adapt to rapidly changing
circumstances, but also because it underscores the
message to the parties concerned of the need for their
strict and scrupulous compliance with the Agreement.

My delegation is pleased to note the attention given
in this draft resolution to the civilian component of the
UNTAES mission. We firmly believe that if peace is to
have a reasonable chance to take hold after hostilities
have ceased, a great deal of effort needs to be directed
towards the fulfilment of the mandate, as laid down in
operative paragraph 11 of the draft resolution. Moreover,
we should like to reiterate the call on States and
international financial institutions to support and
cooperate in the development and economic
reconstruction of the region.

The manpower and resources accorded to UNTAES
must be commensurate with the tasks it is expected to
perform. In this regard, the Indonesian delegation supports

 

the initial deployment of up to 5,000 troops to the military
component of UNTAES. We should like to underline,
however, the import of the provision within the draft
resolution that Member States, acting nationally or through
regional organizations or arrangements, may, at the request
of UNTAES and on the basis of procedures communicated
to the United Nations, take all necessary measures,
including close air support, in defence of UNTAES and, as
appropriate, to assist in its withdrawal. Such a broad
formulation clearly includes IFOR assistance to UNTAES
when this is requested. This is even more apparent in the
context of the contents of operative paragraph 15, which,
inter alia, requests that

"UNTAES and the multinational implementation force
(IFOR) authorized by the Council in resolution 1031
(1995) of 15 December 1995 cooperate, as
appropriate, with each other".

It is our understanding that this also covers the
arrangements mentioned in operative paragraph 14, and thus
provides a solid foundation for cooperation between IFOR
and UNTAES. Although these are two separate operations,
there is little doubt that the success, or failure, of one will
have an impact upon the other.

My delegation dwelt on the contents of operative
paragraphs 14 and 15, for it is our View that they are
indeed the minimum required to help ensure that the
unfortunate recent experience of the United Nations forces
in the former Yugoslavia is not repeated. At the same time,
my delegation is cautiously optimistic that this rather
sombre scenario may be averted. The very signing of the
Basic Agreement and the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina have by themselves
dramatically transformed the regional milieu. The parties to
the conflict have indeed crossed a major chasm. Any party
that, in an act of folly, chose to Violate these agreements
would quickly find itself subject to the wrath of the entire
international community. Above all, it would be acting in
defiance of the wishes of those whom it leads: the ordinary
people, those who have suffered the most from the
senseless violence and whose primary wish is economic
reconstruction and development.

The Basic Agreement represents a crucial and
significant step towards establishing a framework for the
political settlement of a crisis that has inflicted so much
pain and hardship on countless innocent and defenceless
people over the course of the past four years. In our View,
the draft resolution is consistent with the fundamental
objectives of the Basic Agreement, namely, the full
protection of the rights of all in the region and the
affirmation that the territories concerned constitute
integral parts of the Republic of Croatia. The full
implementation of this Agreement is indeed critical to the
overall success of the entire peace process. The draft
resolution before the Council today lays a solid
foundation upon which to build the edifice of a lasting
and durable peace in the region, and, indeed, constitutes
an integral part of the comprehensive political settlement
of the conflict that has engulfed much of the former
Yugoslavia. It must none the less be emphasized that the
ultimate responsibility for the full implementation of the
Basic Agreement rests with the parties concerned. It is up
to them to recognize the futility of prolonged conflict and
to chart a course in the interests of regional peace and
international security.

The delegation of Indonesia endorses the
continuation of the monitoring of the demilitarization of
the Prevlaka peninsula by United Nations military
observers. We value highly the contribution that the
observers have made to reducing tensions in the area, and
we should like to echo the need for the Republic of
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to agree
on a settlement that would peacefully resolve their
differences.

In View of these considerations, the delegation of
Indonesia will vote in favour of the two draft resolutions.
