Mr. Minton (United States of America): The United
States emphasizes that no faction in Afghanistan can
impose its will on the entire country through military
action. A lasting settlement can be achieved only by
establishing a representative and broad-based multi-ethnic
Government that can effectively govern and honour
Afghanistan's international obligations. We take this
opportunity to again urge the Afghan factions to work with
the United Nations and Special Representative Brahimi to
reach this goal.

The factions should also facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian aid by the United Nations and non-
governmental organizations to all in need, and work to
protect the human rights of all Afghans. We are particularly
concerned about the women and girls of Afghanistan, who
are subject to systematic discrimination and repression. We
call upon the factions to respect internationally accepted
norms of behaviour in this matter.

As President Clinton has said, terrorism is one of the
greatest dangers we face in this new global era. We once
again urge the Afghan factions to cease all assistance to
terrorists, including providing sanctuary, and to expel them
from Afghanistan.

Afghanistan's neighbours should not interfere in that
country. In particular, they should not take any actions that
could further enlarge or inflame the conflict at this critical
time. The United States supports the territorial integrity of
Afghanistan and of all of its neighbours. We call on all
Afghan parties and all of Afghanistan's neighbours to
respect its borders.

We too deplore the tragic deaths of international
personnel working in Afghanistan. We extend our deepest
condolences to the families of the victims of these crimes
and call for efforts to bring those responsible to speedy
justice.

The United States is also aware of reports that
several Iranians, including diplomatic staff of the Iranian
Consulate in Mazar-e-Sharif, have been missing since the
Taliban captured that city. While we cannot confirm these
reports, we remind the Afghan factions that the holding
of diplomats for any reason and at any time is
unacceptable, given their special protected status under
international law.

