Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Thanks
to the joint efforts by the international community, the
ceasefire in Syria has been generally preserved recently.
A new round of Geneva peace talks is under way. A rare
opportunity has emerged in terms of finding a political
solution to the question of Syria. Under the current
circumstances, the international community should
remain committed to a political solution, consolidate
the positive momentum through coordinated actions
and encourage the parties in Syria to maintain the
ceasefire and dialogue so as to find a way out that is
acceptable to all the parties as soon as possible.

The Security Council's action on the question
of Syria should take into account the importance of
maintaining the ceasefire, finding a political solution,
working together to counter terrorism and providing
humanitarian assistance. That should be in the interest
of stabilizing the situation in Syria as soon as possible.
Anyone truly interested in the fundamental interests
of the people of Syria and the Middle East would do
nothing that ran counter to such interests. Regardless of
the rhetoric and no matter how elegant it might sound,
anything that runs counter to the fundamental interests
of the people of Syria and the region should not be
allowed by the Council.

China's position on the issue of chemical weapons
is clear and consistent: we oppose the use of chemical
weapons by any State, organization or individual under
any circumstances, and call for punishing all instances
of chemical weapons use. China has itself been a
victim of the use of chemical weapons by other States.
The Chinese people are more justified than any other
party to express their opposition to the use of chemical
weapons. China is deeply concerned about and strongly
condemns the use of chemical as weapons that has
occurred within Syria.

With regard to the use of chemical weapons in
Syria, the Council has in the past achieved important
results in terms of destroying the stockpile of chemical
weapons in Syria. At present, investigations on the use
of chemicals as weapons are ongoing, and it is therefore
too early to reach a final conclusion. The Council
should preserve its unity and continue to support the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism so that it
can carry out its investigations in a professional matter,
based on objective and fair criteria and in accordance
with the mandate that was conferred to it by resolution
2319 (2016). Relevant conclusions must be based on
accurate, detailed and solid evidence that can truly
stand the test of history.

As we all recall, the purported existence ofweapons
of mass destruction was used in the past to unleash a
war that has brought untold suffering to the people in
the Middle East. Countries in the Middle East remain
beset today by the legacy of that war. The lessons of
history must be learned. Only in that way can mistakes
be avoided in the future.

The draft resolution (S/2017/172) is based on
conclusions on which the parties continue to have
differences. It was forced through to a vote, although
Council members still had serious differences. That is
in no way helpful to finding a solution to the issue of
chemical weapons in Syria, and it is not conducive to
the peace talks in Geneva and the political process on
the question of Syria in general.
China has been working tirelessly to help bring
about a solution to the issue of Syria, supports the
United Nations as the major player in terms of good
offices and has been facilitating finding a settlement
among the parties that is acceptable to all through
peaceful negotiations and based on the principle of a
Syrian-owned and -led process. China will continue to
play a constructive role in finding a political solution to
this issue with a view to arriving at a comprehensive,
fair and appropriate solution to the question of Syria.

I would also like to take this opportunity to point
out that the Security Council is the core of our collective
security regime. Every Council member bears the
sacred responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security and should define its national
position in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and on the merits
of the case under discussion. Unprovoked and distorted
attacks against the solemn position of other members
represent a very irresponsible action. In the words of
the representative of the United Kingdom, it is really
absurd. In and of itself, that serves as a good example
of how certain countries are using rhetoric as a means
of last resort and with ulterior motives.

What all Council members should do is deeply
reflect on the situation in Syria and the Middle East,
on how it has been allowed to deteriorate to its current
level, and on the role that each and everyone of us has
played - and on whether that role should or should not
be praised. It is only by doing so that we can be regarded
as acting responsibly with regard to the people of Syria
and the region. Dealing with people solely through
rhetorical flourishes is complete hypocrisy.

