Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It is true that Syria participated in the
liberation of Kuwait when the former Iraqi regime had
made a bad decision. We never participated in the
invasion of Iraq, however, or in the invasion of Libya.
We have never been involved in a conspiracy against
any Arab country.

I welcome the statement and clarifications made
by the Prime Minister of Qatar. Some of his comments
were accurate, but others were not. I would ask him, in
the presence of Council members, whether Qatar is a
member of NATO or of the League of Arab States?
How is it that Qatar went to NATO's assistance in
destroying Libya?

Some speakers have said that they would not
move towards military intervention in Syria and that a
decision of the Council would not necessarily lead to
military intervention. That is all well and good, but can
anyone assure us that what was done to Libya,
Somalia, Iraq, the former Yugoslavia and Kosovo will
not be repeated in the case of Syria?
At any rate, we are very sorry about the innocent
victims. They were sons and daughters of our

homeland. I am an Ambassador of the Syrian President,
and proud to be here in that capacity. I am also the
Ambassador of my people, and proud of that, too. I
cannot speak here in any way that would constitute an
attack on my own people or hurt them. The grief of
others over the deaths of innocent victims can never
equal that of ours in Syria. They are all innocent
victims. We know that the blood that has been spilled
cannot be recovered. We know that the sadness of the
victims' families can never be assuaged.

I and the people whom I represent have the
responsibility to ensure that the Violence comes to an
end, to protect Syria for all its inhabitants, and to save
lives endangered by media incitement. We must also do
nothing to exacerbate the situation or promote the
smuggling of weapons across our borders or the
hosting of an armed opposition and conferences in
neighbouring countries. My country has sent dozens of
letters containing detailed information on that subject.

Only two days ago, a British newspaper that I
shall not name published an article written by their
correspondent in Syria, stating that Qatar and Saudi
Arabia had financed shipments of weapons to Syria.
All Council members are aware that, unfortunately,
there are other countries with which we had a close
relationship before the current crisis. They are now
sheltering armed opposition groups in their territories.
The opposition is engaging in military operations along
our borders, bombing our oil refineries and oil and gas
pipelines. Trains transporting fuel oil were bombed
during what is a very cold winter. The Al-Jazeera and
Al-Arabiya networks should stop fanning the flames
and thereby truly help to end the bloodshed.

In his briefing, the Prime Minister of Qatar
mentioned that he would announce the decisions
reached by the organization representing all Arabs.
However, that organization is not currently speaking on
behalf of all Arabs. Without Syria, there is no Arab
League. We will never allow anyone to adopt a
decision that undermines our fate and future on our
behalf or without our participation.

The targeting of humanitarian workers is clearly a
criminal act, as mentioned by the representative of
Portugal, but perhaps he could tell us how he deduced
that it was the Government authorities who had killed
the doctor who was working for the Red Cross.
There is a neighbourhood in Damascus known as
Al-Hariqa, which means "the fire". Do Council
members know why it was given that name? Surely
not. It was thus named because in the 19405 French
forces bombed it using air and artillery strikes, killing
thousands of innocent civilians living there. That is
how the neighbourhood gained its name, Al-Hariqa,
which means "the fire".

The Syrian parliament building was also bombed,
killing everyone inside except for one person, whom
Syrians have come to call al-shahid al-hai - "the
living martyr". To all of that we would add that
45,000 Algerians were killed in a single hour in the
capital, Algiers, in 1945, because they unfortunately
believed that the end of the Second World War, the
defeat of Nazism and Fascism and the victory of the
values associated with freedom could bring the
Algerians independence.

A wise man once said to his son, "When you
know where you came from, then you will know Where
you will end up." As the proverb says, a book can be
judged by its cover. Intentionally or otherwise, that
applies to the Arab League, which is trying to harm
Syria and the whole Arab nation.

One day at the end of the nineteenth century,
Emile Zola, the famous French writer whose work I
like very much, defended a case in which a French
army officer had suffered an injustice. He wrote a letter
in French - with which I am familiar but have not
spoken for some time - the French title of which is
"J 'accuse". Today, before the Council, I am quoting
Emile Zola, in the sense that I say the same thing:
"J'accuse". I accuse a few people, whom I will not
name so as not to embarrass them. I accuse them of
working to undermine Syria's stability and sovereignty
and the unity of the Syrian people by incitement and
fanning the flames.

In 2003, we opened our doors to 2 million Iraqi
refugees who had fled the British and American
invasion of Iraq. At the time, no one helped us shoulder
the resulting economic burden. Subsequently, two or
three years later, fully one third of the Lebanese
population came to Syria after the Israeli aggression
against them in 2006. No one helped us at that time.
After that, economic cooperation with Turkey - our
neighbour, which we hold in high regard - led to
disastrous economic consequences for small-scale
artisans in the countryside around Aleppo and
Damascus. We had an economic partnership agreement
with Turkey that cost us billions of dollars, and as a
result, thousands of Syrian villagers lost their
livelihoods.

The representative of India was right when he
spoke of the economic reasons behind what is
happening in Syria, but that is not our fault. Mistakes
have been made, that is true. It is true that mistakes
have been made; President Al-Assad has admitted as
much. He drew up a road map designed to help us
move beyond the crisis. He cannot do everything alone,
however. He needs help from the Arab League, Turkey,
brotherly nations and the Security Council.

When the Secretariat of the Arab League sent this
document (S/2012/71, annex) to the Council, they said
on the last page that there were other annexes, such as
the Al-Dabi report, which would be sent by courier.
Why will the Al-Dabi report be sent by courier later
and why was it not included in the documents currently
before the Council? Why was the Al-Dabi report not
submitted with the extra annexes?

For our part, we have done all that is necessary.
We sent a letter to the President of the Security Council
outlining the main points of the Al-Dabi report. As
Council members are aware, however, the Secretariat
of the Arab League rejected the request made by some
Council members to invite Mr. Al-Dabi to speak before
the Council. I think that I have spoken quite enough.

