Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's debate on the theme "United
Nations peacekeeping operations: The United Nations
and regional partnership and its evolution". This
a subject dear to our two countries and to the entire
African continent. I take this opportunity to warmly
commend Rwanda for its ongoing commitment to peace
and security in Africa and its excellent work not only
during its presidency but also since its membership
of the Security Council, particularly on peacekeeping
issues.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed briefing, which confirms the central role of
United Nations peacekeeping operations in promoting
world security.

While Morocco aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, my delegation wishes to share
several additional elements on the subject of this debate.

We have recently had the opportunity in the
Security Council and before other bodies to underscore
the dynamic nature of peacekeeping operations. In
that regard, the debate held in June under the Russian
Federation's presidency of the Council on new trends
(see S/PV.7196) was extremely instructive. Today, we
have an opportunity to discuss another very important
aspect - the relationship between the United Nations
and regional partnerships. We have recently seen that
almost all current conflicts are strongly regional in
nature. While not new, this aspect is constantly evolving,
and we need to adapt to new trends in peacekeeping
through multidimensional missions with increasingly
complex mandates.

Regional and subregional organizations are
increasingly involved in resolving conflicts, particularly
in their initial phases, both as first responders
and in terms of peacebuilding and in post-conflict
phases. We endorse the principle that regional and
subregional organizations or even groups of countries
enjoy a comparative advantage because of their close
geographical, historical or linguistic proximity to the
country in conflict.

There are many examples, as detailed in the
concept note (S/2014/478, annex) for this debate. Let me
echo some of the examples. The Economic Community
of West African States has played a key role in Mali
and Guinea-Bissau, where it deployed a force that
clearly made a valuable contribution to the restoration
of constitutional order in that brother country. The
Economic Community of Central African States was
present in the Central African Republic for many years
through its Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in
the Central African Republic. The Intergovernmental
Authority on Development has sent a force to protect
civilians and observers to the Sudan and South Sudan.
In Mali and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the magnitude of the task and complexity of the situation
have precipitated the involvement of the Africa Union
(AU), which, in both cases, has laid the groundwork for
a United Nations peacekeeping operation. The decisive
action undertaken by the subregion and the AU have
averted the worst-case scenario.

The emergence of regional groups and subregional
organizations such as the Mano River Union or the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, whose members
decided to create a common armed force to fight Boko
Haram, should be supported technically, financially
and logistically, like all regional arrangements. There
are many other cases of international cooperation that
merit our attention, in particular the European Union,
the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and NATO, to cite just a few. Given the
time constraints, we shall limit ourselves to mentioning
those engaged on our African continent.

The commitment of the Kingdom of Morocco
to peacekeeping operations dates back to 1960. It is
reflected today in the deployment of more than 2,000
Moroccan soldiers on the African continent - in COte
d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Central African Republic. Our presence will soon be
bolstered by the deployment of a military component
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
on 15 September.

Our ongoing commitment reflects our unflagging
desire to strengthen and make permanent the concept of
collective security that is at the heart ofthe mandates of
our Organization, and our devotion to the fundamental
principles that govern it, including the consent ofparties
to the conflict, in the light of those parties' accession
to a political process and their agreement to the
deployment of a peacekeeping operation, the presence
ofwhich is to support the process. These principles also
include impartiality, which is not to be confused with
neutrality or inaction, and which requires peacekeeping
personnel to remain impartial in their relationship with
the parties to the conflict; the non-use of force, except
for legitimate defence or defence of the mandate; and
respect for the mandate of the peacekeeping operation.

Beyond these principles, States must contribute
to peacekeeping operations in accordance with the
following criteria: participation within the mission
framework, as authorized and approved by the
United Nations; respect for the founding principles
of peacekeeping, including respect for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and consent of the States involved;
and the tailoring of the peacekeeping mandate to the
specific characteristics of the conflict.

In conclusion, let me reiterate my country's
commitment to international peace and security, and
our belief that the international community would
clearly benefit by strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. Such cooperation should transcend
political support based on the universal principles
that are the raisons d'etre of the United Nations, to
include predictable and appropriate logistical support.
While regional and subregional organizations may be
armed with firm resolve, they often lack the technical,
financial and logistical support to carry out their long-
term stabilization efforts. Better adapted and more
predictable support would ultimately benefit the entire
international community.

It is also important to underscore that the United
Nations, through the Security Council, remains
the principal guarantor of international peace and
security in the world, and that the role of regional and
subregional organizations must remain in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations and be guided by the desire to
ensure coordination.

Lastly, we pay tribute to the men and women who
continue to carry out their peacekeeping missions
in often very difficult conditions. We convey our
condolences to the families and relatives of the Blue
Helmets who have lost their lives in the line of duty,
defending the universal values of the Organization. The
Kingdom of Morocco is resolved to remain committed,
under United Nations auspices, to the promotion and
consolidation of peace worldwide.

