Mr. Kono (Japan): It is a great pleasure for me to
be here in the Security Council today to discuss the
challenges facing United Nations peacekeeping and its
reform. I would like to pay tribute to His Excellency
Mr. Hailemariam Desalegn, Prime Minister of the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, for his
initiative in hosting today's meeting, and to His
Excellency Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his
leadership of United Nations peacekeeping reform.

Peacekeeping is a noble and lofty effort and one
that the United Nations has led for decades in order to
maintain international peace and security. Under the
banner of contributing proactively to that goal, Japan
has made every effort to achieve peace and stability
in the international community, and United Nations
peacekeeping has unquestionably been an indispensable
part of our efforts. In 2015, we enacted a series of laws
on peace and security to enable our country to further
contribute to the diverse activities of United Nations
peacekeeping. This year also marks the twenty-fifth
anniversary of our International Peace Cooperation Act.
During the past quarter century, Japan has dispatched
more than 12,500 personnel to 27 missions, including
in Cambodia, the Golan Heights, Timor-Leste and
Haiti. Most recently, in the longest deployment period
to date for Japanese peacekeepers, we sent engineering
units to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) for five years. They repaired approximately
260 kilometres of roads and developed 500,000 square
metres of land. Japan will continue to dispatch staff
officers to UNMISS headquarters and contribute to
establishing peace and stability in South Sudan.

With regard to today's topic of United Nations
peacekeeping reform, Japan fully supports
implementing and following up on reform efforts
with the aim of making United Nations peacekeeping
more effective and efficient. Resolution 2378 (2017),
which we adopted today, will be a powerful engine
for advancing our reform efforts, and one that Japan
strongly supports and will work to implement. Among
the many areas requiring reform, I would like to
emphasize the importance of training and building the
capacity of United Nations peacekeepers. Well-trained
and skilled peacekeepers are essential to ensuring
effective and efficient peacekeeping operations, and we
need to fill the gap between the demands on the ground
and peacekeepers' current capabilities and equipment.
Japan has been a strong United Nations partner in
developing the United Nations Project for African
Rapid Deployment of Engineering Capabilities, which
has been conducted in Kenya since 2015. Under that
partnership, some 80 Japanese Self-Defence Forces
personnel have been dispatched as instructors to train
130 engineering service members from five East
African countries.
Since more than half of United Nations
peacekeeping missions are deployed in Africa, we
believe that cooperation between them and African
Union peace support operations is critical. Japan will
continue to promote human resources development for
social stability in Africa, which is one of the priority
areas of the Nairobi Declaration of the sixth Tokyo
International Conference on African Development. In
partnership with the United Nations and major troop-
contributing countries of Asia and Africa, Japan will
further enhance capacity-building in the countries of
the Indo-Pacific region. I would also like to stress that
it is important for the United Nations and its Member
States to coordinate their capacity-building activities
in a coherent manner. At a meeting that Japan hosted
last month, in which officials from more than 30
countries participated, the need for such coherence in
coordination was widely recognized.

The Secretary-General's report on a mechanism to
fill the gap between force generation and capabilities
will be submitted to the Security Council within 90 days
of today's adoption of resolution 2378 (2017). I hope
its recommendations will be based on best practices,
including the Project for African Rapid Deployment of
Engineering Capabilities. We are committed to further
discussion, based on that report.

I would also like to emphasize the importance
of the role of women in peacekeeping and of the
development of human resources among the young
people who represent our future. It is women and
children who are most affected and hurt by conflict,
and female peacekeepers can provide them with the
appropriate support and address their specific needs.
Women are indispensable to peacekeeping, and Japan
will host an outreach seminar next month in Tokyo
to promote efforts to appoint more senior women to
mission leadership positions. We also aim to expand
the number of civilians contributing to peacekeeping
by enhancing training for young people.

Japan will continue to contribute proactively
to peacekeeping activities, and as a member of the
Security Council, we will take an active part in the
discussions of United Nations peacekeeping reform
and coordinate closely with other member States, as
well as the United Nations as a whole, with the aim
of achieving more effective, efficient and agile United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

