Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela thanks the Lithuanian delegation for
convening this very important meeting. We also convey
our respects to Minister for Foreign Affairs Linas
Linkevicius of the Republic of Lithuania. We thank the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Gerard van Bohemen,
Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaite, and the Secretary
General of INTERPOL, Mr. Jiirgen Stock, for their
briefings. We are also grateful for the presence of other
ministers and authorities involved in the fight against
terrorism.

Venezuela pays special attention to all threats to
peace and international security, particularly those
caused by terrorist acts. In this respect, my country
reiterates its categorical rejection of the commission
of such acts in all their forms and manifestations,
regardless of their motives and wherever and by
whomever they are committed, because they constitute
a flagrant violation of international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law. We
must stress that acts committed by terrorist groups
undermine the territorial integrity and political unity of
States, as well as the security and stability ofregions and
the international community as a whole, as evidenced
by events unfolding throughout the world as we speak.
There are no good terrorists and bad terrorists. There
are no moderate terrorists. There can be no tolerance
for terrorism.

Today, the violent actions of terrorist groups and
their associated entities are inflicting sectarian violence
on various African and Middle Eastern countries,
leaving a trail of destruction in their wake. Worse yet,
by cloaking themselves in a sectarian interpretation
of religion, they are practicing ethnic and religious
cleansing in vast areas of Iraq, Syria and Libya, among
other countries. We believe that the birth, growth and
expansion of these criminal organizations have been
amplified by the external financing, logistical help
and military equipment that they receive from third
countries, which use non-State actors to destabilize or
overthrow sovereign Governments.

Resolution 2178 (2014) is a milestone in addressing
this phenomenon because it urges States Members of
the United Nations to adopt a set of legal and political
actions to stop the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
There are two approaches to addressing this problem.
On the one hand, the legal approach is aimed at revising
domestic legislation in order to punish and impose
sentences consistent with the seriousness of the crime
committed. On the other hand, the preventive approach
is to adopt initiatives in the fight against violent
extremism in order to prevent the radicalization,
recruitment and mobilization of foreign terrorist
fighters and the inappropriate use of information and
communication technologies. Regrettably, sometimes
both approaches are limited in their implementation
by ongoing differences in vision and capacities among
countries.

Given the complexity of the phenomenon, we
believe that both approaches should be addressed
simultaneously because they complement and strengthen
one another. We should not favour one over the other.
Moreover, it is of particular importance to address the
deep-rooted causes underlying this phenomenon in
order to develop effective strategies to combat social
exclusion, poverty, violence and intolerant ideologies
with a View to preventing radicalization, especially
among young people. We must also favour political
solutions to conflicts that promote the expansion of
terrorism.

Vulnerability to terrorist violence is global.
The existence of more than 25,000 foreign terrorist
fighters, including young people and women, from at
least 100 countries in all regions of the world, reflects
the gravity of the situation. We should ask ourselves
how it this flow has reached conflict zones in Syria
and Iraq. To what extent are the countries of transit
truly committed or able to fight this phenomenon?
The problem of foreign terrorist fighters exacerbates
ongoing conflicts and threatens the countries of origin,
transit and destination, as well as those neighbouring
conflict zones.

Another element that we must closely follow is
the financing and logistical and military equipping of
terrorist groups. These groups have achieved a very
high level of military capability that allows them to
occupy territories, despite the efforts of international
coalitions and the fight carried out by Governments in
the region. In this regard, we regret that resolution 2220
(2015), adopted by the Security Council on Friday,
22 May, did not explicitly provide for the specific ban
of light weapons to non-State actors.

Another key element in the strengthening and
expansion of terrorist groups is linked to the collapse
of States and institutions resulting from invasions of
and interventions in countries. Such was the case in
Iraq and Libya. The collapse of States opens the way
to the chaos, violence and intolerance characteristic of
terrorist groups, while the States of the region have no
capacity for containment.

Venezuela is convinced that the fight against
terrorism must be waged within the framework of
international cooperation, in accordance with existing
international and regional instruments and the norms of
international law, with full respect for the sovereignty
of States, human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Failing to do so would contribute to the radicalization
of these individuals. It is crucial to create technical
capabilities to develop infrastructure, mechanisms
and processes relevant to the fight against terrorism,
including the mobilization of necessary resources.

Furthermore, the role of specialized agencies such
as UNESCO and the United Nations Development
Programme will be particularly important in promoting
a culture of peace and tolerance in order to achieve the
economic and social development of peoples, thereby

preventing terrorist and extremist groups from taking
advantage of the lack of robust institutions in countries
in conflict.

Finally, we consider the problem of foreign terrorist
fighters to have reached such shocking levels that the
international community must continue to work on the
design, implementation and strengthening of strategies
to neutralize the rise ofnon-State actors. In this regard, it
is important that States openly combat this phenomenon
through compliance with the provisions of international
instruments and resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly that prohibit arms transfers
and the financing, training and sheltering of terrorists.
Otherwise, we will be encouraging by act or omission
the expansion of this deplorable phenomenon.

