Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): We thank you,
Mr. President, and the Chinese presidency of the
Council for convening this important meeting and
for the concept note (S/2016/306, annex) to guide this
open debate, which offers the entire United Nations
membership an opportunity to renew its commitment
to the fight against terrorism - a scourge that the
international community in its entirety must contain
and destroy if we are to live in and build a more just and
peaceful world. We also thank the Secretary-General
for sharing with the Council his insights on an issue
that has become a matter of extreme concern for us all.

In fact, terrorism is a serious threat to international
peace and security and an unprecedented challenge,
due to the characteristics it has assumed, with
ambitions of conquering and administering territories
under a programme aimed at bringing the peoples
under the yoke of darkness and obscurantism in total
contravention with the norms of civilized existence
and in total denial of diversity, be it cultural, racial or
religious. Contemporary terrorists, with their backward
interpretation of religion, are turning the present world
into a dangerous place in which to live.

In Africa, terrorism is spreading widely and
dangerously. Boko Haram in Nigeria, Al-Qaida and
its affiliates in the Islamic Maghreb, Ansar al-Sharia
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in
Libya and Al-Shabaab in Somalia spread misery, death
and terror without mercy. The Sahel region, Mali, the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are also targets of terrorist groups in a
rampage of evil and destruction. This is a troubling
situation that threatens peace, stability and security
throughout the continent.

In recent years, a disturbing development has
emerged, linked to the growing number of individuals
involved in conflicts worldwide. It feeds a new type
of so-called international terrorism, giving rise to the
unprecedented phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.
Terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front,
ISIL, Boko Haram and others continue to recruit
adherents and to viciously abduct young people to be
transformed into terrorist fighters all over the world.
The situation has put the international community
under alert on the need to identify and address the
root causes of the phenomenon and to apply the best
approaches to counter this worrying trend.

It is understood that the resolution of ongoing
conflicts, fundamentally in Syria, Iraq, Libya and
Mali, would have a direct impact on the driving forces
of ISIL terrorism, in the Sahel region and elsewhere,
where terrorists have pledged allegiance to the self-
proclaimed caliphate of Syria and the Levant.

The Secretary-General's report on the threat
posed by ISIL to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat (S/2016/92)
makes relevant recommendations on the measures
States and the United Nations should take to counter
such unprecedented threats. The report reminds us
that States, while bearing the primary responsibility
to counter terrorism, are unable to do so when acting
in isolation. The global dimension the terrorist threats
have assumed requires global responses for which the
United Nations and other international organizations
play a critical role by adopting a comprehensive,
concerted and coordinated approach.

Such a strategic approach aims at strengthening the
capacity of States to counter the financing of terrorism
by preventing and disrupting terrorism financing,
implementing in full the sanctions regimes imposed by
the Security Council against the terrorist organizations,
strengthening regional cooperation in the application of
instruments related to transnational organized crime,

given its organic link with terrorism, and strengthening
financial intelligence in the investigation of terrorist
activities. It also aims to counter the recruitment of
would-be terrorists through the Internet and to use
the Internet in fighting radicalization and violent
extremism; to prevent, disrupt and criminalize the
travel of foreign terrorist fighters; to address the issue
of terrorist fighters who return to their countries of
origin; to disrupt the capacity of terrorists to plan and
carry out attacks; and to protect the cultural heritage so
disgracefully destroyed by terrorist groups.

We reiterate Angola's full commitment to
combating the threat posed by terrorism. The Angolan
Government established the National Anti-Terrorism
Observatory, under the coordination of the Ministry of
the Interior, comprising a group ofmultisectoral experts
from various Government departments, including
defence and security, with the task of monitoring any
potential or current terrorist threats.

Resolution 2178 (2014) sets up concrete action to
mobilize the international community to fight foreign
terrorist fighters, including by adopting relevant
national legislation. Angolan legislation applies heavy
prison penalties for anyone collaborating with a terrorist
group, either through the provision of information or
material means, including weapons, ammunition, tools
for committing crimes, shelter, meeting places or by
helping to recruit members for terrorist organizations.

International cooperation is a fundamental tool in
countering the threat of terrorism, and in that context
resolution 1373 (2001) provides guidelines to promote
cooperation in combating terrorism. In applying
those guidelines, Angola cooperates with member
States of the Community of Portuguese Language
Countries and of subregional organizations, namely
the South African Development Community and
Economic Community of Central African States, in the
exchange of information, administrative and judicial
cooperation in preventing and fighting terrorism. A
Regional Early Warning Centre was established to
improve communication among the 14 member States
of the Southern African Development Community.
The Committee of Intelligence and Security Services
of Africa operates, at the African Union level, as a
mechanism for cooperation, coordination and exchange
of information. Bilaterally, Angola cooperates with
the African Centre for the Study and Research on
Terrorism, based in Algiers.

Regarding the financing of terrorism, the Angolan
Parliament adopted a law on the prevention of and fight
against terrorism and the African Union Convention
on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism.
Additionally, a number of legal measures were put in
place ratifying the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and the
Anti-Terrorism and Money Laundering Law. In order
to centralize and process all the information related
to money laundering and terrorist financing, Angola
created the Financial Intelligence Unit within the
National Bank.

To conclude, I would like to renew the commitment
of Angola to continue working with the United Nations
in the implementation of the relevant resolutions,
programmes and plans of action aimed at effectively
preventing and fighting the threat posed by terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations.

