The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Timor-Leste requesting that His
Excellency Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. I
have also received letters from the representatives of
Australia, Ireland, Malaysia, New Zealand, Portugal
and South Africa, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the consideration
of the item, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Guterres
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber

The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the members of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste.

In accordance with the understanding reached
in the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that
the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.

It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
2
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/85, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste.

I now give the floor to Ms. Ameerah Haq.


