Mr. De Gucht (spoke in French): Allow me at
the outset to thank you, Mr. President, and all other
members of the Security Council for inviting me and
giving me the opportunity to speak before the Council
on behalf of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). As of 1 January,
Belgium has exercised the presidency of the OSCE. In
assuming that function, Belgium has clearly
demonstrated its commitment to multilateralism and
international cooperation.

The OSCE is a regional organization under the
terms of Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. It
played a crucial role in bridging the gap that divided
Europe during the cold war. Since then, it has
developed a set of commitments, norms and principles
that links all its members. That constitutes the essence
of modern collective security in the broadest sense of
the term. In that connection, I reaffirm our profound
commitment to those common principles, shared by the
United Nations.

Following 2005, a year of many challenges, the
OSCE'S contribution to peace and security in Europe,
through its cross-cutting mandate, is better recognized.
The OSCE is now in better shape than it was at the
beginning of last year. The Ljubljana Ministerial
Council in December provided an opportunity for
renewed dialogue and better understanding. Thus,
Belgium is shouldering its new responsibilities with
optimism.

Allow me, Mr. President, to outline the main
points of the programme of our chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

First, we will play an active role in the
institutional reform of the OSCE. At the Ljubljana
Ministerial Council, agreement was reached on a
review of the scale of assessments and on a road map
for the institutional reform of the OSCE in order better
to adapt it to the current challenges. That road map
signals the areas where negotiations on reform should
be carried out under the Belgian chairmanship. We
attach great importance to that task, and we will take it
very seriously. It is my intention to appoint a high
representative of my administration to carry out that
process.

Secondly, Belgium will strive to achieve a better
balance among the three aspects - political-military,
economic and human - of the OSCE'S comprehensive
security approach. Belgium will strive to strengthen the
economic and environmental aspect while stressing
regional cooperation and transportation security.

Indeed, security is never finally achieved. It
requires constant attention, ongoing investment and
shared responsibility. The changes that have occurred
since the creation of the OSCE have been enormous
and, for the most part, positive. The risk of a conflict
encompassing the European continent as a whole has
disappeared. But security and stability in Europe
remain among the main concerns of the OSCE. There
can be no democracy without stability. Conversely,
peace and security require respect for democracy, for
civil liberties and for human rights. There is no lasting
stability without economic development.

With respect to transportation and the
strengthening of the economic aspect, the Belgian
chairmanship intends to draw attention to the special
situation of landlocked countries. We intend to
cooperate with the United Nations High Representative
for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked
Developing Countries and Small Island Developing
States and to help implement the United Nations
Programme of Action adopted at Almaty in 2003. We
also intend to strengthen cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations Economic Commission
for Europe to promote the implementation of juridical
norms and instruments.

Thirdly, a central place will be given to
combating international crime and promoting the rule
of law. Transnational crime is, together with terrorism,
one of the most serious new threats to our societies.
The magnitude of this threat was recognized in the
outcome document of the September 2005 United
Nations summit. It is also a problem of concern to our
citizens.

The fight against organized crime is not a new
subject for the OSCE, as attested by its plans and
actions against human trafficking, the illicit trade in
drugs and weapons and the laundering of funds derived
from criminal activities and corruption. The OSCE has
instruments to strengthen the rule of law and to train
police and justice personnel. Our chairmanship wishes
to build on those achievements, to give new impetus to
OSCE work in this area and to introduce some new
ideas. In the fight against organized crime, the 2002
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, called the Palermo Convention, is
the international legal instrument par excellence. The
OSCE offers a useful framework for promoting its
ratification and providing specific support for its
implementation by OSCE participating States.

Fourthly, Belgium will strive to contribute to
conflict prevention and crisis management. More
specifically, we will devote attention to Kosovo and to
what we call the frozen conflicts in Moldova-
Transdniestria, Nagorny Karabakh and Georgia-South
Ossetia. The OSCE itself has neither the mission nor
the means to impose a solution. It can, however - and
this is its mission - supervise and facilitate the
emergence of a solution if the will to negotiate really
exists on the part of the main parties concerned.

The question of Kosovo will be given special
attention by the Belgian chairmanship. Today, the
OSCE mission in Kosovo is the largest of all OSCE
missions, with 1,600 persons on the ground throughout
Kosovo, including in villages and regions where
members of the Serb minority live. In cooperation with
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), the OSCE mission is carrying out
an important task related to the reconstruction of
Kosovo. Its work focuses mainly on protecting
minorities, decentralization, democratization,
promoting human rights, elections, police training and
supporting the administration.

Under the Belgian chairmanship, the future role
of the OSCE mission in Kosovo will be assessed.
UNMIK plans to gradually end its presence, which will
lead to the transfer of tasks and competencies to other
organizations, including the European Union and the
OSCE. In-depth dialogue and close cooperation among
the United Nations, the European Union, the OSCE,
NATO and other main actors will be essential for
success in Kosovo. The Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, has appointed Mr. Martti Ahtisaari as Special
Envoy charged with leading the process of Kosovo's
final status. The OSCE will be called upon to help
implement the final status. Therefore, it is important
that from the outset it be able to fully play its role
among the international bodies concerned.

In Moldova, the OSCE is playing an important
role in the mediation and determination of
Transdniestria's future status. During its OSCE
chairmanship, Belgium intends to make a constructive
contribution to the status negotiations.

In 2005, we witnessed a rapprochement between
Armenia and Azerbaijan on the question of Nagorny
Karabakh. The Belgian OSCE chairmanship intends to
contribute actively to the peace process and to the
Minsk Group's efforts to ensure that that
rapprochement can be translated into a settlement of
the conflict in 2006.

In Georgia, the United Nations is playing a
central role in efforts aimed at conciliation with
Abkhazia. With regard to South Ossetia, such a central
role is being played by the OSCE. We hope that the
recent progress can pave the way for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict. In parallel, the OSCE is now
conducting an economic needs assessment. The
Belgian chairmanship is prepared to organize, if
necessary, a donors conference in 2006.

The OSCE is also very active in the area of
democratization. Electoral observation is an important
instrument in that regard, even if it is sometimes
challenged. I am convinced of the usefulness of this
work and intend to ensure, as Chairman-in-Office, that
observer missions can continue to carry out the tasks
for which they were created: to contribute in an
impartial manner to democratic development. As
OSCE Chairman, I believe it is the duty of member
countries to make full and timely use of existing
instruments designed to guarantee the transparency and
reliability of electoral processes. As Chairman-in-
Office, I appeal to the Government of Belarus to invite
the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights to observe the upcoming presidential elections.

Those are the priorities of our OSCE
chairmanship, but our programme has a broader scope.
We will also pursue and develop the OSCE's other
major areas of concern. I am thinking in particular of
tolerance and non-discrimination or combating human
trafficking. In the context of the OSCE's politico-
military aspect, we will organize a major seminar in
February 2006 concerning military doctrines.

With regard to the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, the OSCE just adopted, at the
Ministerial Council held in Ljubljana, a decision
committing it to monitor the implementation by all its
member States of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004). Furthermore, we are actively engaged in
combating the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons; our actions are in accordance with the United
Nations Programme of Action.

We will also devote particular attention to the
link between the environment and security. To that end,
we will strive to promote the Environment and Security
Initiative, which brings together the United Nations,
the OSCE and NATO in plans to destroy dangerous
products.

Finally, terrorism is recognized by the United
Nations and the OSCE as one of the most significant
new threats. The OSCE Plan of Action for Combating
Terrorism is part of the universal framework of United
Nations conventions and General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions. OSCE members are
committed to ratifying and implementing United
Nations conventions and protocols. Within the OSCE
secretariat, the Action against Terrorism Unit has the
mission of supervising the implementation of existing
United Nations instruments and providing technical
assistance to member States in the fight against
terrorism. The Belgian chairmanship intends to
continue making progress on the basis of the OSCE
Plan of Action and to promote cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations, particularly the Security
Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee.

The United Nations and the OSCE share the same
values. The two organizations work in many common
areas, including such important fields as respect for
human rights, democratization, the protection of
minorities, conflict prevention, crisis management,
combating organized crime, fighting terrorism and
protecting the environment.

I would also like to assure the Security Council
of our full support for the principles and
recommendations contained in resolution 1631
(2005) - adopted last October - which aim to
strengthen cooperation and consultation between the
United Nations and regional organizations while at the
same time recognizing the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for international peace and security.
As Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE, Belgium will
endeavour to further promote synergies and
complementarity between the United Nations and the
OSCE. It is for that reason that I wished to brief the
Council about the activities of the OSCE at the
beginning of our chairmanship.

That is the outline of a programme that is both
ambitious and realistic. It is ambitious because it opens
up numerous new avenues for the OSCE while
expanding the scope of others. It is realistic because we
are aware that progress will only be possible through
agreement among the OSCE's 55 member countries.
As Chairman-in-Office, we intend to play the role of
honest broker, working in the best interests of the
organization as a whole and for the benefit of all its
members. Good cooperation between the OSCE and
the United Nations is crucial in that regard. In its
capacity as Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE, Belgium
wishes to contribute to that goal. We intend to meet the
challenge. I look forward to the support and
cooperation of the Security Council.

