Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I would like to begin
by thanking Ambassadors Gary Quinlan, Mohammed
Loulichki and Oh Joon for their briefings and updates
on actions taken over the past six months. We are
grateful for their efforts and leadership of the Security
Council Committees with counter-terrorism mandates.
Terrorism is a serious threat to international peace and
security and to the political independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and social and economic
development of all States.

The international community has achieved
remarkable progress in countering terrorism.
Significant efforts have been undertaken by the
United Nations and other international, regional and
subregional organizations to promote cooperation and
coordination and to enhance the capacities of Member
States to tackle terrorism. Nevertheless, more should
be done to prevent and combat that scourge. The full
and faithful implementation of international legal
obligations by all States is critical. The role and work
of the Security Council Committees with counter-
terrorism mandates in the prevention and response to
terrorist threats remain vitally important.

Azerbaijan strongly supports close cooperation and
effective coordination among the Committees and their
Groups of Experts. We take positive note of the efforts
undertaken by the Committees to that end during the
reporting period.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) continued to play a critical role in
promoting and facilitating the implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. We note
the introduction of new assessment tools, namely,
the overview for implementation assessment and the
detailed implementation survey, which were developed
to assist the Committee in continuing its constructive
dialogue with Member States. The special meetings
and events organized by the Committee have also
made an important contribution to raising awareness
on counter-terrorism issues, encouraging discussions
on new terrorist threats and challenges, and revealing
shortcomings in the fight against terrorism.

We commend the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) for its close interaction
with Member States, its capacity-building activities
and its cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, which continue to contribute to the
effectiveness ofboth the Committee's work and the full
implementation of counter-terrorism commitments.

The statement just made by the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities clearly outlined
the evolving threat to international peace and security
posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates. Over the past
six months, the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee has
remained actively engaged on the situations in Mali,
the Sahel, the Maghreb and the Middle East. We
commend the Committee for its efforts to ensure the
relevance and effectiveness of the sanctions regime
and to operationalize the procedural enhancements of
resolution 2083 (2012). We reiterate the importance of
the Office of the Ombudsperson as an essential element
of fairness in the application of the sanctions regime.

Azerbaijan greatly appreciates the activities of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), in particular its close interaction with
Member States. We welcome steady progress in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) during the
reporting period. We take positive note of a number
of important events held in various countries, which
provided opportunities for enhancing the awareness
of the resolution globally and facilitating capacity-
building assistance to States.

Areas ofarmed conflict, especially territories under
foreign military occupation, often create conditions
conducive to exploitation by terrorists, separatists
and other non-State actors. The accumulation of great
quantities of armaments and munitions in places
beyond the reach of international control and the risk of
the spread of weapons of mass destruction and related
materials to non-State actors pose a serious threat to
international peace and security. That requires the
diligent implementation by all States of their respective
commitments and stronger cooperation among them in
order to effectively address such challenges.

Last but not least, the war on terrorism cannot
and must not be used to target any religion or culture.
That principle must be part of any counter-terrorism
strategy. It is also important to continue to work
together to ensure that counter-terrorism measures by
Member States comply with their obligations under
international human rights law.

Since this is the last public meeting of the Council
this month, I would also like to express our appreciation
to you, Mr. President, and to your delegation for your
excellent leadership of the Council's work in November.
We also wish the delegation of France a successful
presidency in December.

