Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Ihave
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala, the United States,
Uruguay and my country, Peru.

I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on having organized this debate to discuss the latest
report (S/2017/604)of the Secretary-General, issued on
12 July, on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), requested by the Security Council
in its resolution 2350 (2017), adopted on 13 April.

The Group of Friends welcomes the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore Braithwaite, and thanks
her for her exhaustive briefing and the role she has
played in supporting the political process in Haiti, the
professionalization of the police and the maintenance of
a safe and stable environment.

The Group of Friends also welcomes with
satisfaction the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2350 (2017) of 13 April.
The Group of Friends acknowledges the important
role that MINUSTAH played in promoting stability
and security in Haiti. The Group expresses its deep
appreciation and gratitude to the staff of MINUSTAH
and to all Member States that have contributed to the
Mission. Furthermore, the Group pays homage to those
who were injured or lost their lives in the line of duty.

Strengthening the rule of law and democratic
institutions, establishing a political culture conducive
to democratic stability and improving socioeconomic
conditions are key elements to achieve greater security,
stability and prosperity in Haiti. In that regard, the Group
of Friends is pleased that Haiti has continued to make
progress in consolidating its democracy and stability.
The Group of Friends congratulates the President of the
Republic of Haiti, Mr. Jovenel Moise, for the actions
undertaken during his first 100 days of in office,
including the "Caravane du changement" initiative.

The Group of Friends emphasizes the importance
that national ownership, inclusion and the role that civil
society can play to advance national peacebuilding
processes and reiterates the vitality of the commitment
of the Government of Haiti to strengthen the rule of
law and to achieve greater progress in the justice and
security sectors.

The Group of Friends welcomes the continued
strengthening, professionalization and reform of the
Haitian National Police (HNP) and welcomes the
approval by Prime Minister Jack Guy Lafontant of the
HNP strategic development plan for the period 2017-
2021, as well as the approach of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH)
to the institutional and professional development of the
HNP within the framework of the plan.

The Group of Friends stresses that there can be no
genuine stability, peace or sustainable development in
Haiti without democratic institutions and strengthened
democratic processes. In that context, the Group
recognizes the limited progress made in the performance
of judicial institutions and in the administration
of justice. The Group of Friends emphasizes the
importance of strengthening the rule of law through the
consolidation of Haitian institutions and reaffirms the
role of MINUSTAH and its successor, MINUJUSTH,
in supporting the Haitian State by promoting
better governance structures, the transparency and
independence of the judiciary, as well as the promotion
and protection of human rights, in accordance with
their mandates. In that regard, the Group of Friends
encourages the Government of Haiti to make progress
in the areas ofjustice and human rights.

The Group of Friends recognizes that the
strengthening of national human rights institutions and
respect for human rights, including those of women
and children; due process and the fight against crime,
sexual and gender-based violence; the end of impunity
and prolonged pre-trial detention; and the promotion
of accountability, are essential to guarantee the rule of
law and security in Haiti, including access to justice.
The Group of Friends stresses the importance of the
Haitian authorities assigning the human rights portfolio
to a specific Government ministry.

The Group of Friends welcomes General Assembly
resolutions 71/161 A and 71/161 B, on the new United
Nations approach to cholera in Haiti, which aims to
renew the efforts of the Organization to eliminate the
transmission of cholera and to address the suffering of
its victims. The Group welcomes the decrease in the
number of suspected cases of cholera and related deaths
as a result of the increased response to cholera. The
Group believes that efforts to eliminate cholera should
continue and encourages Member States to contribute
to the United Nations Haiti Cholera Response
Multi-Partner Trust Fund to support the new approach,
including reorienting to the Fund, where possible,
the excess balance from MINUSTAH's 2015-2016
balance sheet. The Group of Friends also welcomes the
appointment by the Secretary-General of Ms. Josette
Sheeran as Special Envoy for Haiti, who will guide
the full implementation of the new United Nations
approach to reduce the impact of cholera and will
support national efforts to achieve sustainable growth
in Haiti by 2030 and the implementation plan.

The Group of Friends notes that, while significant
progress has been made, Haiti continues to face major
humanitarian challenges, especially due to the impact
of Hurricane Matthew. In that regard, the Group
welcomes the mission of the Senior Transformative
Agenda Implementation Team of the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee, which made recommendations to
the humanitarian country team and the Government on
how to improve the effectiveness of the humanitarian
architecture, optimize coordination between
humanitarian and development actors, and adopt a
more strategic approach to protection.

In addition, the Group of Friends affirms that
progress in the reconstruction of Haiti, as well
as Haiti's socioeconomic development, including
effective, coordinated and commendable international
development assistance, and Haitian institutional
capacity-buildinginordertobenefitfromthatassistance,
is crucial to achieve sustainable peace and stability,
and reiterates the need for security to be accompanied
by sustainable social, economic and environmental
development, efforts in which the Government of Haiti
plays a leading role, with the support of the United
Nations country team.

The Group of Friends acknowledges the important
contribution of MINUSTAH to stabilization in Haiti.
It has initiated the implementation of a comprehensive
withdrawal plan covering the military, police and
civilian components. The Group of Friends welcomes the
fact that MINUSTAH and the United Nations country
team have finalized and adopted a joint transition plan
as the culmination of the comprehensive planning
process that began in 2014-2015. The Group of Friends
reiterates its solidarity with and commitment to the
people and the Government of Haiti in their aspiration
for stability, reconstruction, recovery, economic
development and the consolidation of democracy.

