Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the briefers
for the information they shared with us today.

The Dominican Republic welcomes the forum held
on 1 and 2 October in Mogadishu, in which specific and
priority commitments were defined, such as the holding
of elections at the end of 2020 or the beginning of 2021,
the adoption of the draft electoral law by December
2019 and the completion of the constitutional review
by June 2020.

The political stalemate continues to be an obstacle
to achieving significant progress, making it necessary
for Somali leaders to redouble their efforts aimed
at finding solutions to problems through consensus,
prioritizing the interests of the Somali people. We stress
the need for further progress on the legal framework
for the 2020 and 2021 elections and urge the Federal
Government and the federated member states to spare
no effort in reaching an agreement on a comprehensive
political framework for the key electoral issues. We
welcome the Federal Government's efforts in the
constitutional review process and its commitment to
finalizing the Constitution by June 2020. We urge the
parties to continue pursuing constructive, inclusive and
transparent dialogues based on consensus.

We strongly condemn the assassination of Almaas
Elman and would like to express our condolences to
her family and to the people of Somalia. We have lost a
brilliant young peacebuilder and a great humanitarian.
Just two days ago, her sister, Ilwad, was in this Chamber
urgently calling on us to protect the humanitarian
workers and human rights defenders who continue to
be killed, disappeared and abducted (see S/PV.8668).
We will therefore continue to support the struggle of
the Elman sisters. Those responsible for this inhumane
act must be identified and brought to justice.

The inclusion of women and young people has
great potential to transform societies, which is Why we
must increase their political participation and power-
sharing. Women must be involved at all levels in order
for them to reach a minimum of 30 per cent of seats in
the 2020 elections.

We condemn the attacks perpetrated by the terrorist
group Al-Shabaab, which continues to be the main
source of violence, targeting Government facilities and
personnel, security forces, and public places through
the use of improvised explosive devices.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia is of
particular concern because of the high level of
widespread severe acute malnutrition at a time when
humanitarian operations continue to be hampered by
restricted access to vulnerable areas. It is therefore
essential that all local actors contribute to facilitating
humanitarian access and that the international
community redouble cooperation efforts as part of the
humanitarian response plan for Somalia in order to save
lives and alleviate the needs of the most vulnerable.

In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge the
important role of the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia, the African Union Military Observer Mission
in Somalia and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia in achieving lasting peace and stability
in the country. We are confident that the process of
preparing for and holding future elections will be a
gateway to a new stage of dialogue that will promote
the development of an increasingly participatory
democracy by contributing to the search for lasting
solutions to the many challenges that the Somali people
are facing.

