Mr. De La Sabliere (spoke in French): The
Security Council mission that I had the honour to lead
last week in five Central African countries was an
opportunity to renew the Council's support for the
process of peace and national reconciliation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi.

First, on behalf of all the participants in the
mission, I should like once again to thank the
authorities of the five countries that we visited - the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Uganda,
Rwanda and Tanzania - for the warm welcome that
we received everywhere.

The report of our mission is available. Everyone
can read it and become familiar with the
recommendations that we have submitted to the
Council. This morning, without going over it in detail,
I should like to highlight certain points, particularly
with regard to the main problems that we discussed
with our interlocutors.

I shall first discuss our visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Everyone we met there
believes that there is a momentum for transition.
Everyone spoke with us about the desire of the
Congolese to vote. In fact, according to the
Independent Electoral Commission, the milestone of 20
million persons registered to vote has been achieved.
Everyone is now looking towards the next votes - the
referendum on the constitution on 18 December and
the legislative and presidential elections - and the
transition will end in less than eight months. That
progress is commendable, as was stressed by the
mission, but we also recalled that there are still
significant problems to be resolved.

The first problem concerns the elections. The
electoral timetable is tight. There has been some delay.
The mission stressed to each of our interlocutors that it
was essential that the voting take place on schedule. It
is imperative that the date of 30 June 2006 be
respected. The electoral law - an essential element of
the operation - must therefore be considered carefully
by Parliament. It must be promulgated the day after the
adoption of the constitution, which - I repeat - is
scheduled for 18 December. Then, it is essential that
the elections be open to everyone. No one must be
excluded or feel excluded from the process. In
particular, measures must be taken to make up for the
delays in voter registration in the provinces of
Equateur and Bandundu. The Congolese authorities
must also ensure that citizens are well informed.

The second problem is integrating the army and
the police. Progress has been made in demobilizing ex-
combatants and in restructuring the army and the
police. However, that progress must continue and
expand. We have asked the Congolese authorities to
redouble their efforts in this area. In fact, the armed
forces integration programme was interrupted after its
first phase. Six brigades have been formed, whereas
nine had been planned, to ensure security in the east.
Our message, in keeping with our terms of reference,
was that there was no more time to lose in starting the
second integration phase. Moreover, measures must be
taken to ensure that the new integrated brigades receive
the equipment that they need. It is also essential that
the Government pay the soldiers regularly and
adequately.

The third problem is related to governance. Re-
establishing State authority is more than ever a priority.
It must be carried out with respect for the rule of law.
Priority in the area of good governance must apply to
the integrated brigades that I just mentioned and to the

adoption of the report of the European Union mission
to provide advice and assistance for security sector
reform in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
mission reiterated that point several times during its
interviews, particularly with the head of State, Vice-
President Ruberwa and the Minister of Defence.

I now turn to the problem of armed groups in the
east, which was mentioned as a main topic of concern
by all the heads of State with whom we met. In the
eastern Congo, everyone - beginning with President
Kabila - now recognizes that the presence of armed
groups is a burden, particularly on the Congolese
people. Today, it is the people who are the victims of
violence, atrocities and plundering. There is an
obligation to act, but the problem also exists for the
neighbouring countries.

The Congolese forces, with the support of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), are now
engaged in forceful action against the armed groups.
These operations are courageous; I believe that they
should be commended. Much was asked about this in
our conversations. In Ituri, those operations are already
permitting a stabilization of the situation. They have
begun in the Kivus, particularly in Virunga Park. They
must be continued.

We said to all our interlocutors that what the
countries of the region must do, in the face of these
armed groups, is to continue to strengthen their
cooperation. Mechanisms already exist - such as the
Tripartite Commission - and they should be utilized,
particularly in order to exchange information. We
recalled, in the clearest terms, the need for everyone to
respect the sovereignty of neighbours. We also asked
the Governments to ensure that the armed groups
cannot receive cross-border support. The arms embargo
must be respected. The illegal exploitation of natural
resources, which finances arms trafficking, must no
longer be tolerated.

In Burundi, we met a young Government, freshly
elected and resolved fully to implement the reforms
that were undertaken during the transitional period.

Three topics in particular predominated in our
discussions. The first was the presence of the United
Nations, which is now in question. Its support was
decisive in achieving the transition in Burundi, as
noted by the head of State and by all the officials with
whom we met. But now that the transition has been
completed, the question arises - quite naturally - of
disengaging the mission, or of withdrawing at least its
military presence. We spoke at great length with our
interlocutors on this subject, and, according to my
understanding, there was agreement on a gradual
withdrawal. That is what the authorities of Burundi
told us; that is the principle involved.

The United Nations and the legitimate authorities
of the country, with full respect for the sovereignty of
Burundi - as the mission frequently reiterated in its
meetings - but also with a concern for peacebuilding,
an issue that kept coming up in the subregion, must
agree on a specific and concrete plan for gradual
disengagement.

The second point relates to the role of the
international community in the context of an exit
strategy. There must be a successful transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. Above and beyond the
gradual withdrawal of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi, we told the Burundian authorities that we
wished to see a dialogue held, under the best possible
conditions, with the international community, so that
together we can find the best possible way of helping
Burundi.

It seems to me that the Partners Forum, created in
New York two months ago, is the obvious framework
for such a dialogue. But we also believe - and this
wish was unanimously expressed by the members of
the mission - that the Peacebuilding Commission
should be set up as quickly as possible. In our talks we
often spoke of the benefits that Burundi could derive
from the creation of the Commission.

Finally, there is the question of the Front National
de Liberation (FNL). This is a topic that everyone was
thinking about; it came up in all our talks. There has
been great disappointment in that respect. Perhaps it is
not too late for the movement to join the peace process;
some people still want to believe that that is possible.
In any event, it is not acceptable for the FNL to engage
in acts of violence against the new democratic
institutions. We understand that the Government of
Burundi remains open to the resumption of
negotiations. The Security Council, for its part, last
year expressed its readiness to consider the imposition
of sanctions, and we reminded our interlocutors that
that option was still available.

If I may, I should like, in conclusion, to make a
few general comments - perhaps rather personal
ones - about the work of the Council, which I have
been prompted to formulate as a result of this visit.

My first comment is more general. The Security
Council visited Central Africa this year for the sixth
time. I believe that the members of the Council were
motivated once again by a concern successfully to
promote the peace process in a region to which
stability and lasting peace must be restored; these are
pivotal to its development.

The success of the peace processes in the region
is important not only for its peoples, which have
suffered so much; it is important also for promoting
cooperation, on a solid footing, among the countries of
the region. Such cooperation, in various forums and
particularly in the context of the Great Lakes
Conference, is crucial in the context of stability.

Let me add that the success of our common
undertaking in Central Africa is of an importance that
goes well beyond the subregional level; indeed, I think
that it is important for the whole of Africa. That in
itself explains the Council's having visited the region
every year - for six years now, I believe. It explains
the significant support provided by the international
community for the process. We know that United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the United
Nations Office in Burundi have more than 23,000
women and men in the field. I believe that in both
cases - and I think this is a positive element; certainly
I found it reassuring - there is a clear-cut policy on
the part of the international community, which is
remarkably united in this regard.

Another cause for satisfaction is the fact that the
Council's work is reflected in the field by ongoing
diplomatic activities, held, in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in the context of the International
Committee to Accompany the Transition, which itself
is a transitional entity. I say this because I think that
this has more than just subregional significance. It can
be applied to other crises - in C6te d'Ivoire, for
instance, with the recent creation of the International
Working Group.

One can see, therefore, that the Security Council,
which has supported those groups, and very often has
even created them, has been able to adapt and evolve.
It is closer now to the field than it has ever been. I
believe that this is a positive development. The fact
that our colleague Kenzo Oshima went from Kinshasa
to the Horn of Africa to help us better to assess the
situation is an example of this evolution, which, I
think, is something we should continue to promote.

Let me make one other general comment. Over
the past few years, the scale and the mandate of
MONUC have changed so as better to take into account
the situation in the field and to remedy deficiencies and
shortcomings. Today in Burundi we need, together with
the authorities, to consider a gradual withdrawal. It
seems to me that, with the assistance of the Secretary-
General and of Mr. Guehenno and his team, we should,
whenever necessary, when a mandate is being renewed,
really think about the changes that need to be made and
what needs to be adjusted. Of course, we are not
talking about change for change's sake. Very often
mandates simply should be renewed unchanged. But it
seems to me that we need to cultivate the Council's
capacity for adaptation.
I would like to conclude by thanking my Council
colleagues who took part in the mission for the trust
that they placed in me throughout our trip and for their

indulgence, even though very often - with their
consent, of course - I set for them a very heavy
workload.

On behalf of all members of the mission, I thank
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Council secretariat team, which was strengthened in
order to carry out the mission and to meet the needs of
security, logistics and communications. Without them,
without Carolyn McAskie and Bill Swing, to whom we
should pay tribute for their work, and without the
teams assembled on the ground to assist the Security
Council, we could not have carried out this mission
successfully in the period of barely a week.

