Mr. Mitri (Lebanon): 1 have come from Beirut
bearing images of horror and sounds of grief, as well as
both the anger and the hope of my people. I trust that
2
members of the Council will not see images of what we
have seen and turn away, or hear what we have heard
and close their ears.

Let me start with a word of appreciation for all
the efforts that led to the presidential statement of
yesterday (S/PRST/2006/35). I would like to commend
your own efforts, Mr. President, but also those of the
Secretary-General, whom I join in affirming that the
authority and the standing of the Security Council are
at stake.

While appreciating the efforts of yesterday, I
have come here to reiterate forcefully the call of the
Lebanese Government for an immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire. The onslaught continues
unabated. It has to stop.

I have also come to ask for the setting in motion
of a process of international investigation with regard
to the crime of Qana, Qana the second, where a
massacre had taken place in 1996. I am sure that many
of us - since many of us here are people of
memory - will remember the massacre in 1996 during
Operation Grapes of Wrath.

I think that by now, the facts are known to all of
us. Dozens of elderly people, disabled people, children
and women were sheltering in the basement of an
unfinished house. An Israeli jet dropped two bombs,
killing 62 persons, including 35 children, who were
buried under the rubble.

I left my country mourning and crying out against
what all Lebanese - not most Lebanese, I would say,
but all Lebanese - perceive to be an unjustified
collective punishment - and no collective punishment
is justified - that is being imposed on the civilian
population. The spilled blood of the children in Qana
deserves more, much more, than expressions of regret.

Allow me to say that some of us are tired of
listening to a kind of self-righteous discourse about
self-defence. We have heard ad nauseam that in wars,
mistakes are committed. Indeed. But how many
mistakes did Israel commit against my people in 1969,
in 1978, in 1982, in 1993, in 1996 and in 1999, and
how many mistakes is it committing now? When
mistakes are a pattern of behaviour, they deserve
another name: they qualify as crimes.

All of us have heard again and again and again
the justification given that fighters are in the midst of
the civilian population. Let me not argue about that
06-45042
justification, except to say that it is a blatant violation
of international law. Protocol I, of 1977, to the Geneva
Conventions states unequivocally in its article 50:

"The presence within the civilian population
of individuals who do not come within the
definition of civilians does not deprive the
population of its civilian character."

The massacre of Qana is a crime against civilians, no
matter what the pretexts are, no matter what
justifications are given.

The killing must stop. We have seen previous
Israeli aggressions against Lebanon. I think that all
members of the Security Council are aware that none
of those aggressions achieved their stated aim. The
aggression of today should be the end.

Returning to the status quo ante would be futile.
And it is because of that that, in the name of the people
of Lebanon, I call upon all Security Council members
to assist us in putting an end to this human tragedy.
The Government of Lebanon firmly believes that that
can be achieved in the following manner.

Here, I shall read out a text that was approved by
the Council of Ministers, calling for

u

. an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire
and a declaration of agreement on the following
issues:

"An undertaking to release the Lebanese
and Israeli prisoners and detainees through the
International Committee of the Red Cross;

"Withdrawal of the Israeli army to behind
the Blue Line, and the return of the displaced to
their villages;

"A commitment from the Security Council
to place the Sheba'a farms and the Kafr Shuba
hills under United Nations jurisdiction until
border delineation and Lebanese sovereignty over
them are fully settled. While in United Nations
custody, the area will be accessible to Lebanese
property owners there. Further, Israel will
surrender all remaining landmine maps in south
Lebanon to the United Nations;

"The Lebanese Government will extend its
authority over its territory through its own
legitimate armed forces, such that there will be
no weapons or authority other than that of the
06-45042
Lebanese State, as stipulated in the Taif national
reconciliation accord;

"The United Nations international force
operating in south Lebanon will be supplemented
and enhanced in numbers, equipment, mandate
and scope of operations as needed in order to
undertake urgent humanitarian and relief work
and guarantee stability and security in the south
so that those who fled their homes can return;

"The United Nations, in cooperation with
the relevant parties, will undertake the necessary
measures to once again put into effect the
Armistice Agreement signed by Lebanon and
Israel in 1949 and to ensure adherence to the
provisions of that Agreement as well as to
explore amendments to, or development of, said
provisions as necessary; and

"The international community will commit
to support Lebanon on all levels and to assist it in
facing the tremendous burden resulting from the
human, social and economic tragedy which has
afflicted our country, especially in the areas of
relief, reconstruction and the rebuilding of the
national economy."

I believe that members will agree with me that we
owe our people an honourable way out of this war. We
owe our people a solution, with the Council's support,
that will not allow further destruction and that will help
us rebuild our nation - a nation that we have been
rebuilding and reconstructing, especially during the
past year.

Lebanon, we are often told, has some significance
and importance in itself and for itself, for what it
represents, for what it is: a country of plurality,
diversity and tolerance. Therefore, let it not be the
battleground for any war that serves the interests of
others. Let not Lebanon be the battleground of the wars
of others.

I have come to the Security Council on behalf of
the Lebanese Government, hoping to be heard. I have
come to cry out loud our nation's right to live and our
nation's right to live in dignity. We shall not
compromise our just cause as, in a moment like this,
we reaffirm our unity as a nation. The Lebanese
people, amidst tragedies such as that we saw yesterday,
are more united than ever. In that unity, we trust that
wars can be overcome. Our country has overcome
3
many wars and much destruction over the years that I
have mentioned, in years prior to that, and over the
ages. We shall rise up again.

Let that be the Council's choice, too. It should
not allow war, desolation and hatred to prevail.

