Mr. Rudolph (Germany): The Security Council was
forced to impose a sanctions regime over Iraq. The latest
report of the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and the discussion we had yesterday with its
Executive Chairman, Ambassador Ekeus, have made it
abundantly clear that it is unfortunately not yet possible
to lift this regime. My delegation has stated more than
once that only after the full compliance of the
Government of Iraq with all its obligations, including
those contained in resolution 687 (1991), will the Council
be able to consider lifting the sanctions in accordance
with operative paragraph 22 of that resolution.

In view of the fact that the sanctions regime has to
remain in effect, the resolution just adopted by the
Council is a very important document. It opens new
opportunities for the benefit of the Iraqi population. Its
scope is much wider than that of the previous Council
resolutions 706 (1991) and 712 (1991), which, because of
Iraq's refusal, never became effective.

We are aware of the plight of the innocent civilian
population of Iraq. The implementation of the resolution
just adopted can ensure the supply and availability of
medicines, health supplies, foodstuffs and materials for
essential civilian needs. We therefore appeal to the
Government of Iraq to actively cooperate in implementing
this resolution and to make the supplies thus attained
available throughout the country to the entire population.
For its benefit, the speedy implementation of the
resolution is necessary. This should be all the more
possible for the Government of Iraq since the resolution
is in conformity with Iraq's legitimate interests, especially
its interest in maintaining its territorial integrity.

It must be understood that the provisions of this
resolution constitute only temporary measures, as stated
in its third preambular paragraph. The resolution aims at
improving the living conditions of the entire population of
Iraq. The action taken by the Council by adopting this
resolution cannot, however, replace in any way what is
necessary on the part of the Government of Iraq, namely,
strict and complete compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 687 (1991) of
8 April 1991. While we hope that through our action
today we are making a contribution towards alleviating
the hardship faced by the innocent people of Iraq, we
urge the Iraqi leadership to do its part so that the Council
will be able to finally lift the sanctions.
 

