Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his very detailed update. He has returned
from Kosovo with good news, despite the violence that
continues on the border between Kosovo and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

Against that grim backdrop, we reaffirm our
strong condemnation of terrorist acts committed by
extremist groups. We say no to ethnic violence and
believe that ethnic extremism only makes the Balkan
region more fragile and dangerously compromises the
efforts now being made by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
international community. While we wait for this
scourge to be suppressed, we continue to encourage
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to redouble
their efforts to ensure security at the border between
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Kosovo.

To return to the good news brought by Mr.
Guehenno, we note with satisfaction the priorities set
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
We believe them to be good priorities that can be
implemented. I do not wish at this point to enumerate
all those priorities, but we share the opinions expressed
in particular about the elections and their legal
framework. My delegation believes, however, that, if
UNMIK is to continue to make progress, as it must do,
it is important to strengthen cooperation with Belgrade.
This cooperation must be enhanced so that certain
difficult questions addressed in the Special
Representative's priorities can be settled.

It is equally important to end the violence once
and for all. Everyone, especially those who have the
resources, should help UNMIK and KFOR in that
regard. The future of this region, like any in conflict,
lies in a political settlement. Coming from a region that
is fighting against the illicit traffic in light arms, we
fully support the points made by the Ambassadors of
Jamaica and Colombia on this issue.

Finally, we support the proposals made by several
delegations, beginning with the Ambassador of the
Russian Federation, to send a Security Council mission
to Kosovo at the appropriate time.

