Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at
the outset to commend Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
for his comprehensive briefing. We support the
important role of the United Nations in the settlement
of the Arab-Israeli conflict in the Middle East.

We have no doubt, Sir, that you share our view
that the major feature of the situation in the Middle
East is Israel's ongoing attempts to block the peace
efforts led by the United States of America by
continuing its illegal practices, notably settlement
activity, the demolition of homes and the expulsion of
their inhabitants, not to mention the collective
punishment of the people of the Gaza Strip through the
ongoing blockade. The efforts for peace I refer to are
the same mentioned by President Obama before the
General Assembly (see A/65/PV.11) when he promised
the establishment of a Palestinian State within one year
and expressed his hope that, when he returns to the
Assembly Hall next year, the independent State of
Palestine would be a new Member of the United
Nations. He also called on Israel to extend its
moratorium on settlement activities.

However, the Government of Israel continues to
ignore not only the appeals of President Obama and the
Quartet and the international consensus on the two-
State solution and the Road Map, but also the dozens
of resolutions of this Council and the General
Assembly, not to mention the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. The State of Israel has
not only refused to extend the moratorium on
settlement activity in the West Bank - which did not
include East Jerusalem - and pursued such activity
uninterrupted over the past 10 years, but it has
amended its citizenship law, making it a condition for
anyone seeking Israeli nationality to take an oath of
allegiance to the State of Israel as a Jewish State.

Furthermore, Prime Minister Netanyahu of Israel
has sought to pre-empt the results of the negotiations
by setting as his principal objective the establishment
of arrangements to guarantee Israel's security by
ensuring the presence of the Israeli army on the borders
between the West Bank and Jordan and by recognizing

Israel as the Jewish State. Indeed, the amendments to
the Israeli law of citizenship and the call on
Palestinians to recognize Israel as a Jewish State are
but two faces of the same coin and are not only aimed
at eroding the right of return of Palestinian refugees
and displaced persons, but also threaten the very
presence of Palestinians in Israel itself by denying their
legitimate historical presence in the land of their
forefathers. It dresses up the idea of transfer or
deportation as Fascism in new robes, as has been noted
in the Israeli media by the most prominent Israel
writers.

This is exactly what Foreign Minister Avigdor
Lieberman meant when he said that we must place the
problem of the Arabs of Israel on the negotiating table,
for there can be no lasting, genuine and solid solution
based on a homogeneous Palestinian State without a
Jewish presence at a time when Israel is being asked to
be a bi-national State. From the rostrum of the General
Assembly, Mr. Lieberman said that the negotiations
should be based on the exchange of land and
population and not on land for peace. He believes that
there is no possibility of achieving peace next year or
in the next generation and that the only solution is a
phased, long-term solution. He thus calls for emphasis
on the problems of security and the economy.

In fact, what Lieberman calls economic security
and phased peace are pure illusions. Economic security
cannot be achieved or sustained in isolation from the
political situation. He seeks to delude the international
community into believing that the Palestinian economy
in the West Bank is growing and that the Palestinians
are achieving prosperity under Israeli occupation. None
of this is true, for that economy is based largely on
assistance from donors, as many representatives around
this table well know. The call for phased peace, at a
time when settlement activities in the West Bank and
the blockade of Gaza continue, will achieve the
contrary of peace because it erodes the basis of peace
and the two-State solution.

In any case, we cannot imagine peace in any
form, shape or context so long as Israel continues to
blockade the Gaza Strip and occasionally to bombard it
and kill its people under the pretext of fighting
terrorism. As a matter of fact, Israel is imposing not
only an external blockade of Gaza, but an internal one
as well. The most recent report of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, issued in
August, notes that Israel bans the Palestinians from
using or entering 17 per cent of the land in the Strip,
including 35 per cent of its arable land. It also prohibits
fishing in 85 per cent of Palestinian territorial waters,
contrary to the Oslo Accords.

With regard to Gaza, we emphasize the
importance of promptly dispatching the fact-finding
mission established by the Secretary-General to
investigate - in an impartial, credible and transparent
manner and in accordance with international criteria 4
the attack by the Israeli occupying forces and navy on
the freedom flotilla. Such an investigation would allow
us to assign responsibility, punish the perpetrators, and
compensate all the victims. In this context, we hope
that the Council will consider all consequent reports of
the fact-finding mission.

Faced with that intransigence and Israel's logic of
might, we emphasize that we are committed to the
force of the law and that we seek a just, comprehensive
and lasting settlement of the conflict in the Middle East
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), the Madrid terms of reference for peace,
the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative. In that context, negotiations in whatever
form must deal with the final status issues mentioned
in the terms of reference cited. The Road Map calls for
a total moratorium on settlement activities within
specified, short time frames. That was emphasized by
the Quartet on 20 August.

Permanent peace is a peace that includes Syria and
Lebanon and is predicated on a withdrawal from the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights to the borders of 4 June
1967 and what is remaining of Lebanese territories, in
accordance with the resolutions of the Council, in
particular resolution 1701 (2006). In that respect we
avail ourselves of this opportunity to re-emphasize
Lebanon's commitment to resolution 1701 (2006) in all
its aspects. Israel must do that also.

