Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation thanks
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his
comprehensive and objective briefing and his unfailing
commitment to the region.

First of all, we welcome the decision taken by
Israel and Hamas in Gaza to hold a ceasefire that would
follow the agreement the two sides reached in 2014. We
appreciate the political will of both sides, which has
resulted in concluding a viable truce. We hope that this
will lead to a full-fledged peace treaty between the two
sides and thus prevent a relapse, for which no efforts
should be spared. It is clear to all that in a state of fierce
war or exchange of fire between the parties, which we
should avoid at all costs, all the rest ofthe issues simply
fade away, including a critical problem like the illegal
settlements in the Palestinian territories.
We sincerely welcome the contribution of Egypt
and the United Nations since the beginning of the
crisis to pull Israel and Gaza back from the brink of
war and bring some calm. Astana also appreciates
the measures of the international community and
different entities to obtain a ceasefire. I need hardly
recall that confidence-building measures and political
and diplomatic measures are at the core of our foreign
policy. We therefore always urge our partners to utilize
them.

Astana expresses its concern over the intention
of the Israeli leaders to legalize thousands of Jewish
settlement homes in the occupied West Bank.
Kazakhstan calls on both sides to honour their respective
commitments, in accordance with all Security Council
resolutions that have been adopted over the 50 years
since 1967. The Council must ensure that resolution
2334 (2016) is complied with, and we urge a complete
freeze on the construction of settlements.

Astana encourages Member States with
influence - in particular the Arab countries, the
United States and Russia - and the European Union
to urge Israel and Palestine to return to the negotiating
table. This should be aimed at reaching an agreement
upon mutually acceptable principles of the coexistence
of two States based on international law and Security
Council resolutions.

We also need to address the blockade of the Gaza
Strip, where an acute food shortage persists. We share
the concerns of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Process, who said
that further conflict between Israel and Hamas in
Gaza is likely, due to the humanitarian situation in the
Palestinian coastal enclave. It is therefore obvious that
stakeholders should increase the amount of electricity
supplied to Gaza.

Kazakhstan hopes that the work of the unique
Middle East Quartet will be revived and intensified.
We believe that with the assistance of the participants
of the Quartet, the parties will be able to find common
ground for the continuation of a peaceful dialogue.

Astana is deeply concerned about the recent
violent incidents in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. A very serious security situation still
prevails in the occupied West Bank. We have learned
that four Palestinians have been killed by Israeli
forces in separate operations over the past week in the
occupied West Bank, with the Israeli army announcing
the city of Ramallah to be a closed military zone.
We express our sorrow over a shooting attack that
took place near the illegal settlement of Ofra, east of
Ramallah, where two Israeli soldiers were killed by
an unknown Palestinian. The Israeli and Palestinian
security services must work together to restore calm
and avoid escalation. We condemn all acts of violence
and terrorism, in particular against innocent civilians,
and we call on political, religious and community
leaders to speak out clearly against such brutal acts and
those who glorify them.

My country's position remains unchanged and is
very clear. Kazakhstan is a strong advocate of a two-
State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We
still believe that peace is possible between Israelis and
Palestinians. We believe that Israelis and Palestinians
can live together in peace and security with the rest of
the region.

Kazakhstan ends its term on the Security Council
on 31 December, and this is our last consultation on
the subject. We have invested much effort towards the
rapprochement between the two sides over the past two
years of our term. Even as we step down, our interest
will remain steady and ongoing in the future, and we will
always work towards peace in the Middle East through
the General Assembly and other forums - and even the
Security Council, externally - as a passionate State
Member of the United Nations that is deeply committed
to peace and security. We wish Mr. Mladenov and his
team every success, and hope that Palestine and Israel
can fulfil their aspirations.

