Mr. Begec (Turkey): I would like to express our
appreciation to the briefers for their comprehensive
presentations as well as to His Excellency Ambassador
Saikal for his statement. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2017/1056).

Today I will focus on five points.

First, we would like to emphasize the need to
consolidate the achievements of the past 16 years in
Afghanistan. The Afghan Government and people need
the international community's sustained support. It is
vital to deliver on the commitments that we made in
this regard.

Secondly, we attach importance to the functioning
of the National Unity Government. Unity among every
segment of Afghan society is key to the success of our
endeavours to achieve peace, security and stability in
Afghanistan. Further fragmentation of Afghan society
would be detrimental to both the Afghan Government
and the interests of the international community.

Thirdly, we must bear in mind that Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation efforts are key
to lasting peace and security in the country. Turkey
will maintain its contributions to the security and
development of Afghanistan as well as its support to
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace efforts. We will
continue to support the Afghan Government as long as
our help is needed.

Fourthly, increased cooperation among the
countries of the region is imperative for success in
Afghanistan. We firmly believe that this cooperation
can be secured only through dialogue and stronger
engagement. Accordingly, Turkey will continue to
contribute to regional cooperation, including through
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, of which we will
assume the co-chairmanship in 2018. Our vision for
Afghanistan is that of a peaceful and stable country
that enjoys good and cooperative relations with its
neighbours and the world, as it is at the centre of major
regional projects.

On this understanding, we believe that the signing
of the transit and transport cooperation agreement, the
Lapis Lazuli agreement, in Ashgabat last month has

also solidified the basis for regional cooperation by
bolstering trade.

Last but not least, we acknowledge and appreciate
the important role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
standing with the Afghan people and coordinating the
efforts of the international stakeholders in Afghanistan.
Turkey will continue to support UNAMA's activities
and efforts in this regard.

In concluding, I would like to underline that the
Afghan people deserve a better future. Our continued
commitment and support will renew the hopes of the
Afghan people on this path.

