Mr. Wittig (Germany) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this important debate on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

(spoke in English)

I thank the Secretary-General for his very
informative and helpful briefing, and I would like to
warmly welcome His Excellency the Minister for
International and Regional Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The briefings we
have heard and the French concept paper (see S/2011/282) have set the stage for our discussions. The
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
evolved and progress has been achieved over the past
decade. However, serious challenges remain, notably in
the eastern part of the country.

Taking into account the long-standing presence of
the United Nations and the involvement of the
international community in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the key questions are how to pursue our
policy now that the country is entering the stabilization
phase and preparing for an inclusive electoral cycle.
What kind of division of labour and of responsibilities
between the various actors should be adopted? More
specifically, how should the focus and structure of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
be defined to complement and support the primary role
of the Congolese Government in peace consolidation?
The priorities should centre around four basic pillars:
security, governance, elections and socio-economic
development. These pillars are also reflected in the
benchmarks set by resolution 1925 (2010) for future
reconfigurations of MONUSCO. Let me highlight
some specific aspects of particular concern to us in
these four areas.

First is security. The current political and military
situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
does not correspond to a stabilization phase. Civilians
suffer extreme violence, including sexual violence,
mostly affecting women and children. The violence and
potential insecurity arise from a number of sources,
one of which is the remaining presence of Congolese
and foreign armed groups such as the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda and the Lord's
Resistance Army. We encourage all actors to engage in
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
related processes to vigorously pursue those efforts.

Another paramount challenge is, of course, the
reform of all components of the security sector.
Concerning the army, a real integration of the former
members of armed groups, such as the former Congres
national pour la defense du peuple, into the Congolese
army is necessary. There will be little progress in
security sector reform if those processes are not
effectively completed.

How can we overcome the limited progress
achieved so far in the decisive area of stabilization?
International support is needed, and it is provided, for
example, through the two European Union (EU)
missions: EUSEC, the European Union mission to
provide advice and assistance for security sector
reform in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
EUPOL, the European Union police mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Among other
objectives, the two missions work to secure the chain
of payments of the Congolese armed forces. We need
better coordination among the international actors. The
international community should also play a greater role
in improving the capacity of the police and the justice
system.
The most important component, however, is the
political will and determination of Congolese actors to
address core security issues: disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security sector
reform, fighting impunity, protecting civilians and
control over natural resources by armed groups or
armed forces. Taking into account the regional
dimension of the security threats, the political will of
regional actors is also imperative. The same holds true
for the support provided by the African Union (AU)
and subregional organizations.

Secondly, I would like to turn to the issues of
governance and human rights. The lack of Government
capacity is of particular importance when considering
the issues of civilian protection and, specifically,
preventing the use of child soldiers. Child exploitation
is illegal under the Congolese Constitution and is
prohibited under various other legal acts. Despite such
provisions, the practice of using child soldiers remains
a problem. Therefore, I want to appeal to the
Congolese Government - also in my capacity as Chair
of the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict - to implement an action plan to
halt the recruitment and use of children. Looking at
human rights from a broader perspective, we are
convinced that the Congolese Government could
benefit from the advice of an independent expert of the
Human Rights Council.

Thirdly, with regard to the electoral process, the
upcoming elections represent an important opportunity
to make substantial strides in the political stabilization
process. The elections are essential to the future
legitimacy of the Congolese Government. They need to
be conducted in a timely manner and to be inclusive,
transparent, credible, peaceful and secure. A peaceful
environment allowing for adequate democratic space is
a prerequisite for the elections. The primary
responsibility for the elections lies with the Congolese
Government. We appeal to the Government and all
Congolese stakeholders to fulfil their responsibilities in
the electoral process.

Finally, endemic poverty, lack of employment for
demobilized combatants and youth, and competition
for economic resources are potential sources of tension
and violence. It is therefore crucial to lay the
foundation for long-term economic development in the
peacebuilding and stabilization processes. The AU and
relevant subregional organizations have an increasing
role to play. We should support the development of
their capacities. Germany remains engaged in that
field. We consider regional cooperation and integration
to be vital. Therefore, we would like to encourage the
Great Lakes countries and all relevant organizations to
actively engage in that process.

Furthermore, an effective and legal mining
industry, operating in accordance with the principles of
good governance, is key for the development of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The country's
natural wealth must benefit its people. The illicit
exploitation of and trade in natural resources, which is
fuelling the conflict, in particular in the Kivus, must be
brought to an end. My country is engaged in fighting
the illicit exploitation of and trade in natural resources
and supports a mineral certification system, which will
strengthen the legal mining industry and thus the
development of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Arriving at a sustainable solution will require the
will of the Congolese Government, targeted resources
from donors and strategic cooperation among all
relevant actors, notably with the United Nations and
MONUSCO. My country is willing to work the
Congolese Government and the United Nations to that
end.

Finally, allow me to express my gratitude to the
French delegation for their leadership in organizing
today's debate and for preparing the draft presidential
statement, which we fully support.

