Ms. Bahemuka (Kenya): On behalf of my
delegation, Sir, I would like to express our gratitude to
you for having found the time to preside over this very
important meeting. As we gather here today for the
annual debate on children and armed conflict, we need
to reflect seriously on the direction we should take in
the quest to protect our children - innocent victims of
the wars that continue to ravage the world.

My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
to the Secretary-General for having established the
Office of the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, in order to address critical issues
pertaining to children affected by armed conflict.

We commend the good work which has been
carried out over the years by the Special
Representative, Mr. Olara Otunnu, and his Office. We
also thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol Bellamy, for
UNICEF's continued efforts to address the plight of
children around the world.

We welcome the advances that have been made
since 1998, when this issue was formally taken up by
the Security Council. We are happy to note from the
Secretary-General's report that children's issues have
been incorporated into a number of peace accords. We
welcome also the efforts and progress made so far by
the Office of the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict in creating awareness of the plight
of children in armed conflict.

We note with gratitude the role played by
regional and subregional organizations and a number of
civil society initiatives on this issue, and we call upon
those organizations that have not yet done so to
consider mainstreaming the protection of war-affected
children into their policies.

As we address this issue, which is very dear to us,
we should not lose sight of the continuing violations of
children's rights. Despite the existence of a strong and
comprehensive body of legal standards which are
aimed at the protection of children generally, and more
specifically at children in armed conflict, Kenya regrets
that many parties to conflicts continue to ignore these
standards, often with impunity. This calls for a
strengthened and enhanced international enforcement
regime.

We recognize that much more needs to be done to
improve the situation of war-affected children. At a
glance, a number of the ongoing armed conflicts
around the world show a very disturbing picture of the
suffering of the children who are caught up in those
conflicts. The image of those suffering children
strengthens Kenya's resolve to save them.

My Government therefore supports the measures
proposed by the Secretary-General to alleviate the
suffering of war-affected children. We recognize that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes are key to the resolution of this issue. We
also support the deployment of child-protection
advisers in peacekeeping missions and the training of
peacekeeping personnel in child protection and child
rights.

We especially wish to thank UNICEF, other
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations such as Watchlist on Children and Armed
Conflict, which has taken a lead role in negotiating
with parties to conflicts to ensure the protection of
children.

Kenya continues to play an important role as
mediator in regional conflicts, especially in East Africa
and the Horn of Africa region. Many children affected
by those conflicts are indeed suffering. In that regard, I
wish to urge the incorporation of children's concerns in
national and regional peace initiatives, agreements and
efforts. As a regular troop-contributing country, Kenya
supports pre-deployment training initiatives for
peacekeepers in regional and United Nations peace
operations.

My delegation is of the view that strengthening
subregional initiatives to end practices which are
harmful to children - including the illicit exploitation
of natural resources, the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, cross-border recruitment and the use of
children in armed conflict - should be of paramount
importance to all concerned.

In View of the urgent need to strengthen child
protection measures in situations of armed conflict,
Kenya welcomes the proposals contained in the
Secretary-General's report, and we hope that they will
provide a useful basis for the way forward. We
therefore look forward to working closely with the
Security Council as it seeks to endorse the proposals
for the establishment and implementation of an
effective monitoring and reporting system, as contained
in the fourth report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict.

Considering the alarming reports of grave
violations against the well-being of children and in
view of the fact that more children suffer from the
denial of humanitarian access, Kenya hopes that the
Council will support the proposal to expand the list of
violations under consideration beyond child-soldiering
to provide a more comprehensive assessment of the
situation of children affected by armed conflict.

We will continue to support every effort by the
Security Council and the United Nations to put an end
to the climate of impunity in which crimes are
committed against children in the context of armed
conflict. In that regard, all parties responsible for
crimes against children should be brought to justice.

