Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to thank the Egyptian presidency for convening this
open debate of the Security Council under the theme
of countering narratives and ideologies of terrorism,
particularly those threats emanating from such terrorist
groups as the Islamic State, Boko Haram and Al-Qaida,
whose discourse continues to fuel hatred and violence.

Narratives and ideologies of hatred and intolerance
are the fuel that feeds the machinery of terrorist groups.
Through these narratives they are able to recruit
more fighters, receive greater financial resources and
logistical support; they even use them to justify their
actions. In this regard, we believe that terrorist acts
should not be associated with any religion, nationality
or culture.

Countering terrorist narratives and ideologies is
a key element in the area of prevention and the fight
against terrorist groups and their actions, as set forth
in pillar I of the Global Strategy. This idea is further
developed in the Secretary-General's Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), whose
integration with the Global Strategy and methods for
its implementation should be analysed more closely.

Indeed, on the one hand, we must focus on reducing
the conditions and Circumstances that lead to the
radicalization of individuals, targeting the structural
and conjunctural factors that undermine social cohesion.

In this context, we believe it is crucial to promote the
development of peaceful and inclusive societies.
On the other hand, in addition to material factors,
we believe it to be of particular importance to build
a culture of peace, dialogue and ethical values
that downplay the personal motivations that lead
radicalization and violence. In this regard, the use
of information and communications technology also
represents a significant challenge to the international
community. When seeking to limit the use of social
networks and the Internet by terrorist groups, we must
also improve the capacity of States to use information
and communications technology, with support of
the United Nations agencies involved, with a view to
limiting, countering and dismantling terrorist rhetoric.

Similarly, we must remember that terrorist groups
also rely on alternative mechanisms and traditional
communications platforms to spread and disseminate
hate speech, often hidden in legal activity. Therefore,
in full respect for the freedom of expression, we must
neutralize these distorted narratives.

In the fight against this scourge, States, together
with the entire international community, must adopt a
strategic and comprehensive vision that incorporates
the various pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. In the fight against terrorism, Peru supports
all international action in the multilateral context
geared towards providing a systematic, sustained and
efficient response.

Accordingly, we also consider both the conceptual
work and the practical implementation of this vision
at the national, regional and international levels to be
of great importance. My delegation therefore takes
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on activities of the United Nations system
in implementing the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, in the context ofthe upcoming fifth
biennial review of the Strategy.

My delegation also wishes to recall the importance
of finalizing the process of preparing the draft
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism,
as well as deliberations on convening a high-level
conference under the auspices of the United Nations.
To that end, we must redouble our efforts to reach
agreement on the Comprehensive Convention.

I reaffirm Peru's commitment to countering the
threats posed by terrorism and violent extremism, and
we assure you, Mr. President, that you can count on my
delegation's unwavering support.

