Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Lamberto Zannier for
their briefings on the difficult situation Ukraine is
facing due to a conflict that has, lest we forget, claimed
more than 13,000 lives.

That situation is not the result of the adoption, on
25 April, of the law on the use okarainian as a national
language. The law is in no way a threat to international
peace and security. It is up to the Ukrainians to make
their own choices regarding linguistic policies, inter
alia, while respecting their European and international
commitments. The early parliamentary elections to be
held next Sunday will contribute to that.

Nevertheless, the multiple violations of Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity since 2014 are a
source of great concern and a threat to international
peace and security. I wish to take this opportunity
to reaffirm France's commitment to the territorial
integrity, independence and sovereignty of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders. France
does not and will not recognize the illegal annexation
of Crimea. I also reiterate France's condemnation of
Russia's decision to facilitate the granting of Russian
citizenship to Ukrainian citizens living in certain areas
of the oblasts of Donetsk and Luhansk. By doing so,
Russia is deliberately undermining the spirit of the
Minsk agreements.

As we commemorate the fifth anniversary of the
tragic downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7,
our thoughts are with the families and loved ones of
the 298 victims. They deserve the truth, to have the
perpetrators identified and justice to be delivered in
accordance with resolution 2166 (2014).

Furthermore, France once again calls for the release
of the 24 Ukrainian seamen captured during the naval
incident in the Kerch Strait in November, as was also
demanded by the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea in May.

I would now like to underscore two points.

First, there have been some positive developments
in recent weeks and days. Under the leadership of
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyi, the work of
the Trilateral Contact Group resumed in a constructive
manner as of 5 June. Again, at the initiative of the new
Ukrainian authorities, the disengagement of forces in
the pilot zone in Stanytsia Luhanska was implemented
on 30 June. That is a significant step forward in terms of
security and is paving the way for improvements in the
humanitarian situation. I would also like to commend
the resumption of bilateral contacts at the highest level
between Ukraine and Russia, crystallized by an initial
telephone exchange between the President of Ukraine
and the President of the Russian Federation on 11 July.

My second point is that it is now necessary
to create momentum, on the basis of those first
positive developments, that generates the trust that is
indispensable for the settlement of the conflict. We
bear a responsibility to the 3.5 million people who
suffer daily as a result of the conflict. That is why
France, alongside Germany, remains firmly committed
to the Normandy format. France hosted a meeting of
diplomatic advisers under that format on 12 July in
Paris, marking the resumption of the proceedings
and resulting in encouraging constructive exchanges.
A set of priority measures to be taken by the parties
in the coming weeks was agreed upon. It is now their
responsibility to ensure that they be translated into
concrete actions.

It is also particularly necessary to make rapid
progress in terms of prisoner exchanges, the last of
which took place in December 2017, a ceasefire that
is genuinely respected, improving the humanitarian
situation, the withdrawal of heavy weaponry and mine
clearance. Once the necessary legal framework has
been established, democratic local elections will make
it possible to implement the decentralization provisions
provided for by the Minsk agreements.

To conclude, allow me to call for all of us
here to be vigilant. Although encouraging, recent
developments remain fragile. Current circumstances
offer an opportunity to generate new, more positive and
constructive momentum to revive the peace process. It
is incumbent upon us all to seize the opportunity by
taking the demanding path of dialogue and cooperation.
The Minsk agreements will soon be 5 years old - it is
high time that they be finally implemented.

