Mr. Almanzlawiy (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
Indonesian presidency on steering wisely the work of
the Security Council for this month. We also thank you,
Sir, for convening this important meeting.

This year coincides with the twentieth anniversary
of the Security Council's adoption of resolution 1265
(1999), on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
My country continues to urge the international
community to take a united and comprehensive
approach to protecting civilians and keeping them at a
distance from armed conflict. The contemporary reality
ofa world of successive and continuing conflicts causes
suffering and harm to civilians and innocent people,
depriving them of the most basic rights of life. Some
conflicts drive children into combat, depriving them of
their fundamental right to education and to be in school,
and innocent people of the basic rights of life. We
therefore call on the Security Council to operationalize
its relevant resolutions, which must deter violators of
international humanitarian law.

The change in the nature of conflicts requires
ongoing adaptations to protect the lives of civilians.
For example, the Israeli siege of Gaza represents total
disregard for the principle of protecting civilians and
their most fundamental rights. The theft of food in
Yemen by Houthi coup militias also subjects civilians
to the threat of famine. I would like to clarify that any
attack on vital facilities in populated areas represents
direct and clear disregard of the lives of civilians.

We call on the Council and the international
community to work together to find a shared perspective
on protecting civilians in armed conflicts of all kinds.
We also call for preserving the neutrality status of
innocent civilians, and on the international community
to shoulder its responsibilities by taking a strong position
against the Houthi militias supported by Iran, which
target Vital areas populated by innocent people with
ballistic missiles and drones in cities of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, in gross violation of international
humanitarian law and the Council resolutions.

