The President (spoke in Russian): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
August, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Her Excellency
Mrs. Joy ngu, Permanent Representative of Nigeria
to the United Nations, for her service as President of
the Security Council for the month of July 20lO. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Security Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador ngu for
the great diplomatic skill with which she conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2010/401)

The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Serbia, in which he requests that
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jeremic'
(Serbia) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Russian): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
2
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Zannier to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Skender Hyseni.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Hyseni to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/401, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lamberto Zannier, to whom I now give
the floor.


