Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, allow me to warmly congratulate you, Madam President, on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council for the month of November. We wish you every success in fulfilling your mandate. I would also like to commend your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation, for his able leadership in guiding the work of the Council for the month of October. We take note of resolution 2551 (2020), just adopted, renewing the sanctions regime on Somalia. We regret that again, for the second year in a row, important inputs have not been considered in order to reach consensus. The Federal Government of Somalia goes on record again in seeking the full lifting of the sanctions imposed on Somalia since 1992. In that regard, I would like to raise the following issues. First, the sanctions on Somalia are the longest United Nations sanctions regime, with the widest mandate. We reiterate that sanctions are a tool and a means, and not an end in themselves. Therefore, we stress the importance of identifying clearly defined benchmarks for the full lifting of the sanctions on Somalia. We welcome the new addition in the fourth preambular paragraph, in which the Council plan is to keep sanctions under constant review in order to assess their appropriateness, including modifications, identification of possible benchmarks, suspension or lifting measures. We equally welcome paragraph 35, calling on the Secretary-General to conduct a technical assessment on Somalia's weapons and ammunition management programme in 2021 with a view to identifying benchmarks for the full lifting of the arms embargo. Secondly, the terrorist group Al-Shabaab remains a serious threat to Somalia's peace and stability. The United Nations has generously spent millions of dollars on monitoring teams and panels of experts for more than a decade. it remains crucial for the international community to increasingly support the Federal Government of Somalia's policies and strategies to properly address the root causes of insecurity in Somalia. Therefore, we request that our partners invest in improving our capacity in air surveillance, border control and law enforcement. It is also a main responsibility to investigate crimes and safeguard our land and our people. Thirdly, subject-matter expertise and evidence-based reporting are the two most important and best practices used in monitoring United Nations arms embargoes. However, there seems to be a little consideration given to such practices, since the quality of the reports remains mixed due to questionable levels of expertise. Therefore, we recommend the following: first, choosing from a pool of candidates with a high level of technical professionalism, integrity and regional expertise to undertake future investigations in Somalia; and, secondly, establishing a reliable mechanism to address misconduct and redress cases where allegations are wrongly made. We welcome recent steps taken by the Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia to address our concerns and look forward to more institutionalized and transparency-driven process and procedure in that regard. In conclusion, we thank the Security Council for its continued support to Somalia's unity and progress. We encourage our partners to invest in sustainable solutions for building our institutions, as well as to support us in our regional efforts to curb the threats we face. This is the only way that will enable us to build lasting peace in Somalia as well as our region. The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.
