Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would first like to
thank you, Mr. President, and Mr. Meza-Cuadra for
your briefings on your work. From our own experience,
we know humanitarianow cumbersome that sometimes
is and we are grateful for your efforts. However, I
would like to echo what our United Kingdom colleague
said earlier in not only thanking the Chairs but also
the experts, who do a tremendous amount of work. I
believe they need our support and, where necessary, our
protection. With regard to the different Committees, let
me start with the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities. I think
that it was a good omen for the work of the Committee
that we were able to list Mohammed Masood Azhar
Alvi earlier. It was difficult for some, but I believe that
it was very important that we were able to overcome
those obstacles.

Concerning the 1267 Committee's list, which is
perhaps the longest of people proscribed, we believe
that it is very important that the listing system remain
credible. There must therefore always be a balance
among listing, designations and delistings. The rule of
law has to be an integral ofpart ofthe listing procedures,
and we continue to support a strong role to be played
by the Office of the Ombudsperson, which my French
colleague mentioned and highlighted earlier.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), let me make four points.

First, we all remember the horrendous attack in
Christchurch, which showed that not all extremist
terrorist groups assert that, with regard to what they
do, their ideology rests within a religious context. That
does not make them any less dangerous. In the Council
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee, we have only
started to explore the international component of
far-right extremist terrorists and their cross-border
networks. I believe that both require the increased
attention of the Security Council. We believe that we
need to study whether far-right extremist terrorists are
interconnected across international borders and whether
that connection poses a threat to international peace
and security. We would appreciate it if the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate could
make an assessment on the international dimension
of that. A first discussion on that issue will take place
within the Counter-Terrorism Committee later this
year, and we look forward to its findings.

Secondly, we have to look more closely at the
effects of counter-terrorism measures on the work
of principled, impartial and neutral humanitarian
actors. In New York, there has been discussion on the
issue. A lot of analysis with regard to their effect on
humanitarian law and humanitarian actors is available,
and we need to make sure that the knowledge we
have is being translated into Security Council action.
We have to ensure that our resolutions do not impede
humanitarian action, but help us to help innocent
civilians and children in need. We appreciate the fact
that the Counter-Terrorism Committee will discuss
those matters later this week.

Thirdly, Germany is active within the Group of
Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions, and we
are convinced that we need to respect international
standards of due process and human rights when
countering terrorism. Only if we employ fairness and
transparency will we be able to prevent young people
from falling into the trap of violent extremist and
terrorist propaganda. For Governments, it is therefore
paramount to act humanely and within the realm of the
law. It is not only our moral duty; it is also the most
effective way to counter the terrorists' lies.

Lastly, drone strikes by terrorists are no longer only
a topic for science fiction, but a real threat. That is why
Germany and the United States have presented at the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum (GCTF) an initiative
to counter the threat by using unmanned aerial vehicles.
As a next step, we intend to create a document on good
practices to be presented at the GCTF ministerial
meeting in New York in September.

Concerning the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I should like to make a couple
of points.

First, in order to guarantee the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), it is very
important that we provide assistance to States that
require such support. The process of matching requests
for assistance with offers from States or international,
regional or subregional organizations is therefore
absolutelyvitalandneedsconstantupdatingandrefining.
We particularly welcome the intensified cooperation of
the Committee and the Panel of Experts with United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA)
regional centres and international organizations, such
as the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the World Customs Organization and the
International Atomic Energy Agency.

With regard to partnerships among Government,
States and industry, which is an issue key in connection
with the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
Germany has been actively involved in promoting
intensified cooperation. We host the biannual global
Wiesbaden conferences, which serve as a platform for
exchange among regulators, industry, international
organizations and academia. Since 2016, those global
conferences have been complemented by regional
Wiesbaden conferences, held in South Korea, Mexico
and India and looked at regional specificities, The next
regional conference for southern Africa - the first in
Africa - will take place in Zambia late this month.
In that context, I would like to thank the Panel of
Experts, UNODA and the Government of Zambia for
their excellent cooperation in making that conference
possible. The Wiesbaden process raises awareness,
furthers the exchange of information and effective
practices, and promotes private-sector engagement at
the first line of defence.

