Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I am grateful to the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hedi
Annabi, for his briefing.

We are following closely developments in the
political situation in Kosovo following the Kosovo-
wide elections of 17 November. Unfortunately, we have
to say that, at this stage, the task of turning Kosovo
into a democratic, multi-ethnic society is still
essentially seen as being of secondary importance in
the programmes of the main Kosovo Albanian parties,
which as a result of the elections now have a legitimate
basis on which to exercise a decisive influence on the
political life of the province. All those parties continue
to say that their main objective is the swift attainment
of independence for Kosovo.
Hence, we cannot simply wait for democracy to
arise automatically in Kosovo. The November
elections, and indeed last year's municipal elections,
simply confirmed that. Ethnic discrimination continues
in Kosovo, and as in the past this has ramifications of
extremism and terrorism that extend into neighbouring
countries. Moreover, crime is on the rise. The United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) must focus
their attention on this issue.

As a positive matter, we note that there was a
fairly high level of participation in the elections by the
Serb population, both those who remained in the
province and those who were forced to leave in the
wake of the ethnic cleansing carried out by Albanian
extremists. We View that Serb participation in the
elections as an indication of their determination to
participate more actively in the political life of Kosovo
and, through legitimate means, to restore the multi-
ethnic nature of the province, ensuring that it develops
along a truly democratic path as a part of Yugoslavia.

Primary responsibility for further progress
towards a settlement in the province lies with the
international presences, primarily the United Nations
Mission there, which will have to fulfil its obligations
under the common document of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and UNMIK, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999).

We also think that the time has come to look at
the situation in Kosovo in a more sober manner,
through the prism of what the international presences
will have to focus its future activities on: ensuring
genuine security there; creating conditions for the
return of refugees and displaced persons; finding out
what happened to those who were abducted and to the
missing; and ensuring access to the basic services of
any civilized society - education, healthcare, culture,
information - for all inhabitants of the province,
regardless of their national or religious origins.

There is also a new problem that UNMIK and
KFOR cannot ignore. We drew attention to a media
report that Ibrahim Rugova, just a few days ago, said
that he intended to deliver to the Security Council
information on preparations in Kosovo by terrorists,
including Chechen terrorists. There are also suspicions
that those terrorists had contact with persons related to
Osama bin Laden. In this connection, we would note
that the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has so far not begun any investigation of
members of the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army,
who committed crimes against Serbs inside Kosovo
after the deployment there of the international presence
in June 1999.

We do not exclude either the possibility that
many former terrorists may try to join the Kosovo-wide
institutions currently being created. It is the direct
responsibility of UNMIK to ensure that this does not
happen. Resolution 1244 (1999) directly prohibits
participation in the political life of Kosovo on the part
of those who have been involved in terrorist activities.
Before the 17 November elections, the leadership of
UNMIK confirmed that they were not aware of the
presence of any terrorists in Kosovo, but that they were
willing to investigate any possible indications of such
presence. Such information has now appeared, and we
expect UNMIK to discharge its responsibilities by
doing what it said it would.

Today - and before 17 November - the priority
task is to establish constructive interaction between the
international presences, the Yugoslav authorities and
the representatives of the Kosovo people in the new,
elected institutions of the province. Holding the
elections was not the end, but only the beginning, of
the serious work of building a democratic and multi-
ethnic Kosovo in strict accordance with resolution
1244 (1999), including respect for the sovereignty of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

We believe this is how the situation is regarded
by the leadership of the United Nations Secretariat,
UNMIK and KFOR.

