Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): Yesterday we heard a
statement by the representative of Israel, and we feel
compelled to respond to one or two of the points raised
in that statement, out of the many outrageous positions
contained therein.

In that statement, the Israeli representative said:

"The use of the term 'massacre' in the
context of the battle that took place in Jenin is of
course politically convenient for the Palestinian
side. It is a distortion that attempts to create a
moral equivalence between the suicide bomber,
who deliberately targets civilians, and the soldier,
whose mission is to protect against them."

Frankly, I am not aware of any people who would
welcome being massacred for the sake of political
convenience. I am also unable to understand how firing
missiles and bulldozing homes with people still inside
them could be justified by military considerations.

In any case, allow me to take a minute of the
Council's time and to read a statement to which many
representatives referred yesterday, which was made by
the United Nations Special Coordinator, Mr. Roed-
Larsen:

"The situation is shocking and horrifying
beyond belief. It looks as if an earthquake has hit
the heart of the refugee camp here. I have just
witnessed two brothers digging their father and
five other family members out of the rubble. I
witnessed a family digging out their son, who was
about 12 years old, from beneath the rubble.
There is a stench of decay and corpses
everywhere here. The scene is absolutely
unbelievable. What we are seeing here is the
large-scale suffering of the whole civilian
population here. No military operation could
justify the suffering we are seeing here. It is not
only the corpses. It is also children lacking food."

I also wish to say a word about the issue of moral
equivalence. Some years ago the former Secretary of
State, Mrs. Madeleine Albright, whom I highly respect,
used to say that there is no moral equivalence between
bombs and bulldozers, referring to Israeli settlement
activities in the occupied territories. Back then we
begged to differ, because settlement activities negated
the present and the future of the Palestinian people as a
whole. Nevertheless, we understood the logic. Today
some people want us to believe that there is no moral
equivalence between blood and other blood, between
human loss and other human loss.

We condemn all types of loss of human life. To
tell the truth, if we are to make comparisons, we also
believe that what is happening on the Israeli side is
much worse than what is happening on the Palestinian
side. That is simply because what is happening on the
Israeli side is being committed by an army - an army
of a State that implements the official policies of a
Government, an army whose soldiers have been
committing clear, grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, and clear
war crimes. On the Palestinian side, there are groups
committing outrageous and condemnable, illegal acts
in direct contradiction to the official policy. One might
add to that the fact that what is happening to the
Palestinian people is happening on a much larger scale.
We have many more casualties. We have many more
dead. We have much more destruction. The lives of the
Palestinian people as a whole are being destroyed. So
please do not try to speak about moral equivalence, Mr.
Representative of Israel.

We must affirm our full respect for the positions
expressed by members of the Council. Nevertheless, I
have to admit that we were perplexed at the comments
of the representative of Bulgaria. The representative
does not see the need for a new resolution. Maybe he
has not heard that the relevant Security Council
resolutions have not been implemented. Maybe he has
not heard about the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, including in J enin, and the need for a positive
response. The Ambassador also made hesitant
comments, sounding almost negative about the
Secretary-General's proposal or at least about
important parts of it, which would render the proposal
itself dysfunctional. Frankly, we are surprised that
since Bulgaria became a member of the Security
Council, its delegation has not shown the expected
sensitivity towards the Palestinian situation and the
Palestinians' just requests of the Council. We are
surprised because we are familiar with the traditionally
friendly Bulgarian position. For our part, of course, we
will do our best in a very amicable and politically
correct way to overcome this strange situation.

We are convinced of the imperative of adopting
the new resolution. We understand the hesitancy on the
part of some members of the Council, and we hope that
they understand the pressing need, at least from our
point of view. We believe that a resolution is necessary
that deals with the humanitarian situation on the
ground, particularly in Jenin, including the issue of
investigating what has happened in the refugee camp
there and with the fact that Council resolutions 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002) have not been implemented. In
other words, at this stage we accept setting aside the
issue of an international presence, leaving this
important matter to the Secretary-General, his efforts
and his consultations with members of the Security
Council.

There is an Arab draft resolution, one which we
believe is appropriate. Nevertheless, we have also
noted other initiatives positively, including an initiative
put forward by the delegation of the United Kingdom.
Palestine, indeed the Arab Group and, of course, the
Arab member of this Council, Syria, will be ready to
work with all members of the Council to reach
satisfactory language, language that will enable the
Council to express itself and to take the necessary
action in response to the humanitarian situation and to
the fact that the two relevant resolutions have not yet
been implemented.

