Mr. Arias (Panama): In my capacity as Chairman
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), known as the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, I am most pleased to brief the Security
Council and the wider membership on the work of the
Committee. Before entering into the core of this
presentation, I would like to extend the Committee's
warm congratulations to the new Executive Director of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), Ambassador Mike Smith of
Australia. I am confident that CTED will be well
guided by the knowledge and experience of its new
Executive Director.
Since the last briefing, in May 2007 (see S/PV.5679), the Committee recently adopted its work
programme for the period 1 July to 31 December.
Given differences in approach among Committee
members, the process of its approval was somewhat
delayed. Nevertheless, as many of its activities
specified in the former work programme remained the
same, the Committee has continued its efforts to fulfil
its assigned tasks and, in line with the former work
programme, has divided its work into three categories
which are identical to those set out for the first six
months of this year, namely, monitoring and promoting
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001),
facilitating technical assistance, and implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005).

With reference to the monitoring and promoting
of the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), the
Committee continues to analyse, through its
subcommittees, the Preliminary Implementation
Assessments (PIAs) for every Member State. Thus far,
the Committee has adopted 50 PIAs, which were
previously approved by Subcommittee B, presided over
by South Africa. We commend the job done by the
representative of South Africa in this endeavour. The
rest of the PIAs are in the final stages of consideration
by the subcommittees and should be formally approved
by the Committee before the end of the year.
Consequently, within the next few months, each
Member State will receive a copy of its Preliminary
Assessment.

Further, the Committee intends to convene an
informal meeting of all Member States, with the
presence of CTED's new Executive Director, in order
to explain the format of the PIAs so as to provide any
necessary clarification of what the PIA is and how it
works. Sharing this analysis with States is just a first
step, and the Committee looks forward to engaging
with all States to make sure that the information that
we have collected is as up to date as possible. Our
main focus going forward will be working practically
with the States on both the monitoring and the
assistance parts of our mandate.

Also in connection with the monitoring and
promoting of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), the Committee examined the document entitled
"Survey of the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001)", prepared by the Committee
Directorate's Executive Director. As members may
recall; in its work programme, the Committee agreed to
brief the Security Council on the conclusions of its
deliberations on the content of that document.

An important part of the discussion was focused
on the form in which the Committee would report its
findings on the document to the Security Council and
whether it would become an official document of the
Security Council. The majority of the delegations
supported the circulation of the report to the Security
Council. A decision within the Committee on this
matter is still pending. Many delegations have stated
that this document was a useful tool for the Committee
to define its priorities in its future programme of work.

When commenting on the substance of the
document, most delegations welcomed the analysis
completed by CTED, while others raised concerns
about it and about the accuracy of some of its
information. Some delegations also pointed out that in
grouping countries into regions and subregions, the
analysis did not adequately reflect the different levels
of implementation of countries within a particular
region. Therefore, more attention should be placed on
avoiding overgeneralizations in this regard.

In its new work programme, the Committee
requested that CTED prepare an updated and further
detailed analysis which, in turn, would assist the
Committee in meeting its obligations to report to the
Council on the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), as well as to prepare a more focused work
programme for 2008.

Further, at the end of 2006 the Committee
approved a list of 18 countries to be visited. These
visits, which have to be agreed to by the countries
involved, constitute a fundamental component of the
Committee's activities to effectively monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by
observing, at first hand, countries' efforts to that end.
They also allow CTED to gain experience on the
ground with regard to the overall implementation of
1373 (2001). Since our last briefing, the Committee
has concluded successful on-site visits to Indonesia,
Viet Nam, Armenia, Georgia and Bangladesh, and as
we speak the Committee is in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As we are approaching the end of 2007, the remainder
of the Visits will be carried out next year.

In relation to the facilitation of technical
assistance, the Committee held its fifth special meeting
with international, regional and subregional
organizations in Nairobi from 29 to 31 October. This
gathering brought together the principal international,
regional and subregional organizations to exchange
ideas on the topic of the prevention of terrorist
movement and border security. Following three days of
discussions, the Committee and the organizations
present endorsed a joint statement that defined a course
to enhance cooperation among themselves and with the
Committee, as well as establishing a concrete method
to follow up on the activities set out in its plan of
action.

In addition, the Executive Directorate convened
the first of its planned informal forums, in this case on
the West African Member States, which took place in
July 2007. These events will provide an opportunity for
countries that require technical assistance to meet
present and potential donors to fulfil their needs.

The Committee also posted on its website its
technical assistance matrix and a directory of
assistance programmes, enabling users to view and
identify the programmes that best suit their needs.

With respect to the implementation of resolution
1624 (2005), the Committee adopted its second report
prepared by CTED regarding progress made by
Member States in its implementation. Likewise, in its
work programme, the Committee has agreed to initiate
discussions to explore the technical assistance needs of
States to implement this resolution, as well as to
facilitate the provisions of such assistance, while
continuing to encourage those States that have not yet
reported to do so.

Finally, as Council members are aware, CTED's
mandate expires at the end of this year. While the
consideration of this issue falls strictly under the
mandate of the Security Council, and not of the
Committee, I encourage Member States to present their
ideas in this regard, in order to assist the Council in its
due consideration of this issue.

