Mr. Mufioz (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
presence in the Council of the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

The report of the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
Mr. Theodor Meron, to the Council, which was
prepared in accordance with resolution 1534 (2004),
contains a detailed account of the progress made in the
implementation of the completion strategy. The report
indicates progress in the initial judgements and
appeals.

We agree that this Tribunal, as the report
indicates, is sending a strong message of responsibility
and accountability to the former Yugoslavia and to the
entire international community. The completion
strategy requires that the War Crimes Chamber in
Bosnia and Herzegovina be established as soon as
possible, as envisaged in resolution 1503 (2003). We
believe it is crucial to ensure appearance before the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia by Radovan Karadzic, Ratko Mladic and
Mr. Ante Gotovina, as called for in Security Council
resolutions.

We are alarmed that, as the report indicates, it is
not very probable that the Tribunal will be able to
judge other fugitives or new suspects within the
deadline established in the completion strategy. In that
connection, a key element is the cooperation of the
States of the former Yugoslavia.

On the other hand, my delegation appreciates the
comprehensive presentation of Mr. Eric Mose,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwanda Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other
Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States, between 1 January 1994 and
31 December 1994. The briefing gives us an updated
and revised version of the Tribunal's completion
strategy, in keeping with the provisions of Security
Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).

The delegation of Chile also notes the intention
of the Tribunal Prosecutor to focus its efforts on those
persons who formerly held leadership positions and
who, according to the Prosecutor, bear the greatest
responsibility for the crimes committed in 1994. The
preceding will make it possible to conclude the
investigations by the end of this year, at the latest, in
keeping with the provisions of resolution 1534 (2004).

Chile wishes to reiterate its support for the
completion strategies of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, endorsed
by the Council, to conclude investigations by the end
of this year, to conclude judgements by the end of 2008
and to conclude its entire workload by 2010.

Finally, we believe that the work of these
Tribunals, apart from its own merits, constitutes a
forceful warning to violators of human rights,
regarding violations that could turn into humanitarian
tragedies today or perhaps tomorrow. At the same time,
we reiterate our firm conviction that those responsible
for such crimes cannot continue in impunity.

