President Ben Ali (spoke in Arabic): At the start
of my address to this historic summit of the Security
Council, I am pleased to extend my sincere wishes for
the success of its proceedings, which focus on an issue
of critical importance to the future of all mankind:
international peace and security, especially on the
African continent.

Our summit is convening at a time when the need
for a qualitative change in international relations has
become more pressing than ever. Notwithstanding the
scientific and technological achievements that have
changed the face of the world in such a short span of
time, a large portion of mankind in many parts of the
world, and on our African continent in particular, is
still suffering from the scourges of war,
overpopulation, poverty, famine, disease and
marginalization. This state of affairs requires that the
international community formulate a joint, objective
vision of certain concepts such as solidarity,
intervention for humanitarian purposes, the protection
of human rights and how to address development
issues. This should also lead to ensuring that areas of
collective action can be defined so that cooperation
among our States and our peoples may become an
inexorable bond to which we exhort one another by our
deeds and by which we refute the voices of pessimism
that allege that the clash of cultures, civilizations and
societies is inevitable.

The increasing gravity of conflicts and wars,
particularly on the African continent, calls for
combined efforts on the part of the international
community to eliminate the causes of tension and to
find appropriate peaceful, just and lasting solutions to
them.

In this context, I should like to recall the efforts
we have made since 1994 within the framework of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) to improve the
capabilities of our continent in this field through the
OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution. However, the success of our regional
initiatives continues to depend on the complementary
efforts of the international community, since the
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security remains essentially one of the functions of the
Security Council.

For this body to shoulder its huge responsibilities
in a fair and equitable manner, I renew our call today
for the support of the position expressed by the Group
of Non-Aligned countries and by the African Group
regarding developing the Council's functions and
working methods and expanding its structure. The aim
of this proposal is to ensure that the Security Council
becomes more representative, that it is able to keep
pace with the different developments on the world
scene, and that its resolutions assume greater
effectiveness and credibility, while avoiding any form
of double standards.

While noting with deep satisfaction the decline in
the use of the right of veto and the effort to seek
consensus in most cases, we hope that this trend is
adopted permanently for the sake of carrying out
consultations before taking decisions.

Since its election as member of the Security
Council, Tunisia has sought to reconcile points of
View; to press for the adoption of resolutions based on
broad consensus; to settle disputes through peaceful
means; to apply the principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter; and to respect international law.

International peacekeeping operations are still in
need of considerable efforts to ensure that Member
States are able to organize, prepare, deploy, finance and
participate in them.

Tunisia, which since its independence in the
1960s began to contribute to peace and security
contingents in many parts of the world, believes that
our States are called upon to assume their role in
maintaining international peace and security, regardless
of their size or ability. Accordingly, Tunisia today
reaffirms its determination to continue to shoulder its
responsibility in furtherance of peace, solidarity and
development in the world.

