Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We are very grateful for the information
provided to the Council by Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson; Mr. Simonovie, Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights; Ambassador Apakan, Chief Monitor
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine; and by Mr. Ging, Director of the Coordination
and Response Division of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. I also thank
the Lithuanian delegation for the initiative of convening
this meeting.

The last time that the Council met for a
comprehensive overview of the situation in Ukraine
was several months ago, in June (S/PV.7457). Spain
favours the Council maintaining a close and watchful
eye on the situation in Ukraine, together with the
ongoing process of the Minsk agreements.

My delegation regrets the increase in hostilities seen
since the beginning ofNovember along the contact line.
We also regret the fact, and as we have heard today, that
compliance with the Minsk agreements is not moving
ahead at the pace we all desire. Spain therefore calls
for a rekindling of the spirit of understanding that the
countries gathered under the Normandy format have
always tried to foster, with a view to advancing full
compliance with the Minsk agreements.

That is why that process must play a decisive role
in the resolution of the crisis. It is not a perfect process,
nor does it cover all aspects of the crisis. Nonetheless,
it continues to be the only solution available and the
most appropriate one if we are to achieve a political
solution to the conflict that should never have taken
place in the first place and has already lasted far too
long. That is why it is critical to maintain the ceasefire
and implement the commitments on the withdrawal of
heavy weapons, thus enabling the political efforts to
lead to lasting results.

Spain also acknowledges and highly values the
important work being carried out by the Special
Monitoring Mission of the OSCE. It is essential to
provide access to all areas of the territory so as to
enable the Mission to fulfil its mandate. Moreover, it
is crucial that all parties to the conflict scrupulously
and without exception respect the status of the Special
Monitoring Mission, as well as its members.

It is also essential and urgent that all of the
stakeholders involved renew and strengthen their
political will and efforts order to guarantee the full
and effective implementation of the Minsk agreements.
In that connection, I would like to reiterate Spain's
resolute support for President Poroshenko and his
determination to pursue legal and constitutional reform
that will provide stability and progress for his country
and the people of Ukraine. Some additional reforms are
still needed for the swift holding of local elections in
the eastern part of the country, in accordance with the
Minsk process.

We are deeply troubled by the persistence of serious
human rights violations, particularly in those areas
controlled by the self-styled republics of Donetsk and
Luhansk, which were condemned in the recent report
of the Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine.
There are also reports of human rights violations in
Crimea and clashes and acts of aggression suffered by
the Tatar minority in the peninsula.

Against that backdrop, I would like to refer to the
recent report issued in November by the OSCE High
Commissioner on National Minorities, Madam Thors.
The report called for a tolerant and diverse society
to be fostered and supported under a solid, robust
institutional framework. The effective protection of
the human rights of all residents of each and every
region of Ukraine must remain an ongoing priority.
We welcome the recent adoption, in August, by the
President of Ukraine, of the first national human
rights strategy. It is our hope that it can be swiftly and
thoroughly rolled out and applied across the territory
of Ukraine in accordance with the plan of action that
has been announced. We also welcome the acceptance
of the jurisdictional competence of the International
Criminal Court to investigate future crimes under the
Rome Statute.

The role played by the Special Monitoring Mission
in terms of information and awareness-raising in
human rights is also equally important and enjoys our
full support. Access must therefore be granted to the
Mission throughout the entire territory of Ukraine,
without any restrictions.

On the humanitarian track, we are particularly
concerned by the fate of the hundreds of thousands of
displaced persons both within Ukraine and the refugees
in neighbouring countries. It would be remiss of me not
to mention the numerous civilian victims who continue
to lose their lives or suffer injury each day as a result
of the conflict. On the other hand, the onset of winter
is at our door, which gives rise to further concern
about the need to provide humanitarian aid to those
in non-government controlled areas. We believe that
hindering humanitarian access to the non-Government
controlled areas cannot continue, because those efforts
include actors such as Doctors Without Borders.
Hundreds of thousands depend continuously on
humanitarian aid to survive and there can be excuse to
hamper that work.

I conclude by recalling the fact that my delegation
wishes to again draw attention to General Assembly
resolution 68/262, and our firm conviction that any
lasting solution needs to include respect for the political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine.

