Mr. Winid (Poland): Poland aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union, but I would like to add some comments in my
national capacity.

First, I thank you very much, Mr. President, for
organizing today's debate on such an interesting
and important subject for us all, and not only for our
peacekeepers serving in the field. This is our common
duty.
For more than six decades, Poland has been
dedicated to United Nations efforts in maintaining
peace. We are among those States that, as early as 1953,
sent observers to a peacekeeping mission in the Korean
peninsula. Sixty-three years later, we continue to
deploy peacekeeping personnel. With a contribution of
more than 70,000 peacekeepers throughout that period,
Poland has acquired broad, practical experience in
maintaining peace. Through our more recent national
efforts in some of the most demanding conflict
environments, we have also experienced first-hand
confrontations with asymmetrical threats and have had
to deal with that challenge. In that context, we entirely
agree with those speakers who have underscored the
changing nature of modern threats, often arising from
extra-State factors or from totally new phenomena,
such as hybrid warfare.

Expectations with regard to United Nations
peacekeeping, in terms of deliverables, continue
to grow. At the same time, neither United Nations
peacekeeping operations nor special political missions
are designed to counter asymmetric threats. Acts of
Violent extremism have resulted in the largest death toll
among peacekeepers and local mission personnel.

I believe that we should address the growing
complexity of the peacekeeping environment before
situations escalate beyond our capacity to react.
Twenty-first century peacekeeping has to draw upon
intelligence capabilities and new technologies in order
to improve the safety and security of United Nations
personnel. Proper training and relevant equipment may
constitute a difference between life and death. Troop-
contributing countries, as well as regional organizations,
should take that factor into consideration.

Nevertheless, there are no quick fixes if we want
durable solutions to asymmetrical threats. We need
sound mid- and long-term strategies aimed at addressing
the root causes of conflicts and asymmetrical threats.
On-the-field measures must be preceded with political
planning and adjustments, depending on the situation on
the ground. In that connection, the United Nations has
and should play an important role in activities related
to sustaining peace. As the Chair of the High-level
Independent Panel on United Nations Peace Operations
(HIPPO), J ose Ramos-Horta of Timor-Leste, rightly put
it:

"The 'sustaining peace' concept frees the
peacebuilding enterprise from the short-term
horizons that constrain it, particularly when it
is conducted as part of a peace operation, which
tends to treat the building of peace as a conflict
management tool with few predictable resources
to ensure its sustainability beyond the lifetime of
the mission."

Against that backdrop, close cooperation in the field
of peace operations among the Security Council, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs and other relevant United
Nations constituencies is a must. The United Nations
has a particularly vast and unique experience with
regard to assistance in security sector reforms, as well
as in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes. Those are crucial with regard to breaking
a Vicious circle of violence. They also contribute to
limiting the threats posed by violent extremism.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that much has
already been done. The HIPPO report (see S/2015/446),
the peacekeeping review and debates like that we
are having today contribute to the recognition of the
challenges faced by peacekeepers. With regard to
combating asymmetrical threats, our success will be
very much contingent upon the coherent and persistent
implementation of existing recommendations by the
United Nations and the international community. We
also hope that the new Secretary-General, Antonio
Guterres, will actively approach this challenge while
keeping in mind that security is the cornerstone of the
peaceful world we all want to live in.

