Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like to thank you,
Madam, for giving me the opportunity to speak in my
capacity as Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006)
concerning the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

At the open debate of the Security Council
convened on 15 November (S/PV.6424), I provided
detailed information about the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and expressed my suggestions
for its future work. And this afternoon, I will brief the
wider United Nations membership on the work of the
two Committees. For that reason, I will limit my
statement now to only a few points that I wish
particularly to highlight in my personal capacity.

Since I assumed the chairmanship of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee at the beginning of this year, we
have tried to make counter-terrorism and the work of
the Committee more visible in New York and other
parts of the world, and to look into the evolving nature
of terrorism to identify issues and regions that require
greater attention. In this understanding, the Committee
has adopted a more strategic and focused approach. We
have held detailed thematic discussions on all key
areas indicated in resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005) and organized regional discussions. We also
brought together officials in the capitals of the Security
Council members and key counter-terrorism figures of
the United Nations system in Ankara in June. This was
followed in September by a thematic meeting in the
Security Council at the ministerial level (see S/PV.6389). As a result of all of these efforts, we now
10-70084
have a clearer picture of the thematic and regional
challenges and what steps need to be taken.

More transparency has been another priority for
the Committee. This afternoon's briefing will be my
third to member States. So far, the Executive
Directorate has made presentations to the wider
membership on eight different areas. This afternoon,
two more presentations will be held.

The Committee should continue its strategic,
focused and more transparent approach. This will help
better monitor the full implementation of the relevant
resolutions, identify the specific needs of each region
or Member State, and enable the Committee to interact
and cooperate more intensively with all Member States.
I believe that the Committee should dwell more on the
issues mentioned in resolution 1624 (2005),
particularly incitement to terrorism.

Prevention is another area that needs more
attention. We have seen that capacity-building is still a
challenge for many countries. This is an issue that the
Committee should continue to focus on.

With regard to the Working Group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004), which held its first
meeting this year after a four-year interval, I wish to
inform the Council that a report will be issued in the
coming days on its work.

Let me now briefly report to the Council on the
work of the 1718 during the period 2009-2010, and
share my assessment on its future work. Since last year,
the 1718 Committee has encountered various
challenges and, in my opinion, has been able to address
them in an effective and credible way. In this context,
the Committee has designated new entities, goods and
individuals associated with the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's nuclear and missile programmes.
It has also adopted and implemented a comprehensive
programme of work covering issues relating to
compliance, investigations, outreach, dialogue,
assistance and cooperation.

On 26 November, the Committee adopted its new
programme of work, which outlines important tasks for
the Committee in the future. I encourage the
Committee to continue implementing the new
programme of work in a creative and constructive way
in the coming months.

Since last year, the Committee has received
various reports from Member States about their
inspection and seizure of contraband cargoes. I
commend these Member States for acting in a
responsible manner, consistent with resolution 1874
(2009). The Committee, with the support of the Panel
of Experts, has responded to these reports, while also
intensifying its awareness-raising activities with a view
to preventing future sanctions violations.

It goes without saying that the implementation of
sanctions is a process that requires continuous and
determined efforts on the part of the international
community. Much has already been done to implement
resolutions 1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009), but it is not
enough. Indeed, the recent reports about the new
nuclear facilities of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, including a newly built uranium-enrichment
facility, about which the Committee has recently been
briefed, is a stark reminder of the challenges remaining
ahead of us. Therefore, I very much hope that the
Committee will continue to work in the same
cooperative and efficient manner as it has done during
the past two years under our chairmanship.

