Mr. Tarrago (Brazil): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom presidency of the Security Council for
the initiative of organizing this open debate on the
major challenges facing post-conflict countries.

The United Nations system has greatly
contributed to efforts aiming at stabilization and
reconstruction in post-conflict countries. The
international response to post-conflict situations has
been evolving. Its continued improvement is a task for
all of us. We concur with the analysis that better
coherence among actors on the ground, with a strong
leadership role by the United Nations system, and an
early, flexible and expedient mechanism for mobilizing
resources in the immediate aftermath of conflicts are
key.

The recurrent outbreak of conflict is a symptom
of fundamental tensions in a country, but peacebuilding
efforts should not only aim at alleviating the
symptoms; it is necessary to dive deep into the root
causes of conflicts and to engage in a holistic
treatment. It is important to work simultaneously on
the three pillars that sustain the building of peace:
strengthening political institutions, providing security
and promoting economic reconstruction. Breaches in
any of those pillars will impair the foundations of long-
lasting peace.

Brazil has long advocated the need to integrate a
development component into peacekeeping operations.
The road from keeping to building peace should be
seen as a continuum along which the seeds of a long-
lasting peace must be spread in tandem with the
provision of prompt and concrete peace dividends to
the population.

Our experience in peacekeeping operations in
Haiti and Timor-Leste and, more recently, in
coordinating peacebuilding efforts in Guinea-Bissau
have reinforced our conviction of the correctness of
such an integrated approach. In the case of Haiti, we
have seen how useful quick impact projects are to the
operation of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti and for changing the mindset of the
population. Brazil strongly supports a significant
increase in budgetary resources allocated to projects of
that nature. At the same time, it is imperative to step up
efforts to support the Government in implementing
programmes that can generate employment and
income. That is the surest path to the reactivation of
the economy, which in turn will provide the State
apparatus with the necessary capacity to address the
basic needs of the population.

Brazil endorses proposals aimed at devising an
emergency budgetary window to deal with unforeseen
developments in post-conflict countries. We should not
allow unexpected events - such as the recent increase
in food and fuel prices - to undermine peace and
stability.

In the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we are following a two-
track approach aimed at combining measures with
short-term impact with a strategic assessment of the
key priorities for the consolidation of peace in that
country.

A common trait of post-conflict countries is the
institutional fragility of the State, which constrains its
capacity to effectively manage public policies. There
seems to be a vicious circle in which the absence of
response to the most elementary needs of the
population sets the conditions for political instability,
which in turn further enhances the vulnerability of the
already fragile State.

The Peacebuilding Commission, standing at the
very heart of the international peacebuilding
architecture, is particularly well suited to help turn
such a vicious circle into a virtuous one of political
stability and economic prosperity. Although still a
relatively new body in the United Nations system, the
Peacebuilding Commission is proving to add value in
the three countries under its consideration. It has been
instrumental in assisting local Governments in
developing the necessary capacity to tread their own
path to recovery and stability, in line with the principle
of national ownership.

Following its multifold mandate and relying on
the elaboration of integrated strategies, the
Commission has also been useful in marshalling
resources and galvanizing all relevant stakeholders into
concerted action. It has encouraged greater
coordination among United Nations bodies and
agencies. The focus on the countries on its agenda has
helped to strengthen the presence of the United Nations
on the ground.

The Peacebuilding Fund has also been playing a
very important role in providing catalytic money in
areas identified by the Commission. By doing so, the
Fund leads by example and prompts other donors to
invest in key priority areas for the consolidation of
peace. Ongoing efforts to strengthen the relationship
between the Fund and the Commission are much
welcome and deserve to be further enhanced.

We do hope that the Peacebuilding Commission
can continue to grow and evolve over time, take up
new countries on its agenda, and further consolidate its
niche as an important body to deal with the complex
challenges faced by post-conflict countries.

