Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
wish first to acknowledge with thanks the welcome
extended to my delegation by Ambassador Denisov,
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
As a new member of the Security Council and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the United Republic of
Tanzania will do all that is within its capability to
cooperate with others to help enable the CTC
undertake its important mandate, established under
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).

As one of a growing number of countries with
first-hand experience of a major terrorist attack on its
soil, Tanzania's resolve in the war against that scourge
has never been stronger, while paying due regard to
human rights principles. That was reaffirmed by
Tanzania's President, Mr. Benjamin William Mkapa, in
his address to the General Assembly last September:
"There should never be any doubt about our
unflinching resolve to cooperate with others in
combating terrorism in all its forms" (A/59/PV.3, p. 20).

Tanzania strongly believes that the war against
terrorism would be best coordinated and most
effectively fought through the United Nations. That is
where the importance of the CTC, as established under
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), is evidently
appropriate.

We thank the Chairman of the CTC for his
briefing on the work done in 2004. We would like to
express our gratitude for the commendable work of the
Committee in scrutinizing the reports submitted by
Member States. However, as the briefing indicated, the
crucial issue of the shortage of expert capacity should
be promptly addressed. Hopefully, the full
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED), under its able Executive Director,
Mr. Javier Ruperez, would resolve the problem.

We note with interest that the CTC is still
undertaking efforts to elaborate a new approach to
facilitating the provision of technical assistance.
Tanzania is looking forward to, and awaiting the
outcome of, the efforts currently undertaken by the
CTC and the experts of the CTED in that respect. We
believe that such technical assistance could be of
immense help and could significantly help developing
countries, in particular the least developed countries, in
preparing and submitting proper reports on time.

In that respect, Tanzania also supports the
conduct of visits by the CTC to Member States. The
visits are a useful source for the exchange of
information and experiences on the exact technical
assistance requirements for fully implementing
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and other
relevant resolutions on terrorism.

On a related subject, the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, under the direction of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the
Taliban, will be visiting my country, the United
Republic of Tanzania, on 26 and 27 January 2005. The
Government is looking forward to welcoming the
visiting Security Council Team, and is willing to
discuss with it, on a first-hand basis, the requirements
for our reporting obligations under Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999).

We would also like to thank Ambassador Denisov
for the submission of a work programme for the CTC
for the next three months - January to March 2005.
Going through the programme, one cannot fail to be
impressed with the immense amount of work to be
undertaken by the CTC in order to implement the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). Tanzania would
also like to commend the good preparations done by
the CTC for the convening of the fourth special
meeting with international, regional and sub-regional
organizations, to be held in Almaty, Kazakhstan, from
26 to 28 January 2005.

Finally, we commend the efforts by the High-
level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change. In its
report released recently, the Panel proposed a
definition of terrorism - a matter that has been
eluding the General Assembly for almost 10 years and
which has stalled the process of concluding a
comprehensive convention on terrorism. The definition
proposed in the report is similar to the language and
elements of Security Council resolution 1566 (2004).
We believe that that definition can be a useful guide to
the General Assembly in helping to build consensus
and agreement on this matter so as to enable the
convention to be adopted as soon as possible.

