Mrs. Chikava (Zimbabwe): I wish to express
my appreciation to Rwanda for having convened this
important open debate on the very important and timely
topic of the United Nations and regional partnerships in
peacekeeping. Let me also thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing on peacekeeping
activities and the representatives of the African Union
and the European Union for their statements.

Zimbabwe aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representatives of Malawi on behalf of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
and of the Arab Republic of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The debate today provides us with an opportunity
to take stock of the partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations in peacekeeping
operations. It also gives us a platform to explore ways
in which the partnership can be strengthened so as to
make peacekeeping more effective through lessons
learned from previous successes, as well as failures.

Peacekeeping operations have expanded and
become more complex due to the changing nature
of conflicts facing the world today. Unlike in the
past, the vast majority of crises that necessitate the
deployment of peacekeepers are often intra-State
conflicts or unconventional threats caused by acts
of terrorism, organized criminal gangs, piracy and
extremism. The causes and dynamics of those threats
often spread beyond the affected countries into regions
and subregions, impacting negatively on international
peace and security.

A broad discussion is therefore needed on how
peacekeeping should adapt to the new demands and
what capabilities and resources it needs in order to
adapt. The expansion and complexity of peacekeeping
tasks beyond the scope of traditional and military
roles require a collective responsibility and the greater
involvement of regional and subregional organizations
in the maintenance of peace and security. The need
to maintain a well-structured strategic partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
therefore cannot be overemphasized.

In Africa today, where nine of the 16 United
Nations peacekeeping missions are operational, that
notion has been tested with the development of regional
standby brigades and the deployment of regional and
joint peacekeeping operations, in particular the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. Those missions
attest to the partnership and mutual commitment of
both the United Nations and the African Union to the
resolution of conflicts and the maintenance of peace
and security.

It is worth noting that in Darfur, the African Union
acted proactively in pressing for peace. In the Central
African Republic, the swift deployment of the African-
led International Support Mission in the Central
African Republic (MISCA) and the French Operation
Sangaris forces proved critical in saving civilian lives
and in preventing an even greater tragedy. MISCA has
now been mandated to establish a suitable environment
for a deployment before the transfer of the mandate
to MINUSCA. In accordance with the African Union
Protocol on Peace and Security, SADC has established a
standby brigade, whose mandate includes, among other
tasks, intervening in order to restore peace and security
in a conflict situation at the request ofa member State.
As members of SADC, we are grateful for the Council's
cooperation with the regional economic community
in strengthening the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo through the integration of the Force Intervention
Brigade.
The foundation of Africa's partnership with
the United Nations, which is based on Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, provides for
the participation of regional arrangements in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly as first responders to ensure the pacific
settlement of local disputes before referring such
disputes to the Security Council. The cooperation
underpinning that relationship has served to advance
the goals of the United Nations.

While the progress made through our collective
efforts in peacekeeping is commendable, we need to
draw appropriate lessons from our past experiences.
Zimbabwe believes that the future effectiveness
of the partnership between the United Nations and
regional partnerships depends on strengthening
strategic cooperation on the basis of comparative
advantages, complementary mandates and the optimal
use of resources and capabilities. The participation of
regional organizations in the maintenance of peace
and security clearly has added value. Their increasing
role therefore requires less of an ad hoc coordination
process and more of a streamlined framework that
adequately deals with the inherent challenges related
to resources, preparedness and the operational aspects
of cooperation.

There is a need to enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing regional
organizations when they undertake peacekeeping under
a Security Council mandate. Currently, the African
Union missions in the Central African Republic and
in Somalia are struggling to obtain the equipment
needed to build capacity in order to effectively carry
out their mandates. Those are operational weaknesses
that should be avoided when undertaking peacekeeping
operations.

If peacekeeping operations are to remain truly
relevant, the mandates given to peacekeeping missions
must be clear about what they are envisaged to achieve.
Mandates should be based on an objective assessment
to avoid overexpectations as to what the mission can
achieve. In that regard, it is necessary that respective
regions should have a greater voice in the drafting
of peacekeeping mandates that have an impact on
their regions. Regional organizations are well placed
to understand the root causes of armed conflicts
and are well positioned to influence their prevention
and resolution to ensure that they do not undermine
development opportunities.

The effective command and control of operations
underpin success and credibility. Yet that is an area
where gaps still exist. The United Nations could assist
further by standardizing the training of peacekeepers
and by offering guidance to regional institutions.

Finally, I would like to pay tribute to all those
peacekeepers who have lost their lives in the course
of duty, defending the flag of the United Nations and
contributing to upholding the image of the Organization
and its peacekeeping operations.

