Mr. Matjila (South Africa): The South African delegation wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this important debate on transitional justice as a building block towards sustaining peace. We extend our thanks to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Michelle Bachelet; the President of the Commission for the Clarification of Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition of Colombia, Mr. Francisco de Roux; and Ms. Yasmin Sooka, Executive Director of the Foundation for Human Rights in South Africa, for their insightful briefings. We welcome also all the ministers and deputy ministers present today. South Africa recognizes and values the importance of national transitional justice processes in achieving sustainable peace. In our own case, as Ms. Sooka said, transitional justice was a vital cog in securing a relatively peaceful transition from apartheid to the stable constitutional democracy we are today. To that end, it is important to note that this debate is taking place shortly after our country marked the thirtieth anniversary of the release from imprisonment of one of the most notable champions of transitional justice and reconciliation, our former President Nelson Mandela, a global icon of our struggle. Former President Mandela and his leadership collective recognized as early as the time of his release from 27 years of imprisonment that national reconciliation rather than vengeance and retributive justice would be the only viable foundation on which sustainable peace in a democratic South Africa could be constructed. However, the sustainable peace that former President Mandela and his colleagues sought to build did not have the narrow goal of just ending conflict but aimed to rebuild the political, security, social and economic dimensions of a society emerging from conflict. This included addressing the root causes of conflict and promoting social and economic justice, as well as putting in place political structures of governance and the rule of law to help consolidate peacebuilding, reconciliation and development. South Africa notes that transitional justice has an enormous role to play as countries evolve from conflict situations to peacebuilding. This would necessarily entail that the whole spectrum of transitional justice be explored, including criminal prosecutions, truth commissions, reparations and restitution programmes, exhumation of mass graves, apologies, amnesty and various kinds of institutional reforms to redress human rights abuses. Such a process should, however, not follow a one-size-fits-all approach but, rather, respond to the specific context of the country concerned. For South Africa, the restorative justice approach we chose through the Truth and Reconciliation Commission sought to combat impunity and recreate a culture of accountability, uncover the truth about gross human rights violations and assist the families of the victims in getting closure. The Commission also had _ the broad strategic objective of promoting national unity and reconciliation in a spirit of understanding which transcends the conflicts and divisions of the past. Regrettably, South Africa's experience of a repressive regime is not unique. Many countries emerging from authoritarian rule and conflict also suffered extensive human rights violations and often crimes of a heinous nature. Where atrocities were committed on such a widespread scale, holding individual perpetrators accountable may not be possible or even the most desirable result. While ensuring justice by means of individual accountability is an important mechanism to achieve peace, it often overlooks the complexity of conflict and the structural nature of violence. It thus fails to address the broader structural challenges that likely contributed to violence in the first place and that may very well cause a State to fall back into conflict. South Africa is of the view that the United Nations should be enabled to provide more support to nationaltransitional justice processes through peacekeeping missions, the Peacebuilding Commission and other United Nations structures and representation. The Security Council has an important role to play in promoting sustainable peace through transitional justice by encouraging adherence to international guidelines and regional policies. Healing, however, comes from within and cannot be imposed from without. It is therefore important that ownership of transitional justice processes not be appropriated by the international community. Transitional justice must be driven by those emerging from conflict and tailored to their circumstances in order to ensure that it results in long-lasting peace. In February 2019, the African Union adopted its transitional justice policy to assist African Union member States to develop their own context-specific comprehensive policies, strategies and programmes towards democratic and socioeconomic transformation and achieving sustainable peace, justice, reconciliation, social cohesion and healing. It thus serves as a guide for countries to develop a comprehensive policy while maintaining national ownership, which is imperative to ensure that any transitional justice process is successful. As the newly elected Chair of the African Union for 2020 and in line with the AU's collective aspiration to silence the guns on the African continent, South Africa will focus its efforts on conflict resolution across the continent. That includes supporting transitional justice processes in our peacebuilding efforts. In that regard, South Africa will continue to advocate for AU-United Nations cooperation. As we witness the drawdown of peacekeeping missions and see countries transition from conflict to post-conflict situations, South Africa wishes to highlight the importance of including reconciliation, through transitional justice, in holistic comprehensive transition plans. That includes taking into account community-based justice mechanisms and ensuring that the most vulnerable, particularly women and young people, are represented. Grass-roots populations in conflict-ridden regions generally tend to be the most affected by the scourge of conflict. Transitional justice therefore requires the active participation of all sectors of society. The role of women should also not be underestimated. The African Union Transitional Justice Policy Framework, for instance, promotes women's representation and participation in the transitional justice process by expressly stipulating their participation in peace agreements, laws and policies. Less attention is paid to ensuring local grass- roots participation and the inclusiveness of security sector reform in post-conflict situations. While there is expansive and commendable literature in the field of security sector reform, there is scant research on the role of locals in the form of young people, women, traditional leaders, chiefs and community- and village-based organizations in security sector reform processes. As a result, the methods and approaches used tend to be elite-focused and -driven. We should therefore bolster United Nations support for locally driven and generated security sector reform in an effort to enhance the peace dividend and reinforce strategic pillars in order to avoid relapse. One of the greatest challenges in transitional justice is institutional reform. It is therefore imperative that institutions that were previously the instruments of repression be restructured for the good of society so as to create trust between victims and institutions. In addition, new progressive institutions should also be established with a view to strengthening, consolidating and safeguarding peace and democratic governance in order to avoid a potential relapse into conflict. As former President Mandela said, "Peace is not just the absence of conflict; peace is the creation of an environment where all can flourish, regardless of race, colour, creed, religion, gender, class, caste or any other social markers of difference."
