Mr. Hill (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to speak. I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing and for the work of the United Nations Office
in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). I would also like to thank
my friend Mr. Ramos-Horta for attending today's
meeting as Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste and for his
statement. His frank acknowledgement of the recent
violent incidents and instability is important, as is his
communication of his Government's commitment to a
fair and just solution. I also thank him for his personal
efforts to seek a resolution of those difficulties.

As all present at today's meeting would
acknowledge, the role of the United Nations in Timor-

Leste - from stewarding the country towards
independence to assisting it in the early stages of
nation-building - has been a significant success.

However, the challenge of nation-building for new
States and those emerging from conflict is difficult and
ongoing, as recent events have illustrated.

Australia has been at the forefront of
international efforts to support Timor-Leste's transition
to an independent and secure State. We have
contributed to all United Nations missions in Timor-
Leste, and we are currently contributing both military
liaison officers and civilian police advisers to
UNOTIL. Through these missions, the United Nations
has helped establish a foundation on which the people
of Timor-Leste can build a nation. We believe that
there continues to be a role for the United Nations in
assisting the world's newest nation.

Timor-Leste continues to be a major development
partner for Australia. In 2005 and 2006, Australia
provided more than $30 million in bilateral
development assistance, including working with our
Timorese partners to improve health, provide basic
services to rural areas, improve governance and
strengthen the justice sector. Australia has provided
policing assistance, including through training and
other means of practical support, and is committed to a
significant defence cooperation programme with the
country.

In January 2006, Australia and Timor-Leste
successfully concluded a bilateral treaty on maritime
arrangements in the Timor Sea. Once ratified, Timor-
Leste would reap billions of dollars in extra revenue,
which could be employed to improve the lot of all its
citizens. Similarly, Australia has been greatly
encouraged by the ability of Timor-Leste to resolve
issues that have arisen along its border with Indonesia.
Indeed, both Indonesia and Timor-Leste should be
commended for their commitment to building a
productive and harmonious relationship.

I now turn to the future of United Nations
involvement in Timor-Leste. As discussed in the
Secretary-General's end of mandate report for
UNOTIL dated 20 April 2006 (S/2006/251), it is
important that the international community remain
willing to assist Timor-Leste in facing the many
challenges ahead. It is essential to recognize that those
challenges are domestic in nature, and our assistance
should be focused on helping the people of Timor-
Leste to develop sustainable institutions and policies
that support Timor-Leste's new democracy, its political
stability, the rule of law, the future security of its
people and economic growth. It is important, both
symbolically and practically, that the United Nations
and the international community stand beside Timor-
Leste in that work.

Australia has been a long-time supporter of
international efforts in Timor-Leste and of United
Nations involvement and assistance to the Timorese
people. Through that commitment, Australia has
always sought to provide a foundation upon which the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste might
assume control and management of their own affairs.
That should continue to be the guiding principle in
determining how we might best continue to assist.

Australia is aware of the diversity of views held
by members of the Security Council and the core group
about the best way to deliver continuing assistance to
the Timorese people and how the United Nations might
best manage its engagement with Timor-Leste. It is
clearly not the preference of Timor-Leste that the
United Nations conclude a Security Council-mandated
presence at the current time. We should consider those
wishes carefully. If the Security Council decides that a
specially mandated successor mission to UNOTIL is
required for a limited time, that mission should be
focused and properly staffed to complement ongoing
cooperation. It should be funded from the regular
budget. If such a mission is agreed, Australia would of
course consider making a contribution.

As I have said, the goal of the international
community in Timor-Leste should be the people of
Timor-Leste taking full control of the country's own
affairs.

Australia recognizes that the international
community has made a considerable investment in
Timor-Leste's progress as a nation. We would
encourage Timor-Leste's many international supporters
to maintain their bilateral and other forms of
multilateral assistance in order to ensure Timor-Leste
continues along its path to a stable and sustainable
future.

