Mr. Portas (Portugal): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this important meeting. I wish to
welcome His Excellency Sheikh Hamad Al-Thani,
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Qatar, and
Mr. Nabil Elaraby, Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States, to the Council. I would also like to thank
them for their comprehensive and very useful
briefings, and commend them both for their tireless
efforts to resolve the crisis in Syria.

I decided to participate in this meeting of the
Security Council for the simple reason that what is
happening in Syria is of such seriousness; that the
inaction of the international community is so shocking;
that an Arab solution is so urgent; and that a decision
of the United Nations is so essential that I felt
compelled to participate in this debate and to do
whatever I can to transform deadlock into solution,
hesitation into will.

The situation in Syria is both unacceptable and
untenable. For 10 months now, we have witnessed the
most brutal repression of civilians and the most
flagrant and systematic violation of their fundamental
human rights. The brutality of the Syrian authorities
has left in its wake thousands of dead and many more
thousands maimed, imprisoned and tortured. They have
shown their contempt for basic human rights and their
unwillingness to protect their population. According to
UNICEF, nearly 400 children have lost their lives in
Syria. This is indeed a measure of the atrocities
committed.

The only aspiration of the Syrian people, inspired
by their brethren in other Arab countries, was simply to
voice their protest and to pave the way for a
democratic society. They did so peacefully and
unarmed, only to be met by bullets, beatings and
arrests. These victims and their families merit our full
solidarity. As deadly violence goes on unabated, the
situation in Syria continues to spiral dangerously
towards civil war, with serious risks for peace and
security in the region.

And yet, the Security Council has not been able
to fully meet its responsibilities regarding Syria and
the Syrian people, or to play its role as the primary

body entrusted with the maintenance of international
peace and security. Allow me to be clear. The argument
voiced during these 10 months that the choice in Syria
was between inaction or civil war does not hold, given
what we see, hear and read every day. The country is
descending into civil war. The real option now is
between an escalation of the conflict or a controlled
and negotiated political solution.

Portugal fully supports the efforts of the League
of Arab States to find a peaceful solution to the Syrian
crisis that both promotes the end of violence and the
implementation of a serious political process that will
establish a free and democratic Syria. We have
commended the deployment of the Arab observer
mission and the decision to extend its mandate.
Notwithstanding the deployment of the mission, the
regime continues with its violent oppression against
peaceful voices of dissent and its widespread,
systematic and gross violations of human rights, as
documented by the commission of inquiry of the
Human Rights Council.

The Commission's accounts are horrifying, and
all those responsible for these brutal violations and
abuses must be held accountable. We were appalled by
the killing last week of an official of the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent. We must reiterate, firmly, that the
deliberate targeting of humanitarian personnel is
simply a form of barbarism.

By persistently ignoring numerous appeals to put
an end to its bloody crackdown, the Syrian authorities
have fuelled escalation and Violence. Yet, even under
the repression they are subject to, we trust that the
Syrian opposition movement will maintain the peaceful
nature of its legitimate objectives.

I cannot adequately stress the urgency of an
immediate end to all violence. Equally pressing is the
undertaking of a serious political process leading to a
democratic, plural political system where all citizens,
regardless of affiliation, ethnicity or belief, are treated
equally and can fulfil their legitimate aspirations.

Some months ago, President Al-Assad announced
reforms. Yet, he did not fulfil either those promises or
his commitments to the Arab League. In situations of
that nature, the old principle that it is enough to change
only a few things so that everything stays the same is
inapplicable. Quite to the contrary, the lesson of history
is the following: Where there is no reform, there will
be revolution.

Portugal remains committed to the sovereignty,

independence and territorial integrity of Syria. The

longer the crisis persists, the deeper the scars on Syrian
society will be.

My country values highly the role of regional
organizations and their contributions to peace and
security. We believe that the League of Arab States is
best suited to lead the efforts aimed at solving a crisis
that entails direct risks and threats to many of its
member States.

As I said, we fully support the efforts of the
League of Arab States. We supported without hesitation
the request for this meeting. We have staunchly
supported the League's decision of 22 January and the
political road map therein as the only viable path
towards establishing a credible political dialogue among
all Syrians, leading to a peaceful political transition.

We urge all Syrian parties, factions and
stakeholders to respond positively to that proposal.
Portugal fully subscribes to the need for the formation
of a national unity Government and strongly appeals to
President Al-Assad to delegate full authority to his
deputy in order to carry out a peaceful political
transition in accordance with what has been underlined
by the Prime Minister of Qatar.

To cut a long story short, Portugal appeals to all
members of the Council not to look at Syria with the
eyes of the past, in the light of old divisions. What is at
stake in Syria is an Arab initiative for a problem that is,
first and foremost, an Arab one. It is a crisis that the
world and the United Nations cannot ignore. All
members of the Council should feel comfortable with
the initiative of the Arab League because no member of
the Council is comfortable with the daily massacres in
Syria.

Inaction is not only unacceptable but also
irresponsible. It is high time to live up to our
responsibilities and to address the legitimate demands
of the Syrian people and the expectations of the
countries of the region. We must unite behind a strong
and clear message to the Syrian authorities. It is also
the credibility of the Security Council that is at stake.
We must tell the Syrian authorities, unequivocally, that
the killing must stop and that a political solution must
be sought, based on the proposals of the Arab League.
It is for those reasons that Portugal commends
Morocco for submitting a draft resolution with those

objectives in view. We will continue to engage in good
faith with all Council members in order to
expeditiously adopt the draft resolution. The situation
in Syria has already brought serious disruption to its
neighbours. I wish, in that context, to express my
country's deep appreciation for the assistance that
countries of the region - Turkey in particular - have
been providing to those fleeing violence, persecution
and repression.

But let us be clear. If we do not act, not only will
we be condemning the Syrian people to yet more
violence and repression; we will be increasing the
threats to the peace and security of the whole region.
There is no more time to lose.

A year ago, the people of Tunisia set in motion a
wave that quickly changed the face of the Arab world.
After decades of silence and dread, ordinary people
broke away from the shackles of fear. They found their
voice, bravely took to the streets and made themselves
heard. They strove for freedom, for equality and for
their rights to build a democratic State and to
citizenship. They refused to cower in submission. Those
are also the aspirations of the Syrian people, who also
refuse to submit to disproportionate brutal force.

President Roosevelt included among his four
famous freedoms the freedom from fear. It is our duty
to help the Syrian people to free themselves from the
fear inflicted daily upon them. To put a stop to the
killings and allow for a peaceful solution, we must act
and we must act now. As Dostoyevsky said, "to live
without hope is to cease to live". It is up to us to give
hope to and protect the lives of the Syrian people.

