Mr. Nibishaka (Rwanda): I too should like to
thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for presenting the
twentieth report of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to the Security
Council. We take note of the recent judicial activities
undertaken by the Court, the ongoing Office activities,
including the monitoring of current allegations, as well
as the status of cooperation by the Government of the
Sudan and other parties.

Since February 2009, the African Heads of State

and Government have continuously requested that the
proceedings against President Omer Hassan Al-Bashir
be deferred, in accordance with article 16 of the Rome
Statute. The African Union (AU), while reiterating
its commitment to the fight against impunity, has
stressed that the search for justice should be pursued
in a way that does not impede or jeopardize efforts
aimed at promoting lasting peace. Subsequently, the
African Union has decided that all African countries
receiving President Al-Bashir since his indictment did
so in conformity with the decision of the African Union
summit and were pursuing the same goal of peace in the
region. Therefore, we believe that the continued reports
of non-cooperation by African States impede the
tireless efforts of the region to achieve peace in Darfur.
We are also convinced that a concerted approach among
the United Nations, the AU and the Government of the
Sudan is the best way to ensure accountability while
addressing the conflict in Darfur.

With regard to the continued monitoring of the
current allegations, we note that most of the cases
indicated in the report of the Prosecutor of the ICC have
been discussed following the report of the Secretary-
General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/20l4/852). In this vein, we
would like to reiterate our concerns on the continued
instability in the Darfur region, as well as the lack of
a political settlement to end the conflict, a situation
which of course continues to negatively impact the
lives of innocent civilians. We appreciate that the
investigation into the allegations of the manipulation
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) reports have been conducted and
the findings have been presented to the Council. We
look forward to their implementation.

Rwanda also takes this opportunity to reiterate
it strong condemnation of the repeated attacks on
peacekeepers of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. I recall that more than
60 peacekeepers, including from my country, have been
killed since the beginning of the mission in December
2007. We urge the Government of the Sudan to work
closely with UNAMID in investigating those attacks in
order to bring the perpetrators to justice. With that said,
we are aware that, on 18 September, the special criminal
court on the events in Darfur in Al Fasher delivered
the final judgement on the case of four persons accused
of attacking, robbing and raping a female UNAMID
police officer on 10 April in Al Fashir, North Darfur.

We wish to see more progress in the investigation
of other human rights violations and crimes, including
those mentioned in the report of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court. Moreover, it is important
to emphasize that the Government of the Sudan has
the primary responsibility to ensure the protection
of its people and to take concrete steps in addressing
the persistent intercommunal violence in Darfur. We
equally reject violence against civilians by armed
groups and the use of civilians as a human shield in the
fighting against the Government force.

As we are talking about justice, we believe that
the international community should adopt a balanced
approach between peace and justice in order to better
address the conflict in Darfur. At present, further to
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, the launching
of the national dialogue by the Government of the
Sudan earlier this year presents another opportunity
for peace in Darfur. The African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel, with its Chairperson President
Thabo Mbeki, is working very hard to ensure the
success of that initiative. However, without goodwill
from the parties and strong commitment and support
from the international community, that initiative is
unlikely to succeed. Therefore, it is important that the
parties negotiate in good faith with the goal of ending
the suffering of their people. It is also important that
the international community, including the Council,
use its maximum influence and pressure on the parties
in order to ensure the participation of all parties in the
process.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our continued
commitment, as a troop- and police-contributing
country to UNAMID and as a member State of the
African Union, to work towards a sustainable peace,
genuine reconciliation and accountability for the most
serious crimes in Darfur.

