Mr. Al-Najem (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the Group of Arab States, over which my
delegation has the honour to preside this month, I have
the honour to convey to you, Sir, our congratulations
on your friendly country's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to commend your predecessor, the
representative of France, for the excellent manner in
which he presided over the work of the Council. We
also congratulate Mr. Alvaro de Soto on his
appointment as United Nations Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process.

I would also like to thank the Security Council
for its timely response in convening this meeting to
discuss recent developments in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. I refer
in particular to the ongoing and accelerating illegal
settlement activities conducted by Israel, the
construction of the illegal separation wall, and the
deteriorating situation on the ground.

I wish to condemn the acts of terrorism that
occurred in London this morning. We wish the victims
a speedy recovery. We condemn terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations and call for international
efforts to counter it.

The Arab countries are following with grave
concern the latest developments in the occupied
Palestinian territories and recall the understandings
that were reached in Sharm el-Sheikh in February,
which call for the rejection of violence. We also follow
with grave concern the tragic situation of the
Palestinian people in the occupied territories as their
standards of living and their economic and social life
continue to deteriorate as a result of Israel's policies
and practices, which run counter to international laws
and norms and humanitarian law. We are deeply
disturbed by the detentions and the use of live
ammunition against unarmed civilians, the blockade of
Palestinian cities, the restrictions on freedom of
movement, and the political assassinations of
Palestinian leaders. Such violations by the Israeli
occupation forces are carried out brazenly under the
eyes of the world with no concern for accountability or
international opinion.

The destruction of property and the confiscation
of Palestinian territory continue in direct relation to the
ongoing construction by Israel of its illegal
expansionist wall in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem and surrounding
areas. That continued construction represents a blatant
violation of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, and a lack of
respect for the advisory opinion delivered by the
International Court of Justice on 9 July 2004, as noted
in General Assembly resolution ES-lO/15 of 20 July
2004.

The Arab position regarding Israel's construction
of the wall in the Palestinian territories is unambiguous
and has been reiterated on many occasions before the
General Assembly, the Security Council and other
international forums. It is based on the firm conviction
that the practices and policies of the Israeli
Government in the occupied Arab territories, whereby
it violates international law and the resolutions of
international legitimacy, offer no sense whatsoever of a
real or sincere desire for a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace. The date of 9 July 2005 is the first
anniversary of the handing down of the International
Court of Justice's advisory opinion, but despite that
opinion and resolution ES-lO/lS, which was adopted
by a majority of the Member States and calls on Israel
to fulfil all the legal obligations laid down in that
opinion, Israel has only accelerated its construction of
the expansionist wall, further aggravating the situation
and confiscating ever more Palestinian land.

The Israeli Government has declared 1 September
as the deadline for the completion of the expansionist
wall, which now extends 750 kilometres inside the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, cutting off 65,000 Palestinian residents of
Jerusalem from contact with their families and jobs.

Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip must be
complete and based on the road map. It should be
followed by a withdrawal from the other occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. The
withdrawal from Gaza and certain settlements of the
West Bank must be undertaken in coordination with the
Palestinian Authority; it should advance the peace
process and put an end to the suffering of the occupied
Palestinian people. We appreciate the efforts of the
Quartet in that regard.

The Arab countries call on the international
community to assume its responsibilities and appeals to
all States Members of the United Nations to adopt a
clear and unambiguous position to strengthen the
Charter and international law, including international
humanitarian law, and to compel Israel to respect
international legitimacy and to put and end to all its
illegal practices against the Palestinian people,
including the ongoing construction of the separation
wall in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem. It must desist from those policies,
which can only exacerbate the insecurity in the region.
The Israeli Government should know that its policies
and procedures, designed to extend the occupation, will
only backfire and cannot bring security.

The only way to establish security for all is to
find a peaceful, comprehensive and just settlement
based on the resolutions of international legitimacy,
notably Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002), the principle of land for
peace, the Madrid references, and the Arab peace
initiative. Israel must fulfil all its obligations as set out
in the road map, which was endorsed by the Security
Council in resolution 1515 (2003). The road map calls
for the establishment of two States living side by side
in peace and within internationally recognized borders,
and consecrates peace in the Middle East in the
interests of all its peoples and countries.

