Mr. Shalita (Rwanda): We wish to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting to
discuss the reports of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) (8/2006/353) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) (S/2006/358). We shall focus our
remarks on the ICTR.

My delegation wishes to express its profound
thanks to the ICTR President, Judge Erik Mose, and
the Prosecutor, Hassan Bubacar Jallow, for their
respective presentations. We commend them for their
continued hard work and commitment to the successful
implementation of the completion strategy in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004).

The late issuance of the report under
consideration has created some difficulties for my
delegation in preparing for this meeting, as I am sure it
has for Council members. We look forward to future
reports being issued in good enough time to allow for
informed consultations among both Council and non-
Council members.

The Rwandan Government also wishes to express
at the outset its satisfaction with its good working
relationship with the Tribunal. We wish to reiterate our
commitment to work closely with the Tribunal to bring
to justice those who bear the greatest responsibility for
the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.

With only two and a half years remaining for the
Tribunal to complete its work in accordance with the
completion strategy, it is clear that not much time is
left and there is still plenty of work to be done. The
following are some of the areas where we believe
urgent progress is essential in the next few months.

First, with regard to fugitives still at large, my
delegation has on several occasions stated that the
perpetrators of the genocide should not be allowed to
evade justice, even after 2008. The Tribunal's
completion strategy should not be seen as an exit
strategy for the international community in its
obligations to bring all those suspected of the crime of
genocide to trial at the ICTR or in Rwanda. We would
welcome appropriate measures that would ensure that
all accused are brought to justice, even after the
Tribunal's mandate has expired. My delegation has
repeatedly expressed Rwanda's commitment, which I
reiterate here today, to work with Governments around
the world to bring those suspects to justice. We must
not allow notorious suspects such as Felicien Kabuga
and Augustine Ngirabatware to evade justice. If they
did, it would be an extremely sad indictment on us all
and would send the wrong signal about the
commitment of the international community to prevent
genocide by combating impunity.

The second area concerns the transfers of cases.
It is a widely accepted principle that trials, especially
for crimes as serious as genocide, should take place as
close as possible to where the crimes were committed.
In this connection, we welcome Prosecutor Jallow's
reiteration this morning that Rwanda continues to be
the major focus of referrals. It is our view that trials
targeted for transfer should take place in Rwanda
because that would contribute to our own efforts to
eradicate the culture of impunity and promote
reconciliation in Rwanda, as our people would be first-
hand witnesses to justice being done.

The Rwandan Government has discussed this
issue extensively with the ICTR, particularly with the
prosecution. Following those meetings, and in close
consultation with the Tribunal, my Government has
drafted new legislation to prepare for those transfers.
The draft legislation includes addressing procedural
issues and the creation of special chambers.

The draft legislation addresses the issue of the
death penalty, which has been raised this morning by
several delegations. It is our intention to waive the
death penalty for the transferred cases. We expect that
the draft legislation will be tabled before Parliament
and adopted as law within the coming weeks.

On the second issue raised in paragraph 41 of the
report under consideration - lack of capacity within
the Rwandan judiciary - we have had occasion in the
past to inform the Council that we have been steadily
building and enhancing the capacity of our judiciary
over the last decade. Furthermore, the caseload before
the Rwandan judiciary has been significantly reduced
following the introduction of the Gacaca justice
system. That is not to say, however, that our judiciary
does not need strengthening; it does, indeed, need
strengthening. We would be the first to acknowledge
that, and we would welcome any assistance in that
connection from the United Nations and through
bilateral arrangements. But transferring trials to other
jurisdictions does not address the core challenge,
which is how to equip Rwandans with the capacity to
build a criminal justice system that would, for the long
term, fight impunity and promote the rule of law and
human rights. This we believe to be the core issue.
Transferring cases to Europe or elsewhere simply
would not address that core challenge.

Council members will recall that this is a
discussion that we had in the context of the
establishment and operationalization of the
Peacebuilding Commission - a discussion that you,
Madam President, co-chaired. The key issue, as we see
it, is how to ensure that international interventions like
the ICTR have a sustained positive impact on countries
that are emerging or have emerged from conflict. In
this context, we do not believe that transferring cases
to jurisdictions other than that of Rwanda would
achieve the best results for the international
community. We believe that with further support from
the international community, including financial
support for the trials, Rwanda would have the capacity
to conduct them in a manner consistent with
international standards of fair trial.

The third point relates to transfers of convicts.
The Rwanda Government has consistently stated that
that all ICTR convicts should serve their sentences in
Rwanda, where the crimes were committed. Once
again, we believe that this is essential for justice and
reconciliation in Rwanda the main reason why the
ICTR was established in the first place. The initial
concern about the administration of sentences in
Rwanda was the lack of a detention facility that met
international standards. However, a detention facility
was built more than two years ago and was inspected
by the ICTR, which certified that it met international
standards, and signed a memorandum of understanding
to that effect. Despite that, there continues to be delay
in effecting the transfers. It is unclear to us why that is
the case. We would therefore appeal to the Council to
intervene to ensure that those transfers are carried out
expeditiously.

The fourth point relates to the transfer of
documents and materials. As we continue to consider
the legacy of the Tribunal for international justice in
general and, more specifically, its effect on Rwanda,
we believe that the completion strategy should
incorporate the transfer of all court documents and
materials to Rwanda, where they could provide a
nucleus for a research and education centre which
would contribute to raising awareness and to genocide
prevention in Rwanda and beyond. We believe that as
the ICTR completes its work, the United Nations and
the international community should bequeath to
Rwanda a genocide prevention and education centre
not only to serve the memory of the genocide's
1million victims, but also to act as a centre for
research and for understanding the lessons learned
from the Rwanda genocide and as a centre to promote
justice, reconciliation and human rights.

The Rwanda Government is open to discussions
with the United Nations and Member States on how
best to take that proposal forward. However, we should
be cognizant of the need to act quickly, given the
limited time left before the Tribunal completes its
work.

We welcome the information contained in annex
5 of the report concerning the ICTR outreach
programme, and we welcome the remarks made in that
connection by the representative of Japan. We see that
as being inextricably linked to my previous point. In
view of the limited time remaining for the Tribunal, we
urge that it strive towards greater effectiveness in its
outreach programme and ensure that the existing
information centre, training programmes for jurists,
internships and relationships with academic institutions
and civil society groups aim to educate and build
capacity among Rwandans. While we welcome the
efforts of the ICTR in highlighting some of these
issues, which were mentioned in the statement of the
Prosecutor, we once again call upon the Tribunal to
increase its recruitment of Rwandan jurists and
investigators, either as interns or on a permanent basis,
in order to ensure knowledge transfer from the ICTR to
Rwandan professionals.

We would like to conclude by expressing our
profound appreciation to the international community
for its continued support of the Tribunal through both
assessed and voluntary contributions. As we begin the
last leg, we urge the Council to continue its
commitment to ensuring that the Tribunal is adequately
resourced so that it can conduct its work efficiently and
effectively. We also thank the Tribunal's President,
Prosecutor and Registrar and their respective teams for
their work in ensuring the implementation of the
completion strategy.

