Mr. Prendergast: When I briefed members of the
Council in informal consultations two weeks ago, I
concluded with the hope that today I would be able to
bring the Council welcome news about the results of
the emergency loya jirga. This morning I am pleased to
be able to say that that hope was well founded. In view
of the importance of the loya jirga for the political
future of Afghanistan and the intense global interest in
its outcome, my briefing today will pay primary
attention to that event.

The emergency loya jirga can be counted as a
success for a number of reasons. The fact that it was
held is the first success. I have already detailed to the
Council the immense challenges faced in conducting
the election and selection of delegates, in organizing
and securing the site, and in transporting delegates to
Kabul on time and in secure conditions. The generosity
of the international community was a major factor in
this achievement, and on behalf of the Secretary-
General I thank all those States that contributed. I fear,
however, that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) will have to go back to donors
and ask for their understanding, since not all the sums
that were pledged to the budget of the Special
Independent Commission have actually been paid into
the loya jirga trust fund.

The fact that the loya jirga accomplished what it
was mandated to accomplish under the Bonn
Agreement is its second success. The Bonn Agreement
called on the loya jirga to elect a head of State for the
Transitional Administration and to approve proposals
for the structure and key personnel of the Transitional
Administration. As the Council knows, Mr. Karzai was
elected as the head of State, and his cabinet was
approved by the assembly.

Finally, the fact that Afghans from every region,
ethnicity, educational level and occupation were able to
gather together peacefully, to debate heatedly, yet
ultimately to agree on fundamental questions regarding
their common political future is the third - and surely
the most important - success of the emergency loya
jirga. The gathering offered a truly representative
sample of Afghan society in 2002, even if quite a few
people might have had some doubts about the
legitimacy of the presence of certain delegates.

I would not want this generally positive
assessment to give comfort to those who employed
tactics of intimidation and fear during the loya jirga
process. The Bureau of the loya jirga and UNAMA
have documented various cases of intimidation, which
have been brought to the attention of the Afghan
Government. I am aware that other organizations
present in Afghanistan are compiling their own reports
on intimidation. For the sake of the next loya jirga and
to secure the foundations of democracy in Afghanistan,
it is vital that the Afghan authorities highlight and
address, as much as possible, the instances where
democratic rights have been abused by those who still
equate power with force and violence.

Having said that, I must add that intimidation was
actually confirmed in only a small number of cases. In
fact - and this is important to underline - the reports
of intimidation reflected the feeling of fear and
insecurity that remains predominant in many parts of
the country because the rule of law is not yet firmly
established and because far too often force is the only
source of authority.

Moving from the general to the specific, the
emergency loya jirga was convened in Kabul on ll
June with the participation of 1,656 voting delegates
from all over the country and abroad. As per the Bonn
Agreement, the assembly was opened by former King
Zahir Shah, who stressed that he had returned to
Afghanistan to be a servant of his people and not to
restore the monarchy. The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Lakdhar Brahimi, also made
a statement, in which he congratulated Afghans and the
Interim Administration on successfully opening the
loya jirga. Mr. Brahimi took note of the intimidation
that had occurred during the process but - properly, I
believe - insisted that more remarkable were the cases
of resistance to intimidation and the clearly manifested
popular support for the process.

The substantive results of the emergency loya
jirga are as follows. On 13 June, Mr. Hamid Karzai was
overwhelmingly elected - by 1,295 out of the 1,575
delegates who cast their votes - to be the head of
State of the Transitional Administration. One of
Mr. Karzai's two opponents, Massouda Jalal, was a
woman. This was the first time in Afghan history that a
woman had ever run for such a high position, and her
second-place finish is a credit to her and to the
assembly. I would like to note here that the Ministry of
Women's Affairs and UNAMA conducted an induction
course for the 150 female delegates. A core group has
been created from among those delegates to continue to
promote common issues affecting Afghan women. And
while it would have been gratifying to be able to
announce the election of a female head of State in
Afghanistan, Mr. Karzai's victory has been widely
acknowledged to be well deserved. It reflects the
leadership he has exercised, both nationally and
internationally, as Chairman of the Interim
Administration during the past six months.

As the new head of State, Mr. Karzai was
required by the rules of the loya jirga to submit for
endorsement by the assembly proposals on the
structure of the Transitional Authority and its key
personalities. Because of flaws in the management of
the loya jirga proceedings, there was some confusion
among delegates about how their approval for
proposals would be secured. For example, many
delegates thought that they could become members of
the Cabinet if they collected enough signatures from
delegates in support of their bid. But the truly
contentious issue was the question of how a legislature
should be formed, and that issue was left unresolved.

Overlooked in the highly publicized disputes and
bitterness on this issue, however, was an encouraging
reformist vision of government presented by
Mr. Karzai in his acceptance speech on 13 June.
Mr. Karzai proposed the creation of a number of
national commissions to implement his reforms. These
include commissions on national defence, national
security, foreign investment, return of property and so
forth. The salient aspects of Mr. Karzai's vision include
a lean government structure that focuses resources on
the people and not on maintaining a heavy bureaucracy.
Mr. Karzai emphasized the importance of generating
enough income for the Government to be self-
sufficient. Customs duties would be used as the prime
source of income to fund the civil service and the
Government. On economic questions, he stressed the
importance of private enterprise, of encouraging
investment from foreigners and from the Afghan
diaspora, and of cracking down on corruption and
bribery. Mr. Karzai also noted the need to ensure that
donor aid is disbursed effectively.

Another key aspect of Mr. Karzai's vision of
government concerns national defence and national
security. He noted the need for an ethnically
representative national army that is accountable to the
Afghan State, for an intelligence service that operates
within the boundaries of the law and is respectful of the
individual rights of Afghans, and for an independent
judicial system that is free from corruption. Most
important, in his final speech to the loya jirga
Mr. Karzai insisted that all commanders and warlords
must come under the authority of the Ministry of
Defence.

Mr. Karzai explained, however, that forming a
lean Cabinet was not easy at this stage in the history of
Afghanistan. By the time he appeared before the loya
jirga at its final session, he had filled only some of the
Cabinet positions. He is finalizing his Cabinet even as
the Council meets, and has said that he hopes to
announce the final composition of the Cabinet within
the next two or three days. Mr. Karzai's submission to
the loya jirga was accepted with a show of hands.

Mr. Karzai's Cabinet selection could not entirely
avoid the political realities of Afghanistan. This
imperative seems to have been recognized by the
members of the loya jirga. There is, nonetheless, likely
to be some discontent. A vast amount of work lies
ahead for each ministry, however, and we hope that the
Cabinet will focus on its administrative and governance
functions.

At the same time, we urge other Afghan leaders
to support them. One of the essential features of
democracy, which is built into the Bonn Agreement, is
that there should always be another future occasion to
compete for power. Between such periodic occasions,
however, is the time for governance.

These generally positive developments in Kabul
are overshadowed by a deterioration of the security
situation in some parts of Afghanistan. On the eve of
the final day of the loya jirga, several rockets were
launched into the centre of Kabul. Luckily, there were
no casualties and not much material damage. But this
very serious incident is a reminder that security is not
guaranteed and that it will not be guaranteed by luck
alone.

In the north of Afghanistan, a number of armed
attacks and robberies have been carried out against
international aid organizations in the last several
weeks. Most serious and most contemptible was the
gang rape of a female international aid worker. We
have also been discouraged by recent incidents in
which a clinic run by an international aid organization
was fired on during factional fighting in Sholgara, and
the vehicle of an international aid non-governmental
organization (NGO) was fired upon while travelling to
oversee bread distribution at a camp for internally
displaced persons near Mazar. These attacks mark a
worrying departure from what has been, over the past
decade, a generally hospitable attitude by Afghans
towards aid workers, as well as from the respect for
international norms that is necessary to guarantee a
humanitarian space in zones of war.

Aid agencies have appealed to the Special
Representative to intervene with national and local
authorities to redress this alarming situation.
Mr. Brahimi has responded by writing to Chairman
Karzai to request strong and urgent intervention with
local parties to secure conditions for humanitarian
work and to ask him to ensure that those responsible
are held accountable under the law. Mr. Brahimi also
met with General Abdul Rashid Dostum, General Atta
Mohammed, and Mr. Haji Mohammed Muhaqiq, the
leaders of the three main northern factions, to make the
same demand for intervention. He emphasized that
previous United Nations interventions with local
authorities had regrettably not resulted in any serious
measures being taken to apprehend criminals - many
of whom, I regret to say, are in uniform - or to
prevent future abuses. He noted that if the security
situation continues to deteriorate, aid organizations
might be forced to cut their operations in the north.
This would make it much more difficult to persuade
donors to invest in recovery and reconstruction projects
in the region, particularly in the light of paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 1401 (2002).

It is clearly vital that, in the weeks and months
following the loya jirga, the international community
should assist the Afghan Government to bring its
authority to bear on insecure areas of the country.
Much of this can be done through the continued
training of a new Afghan army, which continues to
progress. But, inevitably, that army will not be able to
provide adequate security for many months to come.
Given the importance of peace and security in the
transitional period, the contributing nations to the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the
Council may wish again to consider the possibility of a
limited expansion of ISAF to areas outside Kabul,
particularly those where there is a clear pattern of
emerging insecurity that, if left to evolve without
countervailing pressure, could seriously threaten the
further implementation of the Bonn process.

As the United Kingdom yesterday completed the
hand-over of the ISAF leadership to Turkey, I would
like to signal our immense gratitude for the
professionalism and dedication of the former, as well
as our anticipation of equally effective leadership and
cooperation from the latter. ISAF, in exemplary
cooperation with Afghan forces, did a superb job of
providing security for the loya jirga. From the
diligence and promptness of the members of this
Council in authorizing and extending ISAF to the
excellent field-level performance of ISAF's troops, the
force has been a model of international cooperation, as
well as tangible proof of the international commitment
to promoting peace and political order in Afghanistan.
I can think of no higher tribute to pay than to
emphasize, once again, our confidence that ISAF
would have an equally positive impact if deployed
elsewhere in Afghanistan.

A major task of the Transitional Authority, in
addition to extending its writ beyond Kabul, will be to
address the reconstruction and development of
Afghanistan. The United Nations has pledged to be an
effective partner in this process. In this regard, I am
pleased to report that progress continues to be made by
UNAMA and the United Nations agencies in
Afghanistan in developing a coherent assistance
strategy as well as a productive and cooperative
relationship with the Afghan Government.
In the near future, I would hope to provide a
comprehensive briefing on assistance activities and on
progress made by the United Nations in implementing
relief and recovery programmes in Afghanistan.
Meanwhile, I am compelled to highlight once again the
worrying decline in donor funding for Afghanistan.
Already, many organizations, most notably the World
Food Programme, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
International Organization for Migration have been
forced to scale back, or even halt operations. This
funding shortfall, moreover, makes it extremely
difficult for those agencies, and consequently for the
United Nations system as a whole, to prepare the
necessary transition towards increased recovery
programming later in the year.

Allow me to say in conclusion that the plans and
hopes mapped out six months ago at Bonn have
become the realities of today. Perhaps few people
believed then that the Interim Administration would be
as effective as it has proven to be, and that the peace
process would be as robust as it has been.

Now, new challenges face us and new tasks lie
ahead in the implementation of the Bonn Agreement.
On behalf of the Secretary-General, I would like to
urge the international community to continue to assist
the Afghans and to support the United Nations, as it
has generously done thus far. I ask the international
community please to help ensure that we meet these
new targets as we have the ones that now lie behind us.
For the moment, I am sure the Council may agree, each
success of the Bonn process actually adds to our
responsibilities rather than subtracts from them.

