The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Nepal, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Acharya
(Nepal) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2006/920, containing a letter dated
2

22 November 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council, and
S/2007/7, containing the report of the Secretary-
General on the request of Nepal for United Nations
assistance in support of its peace process.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2007/30, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in Russian): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1740 (2007).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.
07-21758

