Mr. Koenigs: Let me make four very brief
comments.

First of all, I would like to thank the Security
Council for the continued broad support that the United

Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and its entire staff has received from it, for we depend
on its ongoing support. At the moment, UNAMA faces
not only the usual challenges of a post-conflict mission
but also a burgeoning conflict in the south of the
country. We therefore have both peacekeeping and
peacemaking challenges ahead.

Secondly, I appreciate that the priorities have
been clear in all the meetings held in the past month:
first, security and security sector reform; secondly,
governance; thirdly, counter-narcotics efforts; and,
fourthly, regional cooperation. That came through in all
the comments made today. I would like to mention
that, because it is vital to security, governance might be
the most important and challenging of all. Afghan-
owned security must be achieved, but counter-narcotics
efforts, capacity development and regional cooperation
are also necessary.

Thirdly, counter-insurgency can only be
successful if it increases the legitimacy of the
Government of Afghanistan. All our efforts in the areas
of governance, counternarcotics, security and regional
cooperation must therefore focus on the overarching
importance of the legitimacy of the legally elected
36

Government. We must therefore win hearts and minds
not only for ourselves, but also for the Afghan
Government. We have to win the legitimacy of the
Afghan Government, because only an Afghan
Government that is legitimate, and perceived as such,
will be able to finally overcome the challenges posed
by the insurgency.

Fourthly, and lastly, in my View, the efforts of
Afghanistan and the international community should,
and can be, an integral peacemaking factor for the
whole region, just as the region can, and must be, a
peacemaking factor for Afghanistan. On the other
hand, the conflicts and instability in the region could,
but must not be, a disintegrating factor for Afghanistan
and our efforts.

