Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
like, first of all, to sincerely thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this debate, which provides us
with this opportunity to exchange ideas with the
representatives of regional and subregional
organizations on the best way of boosting cooperation
with the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations has
increased, and the prospects that are now opening up
are more promising than ever. Much remains to be
done, however, if we are to better prepare those two
partners to face, together, existing and new threats to
global peace. The purpose of our meeting today is to
make an assessment of the state of such cooperation, to
identify its strengths and weaknesses, and to consider
what might be done in order to improve it. I would like
to comment on just three elements.

The first element relates to the need to rationalize
the framework for cooperation and to ensure that it
remains adaptable, since we are dealing with matters
that are continually evolving. A great deal of work has
been carried out in that area by the General Assembly
and the Security Council. In our view, this is not a
question of rewriting Chapter VIII of the Charter, but
of exploring, as much as possible, the resources at our
disposal and of basing ourselves on a liberal and
pragmatic reading of its provisions.

We must recognize, in this respect - and we
pointed this out during our discussions on the draft
resolution to be adopted at the end of the debate - that
there is a degree of resistance to going off the beaten
track. Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is not optional but is an
imperative need imposed by new global realities.
Indeed, the new, complex challenges confronting our
system of collective security require us to strengthen
cooperation between all players - the United Nations,
regional organizations, Governments and civil society.

Furthermore, regional organizations are playing
an increasing role in the settlement of crises in their
respective geographic areas, and legitimately aspire to
take on increased responsibilities. The Security
Council is not being asked to delegate some of its
responsibilities to those regional organizations but,
rather, to make good use of the contributions of such
organizations through improved interaction, on the
basis of the principles of complementarity and
comparative advantage. The contribution of the
African Union (AU) and subregional organizations in
Africa in the area of political mediation and conflict
prevention, as well as, increasingly, conflict
management, thanks in particular to the very active
role played by the Peace and Security Council of the
AU, is key in this regard.

The second element relates to the mobilization of
resources to help regional organizations and to
strengthen their capacity for action. The United
Nations has acquired a body of experience in planning
and managing multifaceted and complex operations,
which it can and must share with regional
organizations. Although much progress has been made
in helping regional organizations, in particular in
Africa, to develop their capacity for intervention,
greater efforts are required. The Secretariat is prepared
to do more, but it is has to deal with insufficient
resources and, sometimes, lack of political will on the
part of Member States, which prevent it from seeking
innovative solutions. In this context, the Darfur crisis
provides a clear illustration of the gap that exists
between statements and declarations of good faith and
practice; it is a test case for cooperation with regional
organizations - the yardstick by which the
international community's efforts, and its success and
failures, will be measured.

The third element relates to the stabilization and
peacebuilding phase, during which the United Nations
and regional organizations have a great deal to do
together. That phase, which is generally considered to
be crucial for the success of a peacebuilding process,
does not receive the attention that it deserves. We hope
that the establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission will help to bridge that gap.

