Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
We are at a moment when the possibility exists for
advancing the road map to a two-State solution of the
Middle East conflict, including through steps by the
Government of Israel to withdraw from Gaza. This
should be our focus, and actions by either party that
move us away from this goal are not helpful.

On Saturday, 17 April, the terrorist organization
Hamas claimed responsibility for a suicide attack that
killed one Israeli border guard at the Erez Crossing.
Another Israeli policeman was critically injured. A
second suicide bombing attempt was foiled. These
attacks on Erez, which has been an area where Israelis
and Palestinians work together, were clearly designed
to perpetuate the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and
prevent any progress towards the achievement of the
steps outlined in the road map, including the
withdrawal of settlements. These attacks occurred
before Israel killed the leader of Hamas. For our part,
we have told the Israelis that they must consider
carefully the consequences of their actions. We urge all
parties to exercise maximum restraint.

We are committed to ensuring that Prime Minister
Sharon's plan is consistent with the road map and the
realization of the President's vision of two States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security. An Israeli withdrawal from Gaza would be a
significant step forward if it were done in a manner
consistent with the road map and the President's two-
State vision. Such a withdrawal would provide a rare
opportunity for real progress. It is particularly
noteworthy that this step is being proposed by Ariel
Sharon, who is one of the principle architects of Israeli
settlements policy of the 1970s. The fact that one of the
strongest supporters of Israeli settlement policy is now
proposing to remove settlements is an important and
positive development and should be commended. This
is an important precedent for future Israeli
Governments.

Israelis and Palestinians still have important
obligations under the road map. The Government of
Israel is committed to taking additional steps on the
West Bank, including progress towards a freeze on
settlement activity, removing unauthorized settlement
outposts and improving the humanitarian situation by
easing restrictions on the movement of Palestinians not
engaged in terrorist activities. Palestinians must stop
armed activity and all acts of violence against Israelis
anywhere and all official Palestinian institutions must
end incitement against Israel. The Palestinian
leadership must act decisively against terror and
undertake comprehensive institutional reform,
including genuine empowerment of the Prime Minister.
My Government has no intention of prejudicing the
outcome of permanent status negotiations. A lasting
settlement can be reached only through direct
negotiations and mutual agreement between the parties.

