Mr. Cook (United Kingdom): Let me at the outset
congratulate the Netherlands on initiating this debate. It is
inevitable that this Security Council is often preoccupied
with immediate and pressing crises. But if we are to do
our job of securing peace throughout the world, we must

 

also find time to consider some of the underlying causes of
conflict. The starting point for our discussion today is that
one of the clearest underlying causes of conflict is the
plentiful supply of small arms. Ready access to small arms
provides the means and the temptation to start conflict, and
it fuels the tension and the suspicion which sustain conflict.

The dramatic threat to human life from weapons of
mass destruction has prompted great diplomatic effort and
grand international conferences to bring them under control.
It is a tribute to those efforts that nuclear weapons have
never been used for half a century and that chemical
weapons have been rarely used.
However, as our French colleague has already noted,
over the same period it is the assault rifle that has become
the weapon of mass killing. Small arms have both
continued to proliferate and to escalate in their use. In the
last decade alone, conflicts fought with only small arms
have killed over 3 million people, overwhelmingly unarmed
civilians. Against that enormous death toll, we really need
a different phrase than "small arms". There has been
nothing "small" about the misery they have brought to
families or the disruption they have brought to societies.

We must all accept our responsibility for this situation.
Most of the conflicts have taken place in the developing
world, but most of the firearms were made in the
industrialized world. We have a common problem, and we
need to be partners in finding the solutions.

I believe there are three main areas on which we
should focus our work together. We need to impound and
destroy the firearms that are out there and out of control.
We need to regulate and make more transparent the official
trade in firearms. And we must drive out of business the
illicit traffic in firearms.

The first of these tasks is to reduce the total volume
of firearms in the world today. It is a measure of the
problem that none of us round this table know how many
firearms there are in circulation. I have asked my officials,
and I have been given estimates from 100 million to 500
million weapons in circulation at the present time. There
are probably more firearms in the world than there are
personal computers. And ready access means they are
cheap. Five million dollars will buy approximately 20,000
assault rifles - enough to equip the army of a medium-
sized State.

We need to find new, imaginative ways of securing
the surrender of some of those firearms. In Albania the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) is
showing an imaginative way of doing so by providing
roads for communities in return for weapons surrendered.
That is a double benefit: more development and less
insecurity. We need also to make sure that disarmament
and weapons amnesties feature in all peace settlements.
We must halt the recycling of firearms from one conflict
to another.

But destroying firearms is not going to make any
difference if they are simply replaced by fresh supplies.
That is why the second task is to reduce the flow of
firearms. I warmly welcome regional initiatives, such as
the moratorium agreed in the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). But the countries that
manufacture firearms have an equal responsibility to take
the initiative among themselves.

In Europe, we have adopted a code of conduct which
requires all member States to inform each other when
they have refused the sale of weapons because of
concerns that those weapons could be used to violate
human rights or to fuel tension. It also requires us to
consult among ourselves before any other member takes
up that contract which has been refused by any of us. The
European Union has since agreed a joint action which
commits member States to promote the principle that we
do not equip groups outside legitimate government with
military arsenals. The ownership of military firepower
must be the preserve of legitimate Governments.

If the second task is to regulate the legal trade in
firearms, the third and last task must be to halt the illicit
trade in firearms. Britain will strongly support the work
on a firearms protocol. We should explore the feasibility
of an international legal basis for the marking of firearms,
so that their origin can be traced, and a comprehensive
method of recording data on firearms to make sure that,
having traced their origin, we can track their movement.
The illicit trade in firearms is just as deadly as the drugs
trade and needs an equally vigorous international
response.

Finally, rising to the challenge will require concerted
action by all involved, from producers to purchasers; from
businesses to bureaucrats to border guards. To achieve
that cooperation, one element is essential: a clear signal
from the international community of our resolve to act
and the priority we attach to this problem. Today's debate
in this Council provides that signal. That is why I
welcome and commend the initiative of the Netherlands
presidency, and I give it Britain's full support.

 

