Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I have the honour
to introduce the twelfth report (S/2013/732) of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa, which covers the
period 1 July to 31 December 2013. I have the pleasure
to inform the Security Council that, during that period,
the region continued to move forward along the path
of stability, thanks to the ongoing commitment of the
leaders and peoples of the region, especially in the
context of the Economic Community of West Arican
States (ECOWAS) and other subregional bodies such as
the West African Economic and Monetary Union and
the Mano River Union.

The efforts to mobilize and the initial actions by
ECOWAS to address the crisis in Mali, with the support
of the African Union, the United Nations and the entire
international community, were followed up by the
Organization through the deployment of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. Mali's territorial integrity and
constitutional order were restored and, following the
election of President Boubacar Keita, the process of
dialogue and national reconciliation is now under
way - even if major challenges persist with regard to
security and stability. Having drawn the lessons from
the crisis in Mali, West African leaders are determined
to establish a regional and continent-wide rapid-
reaction force to equip the region with the necessary
capacity to respond effectively to regional crises and
other common threats.

Following long and complicated electoral
processes, legislative elections were ultimately held
in Togo, Guinea and Mauritania. The decision of the
Supreme Court in Ghana to confirm the victory of
President John Dramani Mahama brought to an end the
post-electoral challenge in that country.

West African leaders took advantage of that
period of calm in the subregion to relaunch structural
development projects and to expand regional integration,
in particular on the ocassion of the ECOWAS ordinary
summit held in Abuja in July and, especially, during
the extrarodary summit held in Dakar on 25 October,
which was devoted to economic issues and regional
integration.

As in the past, the United Nations Office for West
Africa focused on carrying out its mandate through
actions aimed at preventing conflicts and crises by
supporting good offices, mediation and facilitation
efforts. During the period under review, in addition
to initial efforts to support the dialogue that led to the
Ouagadougou Agreement between the Government of
Mali and rebel groups in the north ofthe country, as well
as to support the electoral process in Togo, the Office
helped the parties in Guinea to implement the political
agreement of 3 July concerning the preparations for the
holding ofthe 2013 legislative elections. Those elections
were held peacefully on 23 September in conditions
deemed suitable in the Guinean context. During my
recent visit to Conakry, from 9 to 11 December, the
leader of the opposition reiterated to me the decision
to have those elected take their seats in the National
Assembly. The country's President also informed me
of his intention to convene the National Assembly
before the holidays at the end of the year. I took the
opportunity to encourage the Guinean parties to pursue
dialogue on the reforms necessary to consolidate their
democratic institutions and to work to entrench them
in the country's political life, including in the National
Assembly. I assured all parties of the ongoing support
of the United Nations.

I take this opportunity to reiterate my appreciation
to the Guinean parties and to the other members of
the follow-up committee for their cooperation and
support for my role as international facilitator. I also
thank the Council, the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Department for Political Affairs and the Peacebuilding
Support Office for their support for my efforts,
in particular through their contributions to the
Peacebuilding Fund.

The border demarcation process between Cameroon
and Nigeria has continued to benefit from the good
offices of the Secretary-General through his Special
Representative. In that respect, it is my pleasure to
inform the Council that the follow-up process to the
Greentree Agreement, signed in June 2006 by Cameroon
and Nigeria with the Secretary-General and marked by
the ceremony transferring authority over the Bakassi
area on 14 August 2008, was successfully concluded.
In fact, at the end of the five-year transition period,
characterized by a gradual return of trust between
the two countries, the heads of delegations of the two
parties, Cameroon and Nigeria, and myself signed ajoint
declaration on 22 October stating that, as of 14 August
2013, Cameroon exercised its sovereign rights over the
entire Bakassi zone. Moreover, significant progress
was made in demarcating the border, including placing
the markers. In addition, efforts are under way, in
cooperation with the United Nations country teams in
Cameroon and Nigeria, to promote local development
projects that will be benefit the people ofboth countries
on either side of their common border and help them
reaffirm their long-standing links of solidarity.

Above and beyond that significant success for
United Nations preventive diplomacy, I welcome the
climate of trust and cooperation that gradually emerged
between the two States as part of the process of
implementing the judgment of the International Court
of Justice under the auspices of the United Nations. In
order to illustrate that positive development for those
pivotal States of West Africa and Central Africa, I
note that over the past few years Nigeria has become
Cameroon's most important trading partner. The Office
has also supported initiatives to address the challenges
of regional security in the three fragile zones that have
been identified in West Africa.

With respect to the Sahel, the recent tour of
the Secretary-General to some Sahel countries,
accompanied by officials ofthe World Bank, the African
Union, the African Development Bank and the European
Union, helped to establish greater mobilization for the
Sahel and to strengthen the partnerships between States
of the region and the international community in the
search for sustainable solutions to the multidimensional
challenges ofthe Sahel. In following up on the Council's
request, the Office has established a coordinating
mechanism in Dakar for the various United Nations
entities implementing the strategy, including the
Office of the Special Envoy for the Sahel, the Regional
Humanitarian Coordinator for the Sahel, and the
African Office of the United Nations Development
Programme.

I am happy to inform the Council that there is now
positive momentum within the United Nations system
in Dakar, in coordination with all entities concerned,
for the coordinated and integrated implementation
of the United Nations strategy for the Sahel in the
framework of the steering committee led by the
Special Representative. In the coming weeks, we must
strive, under the authority of the Malian presidency
and together with the African Union and other
organizations, to implement the coordination platform
established during the ministerial meeting in Bamako
on 5 November.

The second area of tension that has required
sustained efforts is the Mano River basin. Once again,
I am pleased to inform the Council that significant
progress has been made in implementing resolutions
2000 (2011), 2062 (2012) and 2066 (2012), calling for
the development of a cross-border security strategy in
the Mano River area. Following a process initiated by
the Office, in close cooperation with ECOWAS and
the Mano River Union and with the support of United
Nations peacekeeping missions in the region, the Heads
of State of the Union adopted a strategy for cross-border
security in the Mano River Union at an extraordinary
session in Dakar on 25 October.

I am pleased to pay tribute to the leaders of the
region, as well as their ministers and respective
experts, for the enthusiasm they have shown and the
interest they have brought to bear on that initiative,
which is now fully owned by their institutions, namely,
ECOWAS and the Mano River Union. I also wish to
thank the President of the ECOWAS Commission,
the ECOWAS Commissioner for Political Affairs and
Security and the Secretary General of the Mano River
Union for their commitment and cooperation. We
launched the implemention ofthe strategy by organizing
in-depth consultations with civil society organizations
from countries of the region in Freetown from 11 to
13 December. Over the next few weeks, I will use my
stay in New York to intitiate in-depth consultations with
partners on providing support for the implementation
process of the strategy, together with ECOWAS and the
Mano River Union.

Finally, in an attempt to eliminate the threat of
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea,
efforts have been undertaken to implement the strategic
framework adopted at the Yaounde summit on 24 and
25 June, particularly by establishing an interregional
coordinating centre, which will be based in Cameroon.
The United Nations Offices in West and Central Africa
are working with ECOWAS, the Economic Community
of Central African States, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and other partners, including the Group
of Eight Plus Friends of the Gulf of Guinea, to ensure
follow-up to decisions made at the Yaounde summit.

Since the previous report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/384), the Office has pursued its support for the
development of regional capacities in security sector
reform and national initiatives, in cooperation with
such partners as the Department for Peacekeeping
Operations, the Peacebuilding Support Office and
the United Nations Development Programme. In that
respect, we have continued to support the process of
developing the ECOWAS Regional Framework on
Security Sector Reform and Governance. I am pleased
that the review of the relevant document is now in its
final stages.

In addition, countries of the region are pursuing
their efforts to combat drug trafficking and organized
crime. The updating of the ECOWAS Regional Action
Plan to Address the Growing Problem of Illicit Drug
Trafficking, Organized Crime, and Drug Abuse in
West Africa has been launched with the support of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, among
others. Likewise, the political committee of the West
Africa Coast Initiative has endorsed the revised concept
focusing its activities on entities fighting transnational
crime, which will contribute to strengthening the
institutional network combating drug trafficking in
West Africa.

I welcome the initiative of the French presidency to
devote a meeting ofthe Council to considering the issue
of drug trafficking and organized crime in West Africa,
thereby demonstrating the Council's unwavering
interest in these issues, which pose a genuine threat to
stability in the region.

With respect to the threat of terrorism, I note
that, at a brainstorming session organized by the
Office in Dakar in September, United Nations bodies,
ECOWAS, the African Union and centres for research
and studies associated with that initiative emphasized
the need to help the countries of the region and their
regional institutions to better understand the causes of
terrorism and their vulnerability to it, as well as the
factors that are fueling this growing threat. In that
regard, it is important to ensure that the many security
initiatives adopted by the various national, regional and
international stakeholders are coordinated in order to
ensure practical, effective and coordinated action to
address this growing threat.

The United Nations Office for West Africa has
actively pursued its work to involve women in conflict
prevention and resolution. In that regard, I am pleased to
inform the Council that, in the context of the follow-up
to the conclusions of the ministerial meeting organized
by the Office in 2010 with the relevant United Nations
entities, 12 out of 16 countries of West Africa have
adopted action plans on implementing resolution 1325
(2000). In that spirit, at every opportunity we make
use of the services of women who have benefited
from mediation training organized by our Office in
collaboration with UN Women.

Despite the praiseworthy efforts made by leaders
of West African countries and their people, the region
remains fragile and continues to require ongoing
support from the international community, especially
the United Nations. Many countries in West Africa,
including the most powerful, notably Nigeria, have
experienced shocks that pose risks and threats to peace,
stability and sustainable development.

The growing power of organized crime in different
forms, which benefits from porous borders and weak
national institutions, is, in my view, the most serious
menace. Organized crime feeds on weak institutions,
widespread corruption and on the impunity that in
turn exacerbates the situation. Moreover, West Africa
has to confront the risks of instability during electoral
procedures. In that regard, West Africa is preparing to
cope with a wave of crucial and sensitive elections in
the upcoming period.

I remain confident that the Council will be well
disposed to renewing the UNOWA mandate, particularly
given its important role in supporting efforts at conflict-
prevention and peacebuilding and thereby promoting
an environment conducive to sustainable development
in the West African region.
Ithank Council members for the sustained attention The President (spoke in French): I now invite
they are according to the situation in West Africa. Council members to consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 3.20 pm.
