Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
presiding over today's meeting, and to congratulate
Poland on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I wish the Polish
delegation every success and I thank you for holding
his open debate on children and armed conflict.

I like also thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for the extensive efforts she and
her Office are making to protect children in conflict
zones. These efforts are of great importance to the
Yemeni Government, as the recruitment or use of
children as soldiers is one of the six grave violations
prohibited by Yemeni legislation, in accordance with
the Yemeni Child Law and international conventions.
We also welcome the Executive Director of UNICEF.

The Houthi militias have recruited more than 30,000
children and are using them in the conflict. These
children have therefore become susceptible to violations,
including killing, maiming and sexual violence, and are
denied humanitarian aid, which has claimed the lives
of more than 3,279 children, constituting an egregious
violation of international humanitarian law and human
rights law as well as all protocols and conventions on
the protection of the children. The Houthi's rebellious
militias have destroyed the lives of more than 4 million
Yemeni children, forcing them to look for work owing to
the deteriorated economic and humanitarian conditions
caused by the war being waged there. The militias have
drawn them to the battlefront, tempting them with
money to sustain their families and ultimately shoving
them into the pits of death.

These processes of recruitment have included
children in schools, orphanages and juvenile
institutions in local communities, while more than
1.6 million children have been denied education in
the past two years alone. They have also embarked on
shelling, demolishing 2,372 schools in part or in whole.
They have used more than 1,600 schools as prisons
and military bunkers, which has jeopardized the lives
of these children. The children of Yemen living in the
areas controlled by these militias are brainwashed
and indoctrinated through the teaching of a warped
curriculum filled with notions that glorify violence,
sectarianism and incitement in a way that will have a
very long-term impact. It will indeed be very dangerous
for the future generations of Yemen if these extreme
ideologies are not eradicated and eliminated.

The Yemeni Government reiterates its commitment
to protecting children and shielding them from armed
conflict. In fact, that has always been the commitment
of the Government. The commitment manifests itself in
a number of actions taken by the Yemeni Government.
Given that we are short on time, I will not single out
all these actions, but we will inform the Council about
them in writing.

The armed Houthi militias have established
summer camps to attract children into their ranks,
which is an extension of their approach to exploiting
Yemeni children, in violation of all international
laws and norms. We look forward to accelerating the
implementation of the updated plan of action and road
map, which were signed in 2014. We also look forward
to the visit to Yemen of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Gamba, to gain a first-hand overview of
what is happening on the ground and direct experience
ofthe efforts being made by Yemen, especially in terms
of the efforts made by the centre for the rehabilitation
of child soldiers in Marib to reintegrate children. We
call on international organizations to establish similar
institutions for the reintegration of children.

We welcome the fact that the report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (S/2019/509)
takes note of the progress and commitments made by
the Yemeni Government in favour of the protection of
children. We welcome the cooperation and the serious
work of Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
We cannot overestimate the importance of a protective
approach towards children, with due consideration
for our remarks on the report and the significance of
changing the monitoring mechanisms that rely on
the parties or teams in Sana'a and accelerating the
implementation of agreed plans and programmes.

In conclusion, the conflict in Yemen will be
resolved only when its root causes are duly addressed
and a sustainable peace is achieved, thereby ending
the suffering of the Yemeni people. Peace should
be based on the agreed terms of reference, namely,
the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference, the relevant Security
Council resolutions - in particular resolution 2216
(2015) - and the reinstatement of the hijacked
State institutions.
