Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The draft resolution to be voted on today reflects the
rapid succession of events during the last two weeks,
since the beginning of the current crisis.

Since the beginning of this crisis, Egypt has called
for all possible efforts to be made to contain it through
dialogue and diplomatic means. Egypt has also called for
averting confrontation and escalation and any action that
would affect the stability of that sensitive part of the
world.

In this regard, I would like to pay tribute to the
efforts and the important contacts made recently by the
Secretary-General. I would like to express Egypt's
appreciation for the valuable effort made by the high-level
mission sent to Baghdad under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi.

In addition, Egypt spared no effort in conducting
contacts at all levels - at the highest levels - in
Baghdad, in Cairo and here in New York. Up to the very
last moment, we had hoped that all these efforts would be
successful in defusing the crisis and in persuading Iraq to
reverse its position, which would have negated the need
to put the draft resolution before the Council today to the
vote.

Egypt understands the feelings of despair and
frustration of the ordinary people of Iraq because of their
continued suffering, which results from the sanctions
imposed on Iraq. There is not even a glimmer of hope
that they will be lifted after the six and a half years

 

during which Iraq has been dealing with the United Nations
Special Commission. While we recognize that its
cooperation has not been ideal, it could be said that Iraq
has gone a long way in that direction.

Nonetheless, we do not see wisdom in Iraq's
insistence on its recent position with regard to the Special
Commission. Nor do we see wisdom in its lack of
responsiveness to the efforts we and other parties made to
dissuade it from insisting on this position. We do not see
wisdom in that position because it means squandering the
achievements made on Iraq's long road of cooperation with
the Special Commission over the past years. We do not see
any wisdom in this position because the completion of the
process of cooperation between Iraq and the Special
Commission and of Iraq's compliance with the relevant
resolutions of the Council is the means of lifting the
sanctions imposed on Iraq and, therefore, the means of
alleviating the suffering of our brothers, the Iraqi people.

On the other hand, the current crisis must be seen as
a good opportunity to extract lessons. The Council must
recognize this in its dealings with Iraq in the future. This
should be in a manner that takes into account the concerns
and suffering of the Iraqi people and the causes and
ramifications of the feelings of frustration that lead to the
taking of positions that, we hasten to reaffirm once again,
are unacceptable to us. Such positions do not serve the
interests of any party, including Iraq itself.

At yet another level, the Council should review the
Special Commission's methods of work in order to ensure
increased efficiency in carrying out its tasks as a subsidiary
organ of the Council, within the context of the current
dialogue taking place in the corridors of the United Nations
on the need to reform all United Nations bodies in general.
We are currently discussing reform and development in the
General Assembly and in all other bodies, and we must do
so here, too, so that we do not push Iraq, with its back to
the wall, into believing that it has nothing to gain from its
continued cooperation with the Commission and nothing to
lose from a cessation of that cooperation.

At any rate, we share the conviction of many
delegations, both members and non-members of the
Council, regarding the necessity always to comply fully
with constitutional provisions and legal standards by not
depriving any State Member of the United Nations of the
right to express its view before the Council, in accordance
with Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter. This is the right of
all States Members of the United Nations, especially if the
question relates to sanctions imposed on that State under
Chapter VII of the Charter. Such sanctions cause human
suffering, as is well known.

In this context, I call upon the Council to take into
very serious account the comments made by the
Secretary-General in his talking points for his briefing of
the members of the Council on 10 November with regard
to the outcome of the mission of his envoys to Iraq:

(spoke in English)

"Had Iraq agreed to return to full compliance,
1 would have had no hesitation to recommend to the
Council that Iraq be granted a hearing by the
Council in whatever format the Council might deem
appropriate. I believe it is reasonable for any country
being at the receiving end of United Nations
sanctions to ask for such a hearing provided it
strictly complies with the resolutions of the
Council."

(spoke in Arabic)

The delegation of Egypt today finds itself in the very
sensitive position of voting on a draft resolution that
imposes any kind of sanctions on an Arab State. Indeed,
we abstained in the voting on the draft resolution adopted
by the Council last month as resolution 1134 (1997),
which hinted at the imposition of some additional
sanctions but did not go beyond that to their enforcement.
But today we view the question from various angles. The
delegation of Egypt participated in the consultations on
the draft resolution. It proposed some amendments,
including the addition of a paragraph on respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of both Kuwait and
Iraq. Fortunately, the sponsors responded positively to
that amendment. The consultations also resulted in the
deletion of some formulations in the preliminary draft that
implicitly threatened dire consequences and the use of
various methods in dealing with Iraq. Despite our very
difficult position, Iraq's lack of responsiveness to the
many and intensive efforts we and many other States
made up to the very last minute leaves us with no choice
but to vote in favour of the draft resolution in the hope
that Iraq will alter its position and resume its cooperation
with the Special Commission in a manner that will ensure
the lifting of the sanctions and an end to the suffering of
the brotherly Iraqi people.

While we intend to vote in favour of the draft
resolution, we would like to place on record here our
understanding that the travel restrictions contained in the

 

draft resolution must not obstruct Egypt's discharge of its
responsibilities as the host country of the headquarters of
the League of Arab States. This involves facilitating the
participation of the States members of the League in its
meetings held in Cairo. This is a responsibility which Egypt
has the honour to undertake in its capacity as the host
country, under the Charter of the League of Arab States.
We should like also to place on record, and very clearly,
our conviction that the draft resolution contains nothing that
could open the way to an escalation of the situation, to the
use of force or to resort to a military option. We hope that
dialogue and the use of diplomatic means will continue,
that normal relations will be resumed between Iraq and the
Special Commission and that the constructive and fruitful
cooperation between them will be resumed in manner that
will enable the Council to consider lifting the sanctions
imposed on the Iraqi people.

