Mr. Maas (Germany): I am pleased to participate
in today's important Security Council debate under the
leadership of French Foreign Minister Le Drian. Sitting
next to him here in the Council underlines how closely
France and Germany are working together as Council
members in advancing multilateralism and cooperating
on the ground, for example in Mali.
I was reminded of how important that is during my
visit to Mali a few weeks ago. I vividly remember a
discussion I had with young people in Gao. They told
me about how they fought to resist Islamist terrorism
in 2013. They also talked about how they have been
working to promote peace since then. They did not
allow their freedom, including the freedom of thought,
to be taken away. How did they find the courage to
do this? "Because it is our country", they told me. To
me, this was encouraging, because it is the women
and men of Mali who hold the key to a peaceful future
for their country. That is why I am very pleased that
Prime Minister Maiga has joined us today for this
important discussion.

The road to peace and reconciliation is long. Even
though Malian leadership plays a critical role, Mali will
continue to need international support as it travels down
that road. It will need the Security Council right by its
side. Our message today is that the Council is ready
to support it. The Council underlined this fact with its
trip to Mali and Burkina Faso the last week, which was
organized by Germany, France and Cote d'Ivoire. The
European Union to is ready to continue training and
supporting the Malian security forces.

Our support to Mali is provided thanks to the
civilian staff, police officers and soldiers of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), who often serve at great
risk to their lives. I heard first-hand how dangerous the
mission is from the women and men in uniform whom
I met in Gao. They are doing a fantastic job, and we are
all most grateful to all of them. The work of MINUSMA
deserves our full support. MINUSMA needs a strong
and comprehensive mandate. Germany will continue to
work in the Security Council towards this end. We are
prepared to continue to participate in MINUSMA with
our largest Blue Helmet contingent. Germany stands
shoulder to shoulder with Mali and its people.

The terrible massacre that took place last week near
Mopti demonstrated how great the threat still is. More
than 160 people were killed, including many women
and children. The perpetrators of this despicable crime
must be brought to justice. It should remind all of us
how important it is to do everything possible to improve
the security situation.

Regional cooperation in the Sahel region also
remains important because many of the challenges do
not stop at national borders. We call upon the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to rapidly make the
Joint Force fully operational, which is an effort being
supported by Germany and the European Union.
In addition, MINUSMA should continue to play an
important role in supporting the G-5 Sahel.

No matter how much MINUSMA is helping to
provide stability in Mali, a peace mission cannot replace
the political process. It is therefore very important that
the Government has set important reforms in motion.
The Secretary-General is right to point out in his report
(S/2019/262) that the peace process has recently gained
new momentum. The demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration of former fighters are making progress.
Work on reforming the Constitution has gotten under
way. These reforms must steadily continue, and
the upcoming parliamentary elections are another
important step.

But something else is needed as well. To have truly
lasting peace, it must be ensured that human rights
are respected, women play a major role in the peace
process, the different social groups and regions in
Mali are brought together, State structures are built up
everywhere in the country, and economic opportunities
are created, especially for young people. This is a
tremendous task, but I am convinced that it can be
done because Mali has a great advantage * it has a
strong and vibrant civil society, and it has young people
who believe in the future of Mali and who, in the face
of many difficulties, have decided to stay and build a
future for themselves because it is their country. These
people need our support, and I believe they deserve it.

