Mr. Mialkovskyi (Ukraine): I thank you, Madam,
for convening this important thematic debate.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union (EU). At the same
time I would like to make a statement in my national
capacity.

Numerous conflicts throughout the world have
created an environment in which the United Nations
alone cannot respond effectively to emerging threats to
international peace and security. In that regard, I would
like to underscore that Chapter VIII is as relevant today
as ever. Regional organizations, with their experience
in the peaceful settlement of disputes, including
through conflict prevention, confidence-building and
mediation, are strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations.

Deep cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations is a vital element in
the contemporary world, where the international
community is facing such complex challenges. We
firmly support the efforts of the United Nations to
strengthen its relations with regional organizations,
with the ultimate goal of achieving a concrete, positive
impact on the political and socioeconomic development
of the regions.

In 2015, we are marking the seventieth anniversary
of the end of the Second World War and of the signing
of the Charter of the United Nations. Throughout
these 70 years, the United Nations has faced numerous
and complex challenges, including terrorism and
extremism, conflicts, poverty, unemployment,
inequality and climate change. Unfortunately, today we
can add to that list a brutal violation of the Charter of
the United Nations by one of the permanent members of
the Security Council.

Soon it will be a year and a half that Ukraine has
been subject to Russian aggression. The Council is
well aware of the outcomes - Crimea and Sevastopol
have been forcibly annexed, while the Donbas has
been plunged into violence, with thousands killed,
over 1 million displaced and regional infrastructure
destroyed. The contribution of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has been
an important part of the international community's
response to the threats arising from Russia's aggression
against Ukraine. We highly appreciate the work of
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, in line with
the agreed mandate covering the entire territory
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized
borders. The Mission enjoys Ukraine's full support
in the implementation of its tasks, in particular those
related to monitoring and verification under the Minsk
agreements.

We regret the fact that, despite significant
international efforts, the situation on the ground remains
tense and volatile, with casualties among Ukrainian
servicemen and civilians on the rise due to a surge in
the activity of Russia-backed militants. Although we
have made active use of the crisis mechanisms of the
United Nations and the OSCE, that has not prevented the
illegal occupation of Crimea and Sevastopol, or direct
Russian military involvement in the Donbas. Moreover,
Russia continues to consolidate its aggression despite
its own commitments to de-escalation under the Minsk
agreements.

In the current circumstances, we believe that the
capacity of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
should be strengthened, including by increasing the
level of cooperation with the United Nations. In that
respect, we look forward to hearing from the Secretary-
General on how the United Nations can assist the OSCE
in contributing to the implementation of the Minsk
agreement, in particular with regard to his idea to
establish a relevant United Nations office in Ukraine.

The development of a strong partnership between
the United Nations and the European Union is
increasingly critical as global crises intensify in
complexity and multiply in scope. In the case of the
EU, that might be achieved by making effective use of
the existing common security and defence policy tools,
including by better linking them to the EU's foreign
affairs, humanitarian assistance and solidarity.

In terms of the Russian aggression in Ukraine,
we still think that the EU Common Security and
Defence Policy crisis management operation could
be one of the appropriate solutions, not only allowing
for the maintainance of peace and security, but also
facilitating political processes, protecting civilians and
human rights, and assisting in restoring the rule of law.
We believe that if our suggestion were implemented, it
could enhance the arsenal of measures already in place
to make Russia abide by the rules and live in peace with
its neighbours.

I would like to underscore that Ukraine fully
recognizes the important role that OSCE plays in
observing the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
At the same time, achieving a comprehensive settlement
and lasting peace in certain areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions requires additional efforts, including
the involvement of available international means and
tools.

In recent years, cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization for Democracy and
Economic Development-GUAM, which Ukraine
chairs this year, has developed with General
Assembly resolution 69/271 on United Nations-GUAM
cooperation. One example I could mention is the ongoing
projects with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), such as the Afghan Opiate Trade
Project of the UNODC and the joint GUAM/UNODC
project in combatting money-laundering, as well as in
seizing and confiscating criminal proceeds. GUAM
also plans to develop cooperation with the United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe and the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.

The political cooperation of GUAM. member
States is based on their common vision and well-
rooted traditions. The statutory documents and summit
declarations of GUAM. are in line with basic United
Nations approaches to regional cooperation, creating
political stability and economic prosperity, allowing
universal values to take hold and establishing a peaceful
and promising civil society that enables personal
fulfilment.

All our member States suffer from unresolved
conflicts, some ofwhich have existed for decades. Those
conflicts undermine peace, security and cooperation
and generate impacts both at the regional level and in
their trans-Atlantic dimension. Triggered from outside
and accompanied by foreign military interference, such
conflicts can find a peaceful resolution exclusively on
the basis of the generally accepted norms and principles
of international law, particularly those related to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the States
concerned within their internationally recognized
borders.

The activities of GUAM. during the ongoing
Ukrainian chairmanship have encompassed a number
of projects and programmes aimed at the creation of
a zone of stability and cooperation in the region. As
already mentioned, since the occupation of Crimea
Ukraine has faced an expanded Russian aggression of
hybrid character on its eastern borders, accompanied by
an unprecedented media campaign. Therefore, we look
forward more than ever to obtaining further support for
GUAM. efforts, which would be aimed, first of all, at
building the capacities of its member States. It is also
a matter of crucial importance to keep pace with and
increase the dynamic ofprojects that would energize the
economic sector as well as enhance security measures.
