Mr. Judeh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): This quarterly
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
is being held at a time when the entire Middle East
region is grappling with increasing and unprecedented
tensions, upheavals and challenges that seriously not
only threaten international peace and security, but also
regional peace and security. Convinced of that truth,
this quarterly meeting is being held at the ministerial
level, as the State members of the Security Council
are aware of the seriousness of the situation in the
Middle East, especially in the occupied Palestinian
territories at its core, including Al-Haram Al-Sharif
and the occupied Al-Aqsa Mosque. They are convinced
of the need to work immediately to curb its potentially
dangerous consequences and to attempt to restore peace
and stability throughout the region, so as to pave the
way to a lasting solution to all of the challenges, threats
and tensions in the Middle East.

The last two months witnessed another dangerous
escalation by the Israeli occupying authorities in the
occupied West Bank in general, including acts of
aggression carried out by, or under the protection of,
Israel against Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in particular. This represents a continuing
and flagrant violation of a series of previous Security
Council resolutions that considered, firmly and clearly,
all the measures undertaken by the Israeli occupying
authorities in occupied East Jerusalem in its entirety
absolutely null and void, in conformity with the clear
and decisive recognition of the Security Council that
East Jerusalem in its entirety, including Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque, is part of the
territories that were militarily occupied by Israel in
1967, in accordance with the norms of international law
and international humanitarian law.

Furthermore, this escalation and these Israeli acts
of aggression, which are dangerous and have been
condemned and rejected, in addition to the violations in
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, have resulted in the deterioration
of the situation, in a way that puts us on the verge of a
devastating religious war. These acts fuel and provoke
the sentiments of more than 1.5 billion Muslims
throughout the world, all the more so because the
occupied Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque are a place of worship for Muslims exclusively.
In addition, these acts of aggression have a devastating
impact on the opportunities to resume the negotiation
process between Palestinians and Israel aimed at
bringing about Israeli-Palestinian peace by means
of a solution based on the peace process established
under international terms of reference, resolutions of
international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative,
with all its elements.

The position of my country, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, led by his Majesty King Abdullah
II, is to carry out the two-State solution, put an end to
the occupation, create the independant Palestinian State
enjoying full sovereignty on its territories on the the
borders of4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
find solutions to all the core questions - Al-Quds,
refugees, security, borders, water - in keeping with the
pillars I previously mentioned, and in such a way that
safeguards and achieves the high interests of Jordan,
which are related to all those issues, especially Al-Quds
and the refugees. This is the only solution that will help
us to avoid the dangers and violence that we see every
day, such as what we are all talking about concerning
the possible dictation of the one-State solution, which
the President referred to in his statement.

Because of the recent violations in the occupied
Palestinian territories committed by the Israeli
occupation authorities, or under their protection and
watch, in occupied East Jerusalem in general and the
violations against Al-Haram Al-Sharif/the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in particular, we have seen signals of a major
and widespread escalation in the situation, which
could spin out of the control of any party. Its impacts,
especially in terms of the violence, the killings and the
counter Violence, could extend beyond the occupied
Palestinian territories in a way that would threaten
international peace and security.

I reiterate here Jordan's principled position
condemning the targeting of civilians, regardless of
its motives and reasons. The Israeli Government must
renounce the tactics and arguments of its internal
coalitions, which are no longer secret to anyone. The
Government must adopt an approach to match its
repeated claims of commitment to peace with actions
and policies leading to peace, instead of pursuing its
policy of divisiveness and the flagrant contradiction
between what it says and what it does.

Peace will not be achieved if Israeli's unjust
attacks on the Christian and Muslim holy sites in
occupied East Jerusalem continue. Peace will not
emerge from continued unilateral Israeli measures
aimed at prejudging the results of the negotiations
on essential issues, first and foremost of which is the
Israeli settlements policy. We will come no closer to
peace with the continuation and escalation of Israel's
collective punishment against Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territories and its continuation
in imposing closures, blockade, the erecting of
walls of separation, demolishing homes, killing of
innocents, the seizure of land and other measures
that violate international law, international human
rights and international legitimacy. Peace will not be
achieved if Israel remains wedded to those illusions
and attempts to convince the world that undertaking
symbolic and economic steps to improve the lives of
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territories, even though those measures are important,
will be an objective in themselves, not only a means
on the road to put an end to the Israeli occupation and
to establish an economy of an independent and fully
sovereign Palestinian State living in genuine peace
and security side by side, and with, the States of the
region and their peoples. Comprehensive Arab-Israeli
peace, in turn, will not be achieved without Israeli-
Palestinian peace and a two-State solution. We will not
be able to effectively and sustainably fight terrorism or
extremism or triumph and see the values of the whole
of humankind prevail without Israeli-Palestinian peace
and Arab-Israeli peace.

Jordan remains committed, under the leadership
of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein,
to achieving a permanent, fair and comprehensive
peace on the basis of international law and the agreed
terms of reference. That commitment is firm and
an internationally recognized strategic choice. Our
credibility within the framework of that commitment
does not need to be proved. Our commitment, duty
and responsibility with regard to the preservation
and protection of Muslim and Christian holy sites in
occupied East Jerusalem, with Al-Haram Al-Sharif/
Al-Aqsa Mosque at its very heart, fall within the
framework of the Hashemite protection of those holy
sites. That protection is assured by His Majesty King
Abdullah II, who is the guardian of those holy sites. His
commitment is unequalled.

When we say that the Israeli occupation authorities
continue and escalate their violations in the occupied
East Jerusalem and against the Islamic and Christian
holy sites, including Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Al-Aqsa
Mosque, we are not exaggerating. Those ongoing,
increasing and dangerous Violations, which have
worsened anew over the past two months and led to
deterioration in the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and has brought it to the brink of exploding,
violates the historic status quo of the Christian and
Muslim holy sites.

The Israeli Government claims that it preserves it,
as it is not in keeping with the Israeli commitments
pursuant to article 9 of the Israeli-Jordanian peace
agreement. It also runs counter to the legal obligations
of Israel as the occupying Power in keeping with the
provisions of international law and international
humanitarian law, which are strengthened by
international resolutions adopted by United Nations
entities. We in Jordan, as always, will deal with these
Israeli acts of aggression, which are condemned and
rejected. If they continue, they will undermine the
peace process, its prospects and all of its achievements.

We have said it before and we will say it again: Jordan
uses all diplomatic and legal options available to it to
put an end to these brazen and irresponsible violations
of international law. I note that the diplomatic options
chosen by Jordan have in the past forced Israel at various
periods and stages to adopt a number of temporary
measures to calm the situation, and it did temporarily.
However, later, Israel has always continued its attempts
to modify the historical status quo in violation of all
understandings and agreements, which were agreed
by Israel. Jordan has therefore closely considered the
legal options to address the Israeli violations, and will
continue to proceed in that direction with the aim of
putting an end to these Violations, protect Al-Haram
Al-Sharif/Al-Aqsa Mosque, and ensure that Israel
respect its international legal commitments.

We also ask the Council to assume its responsibilities
in this regard, because these violations committed
by the Israeli occupation and the situation, which
are universally condemned, represent a real threat
to international peace and security. We must adopt
protection measures to ensure that these condemned
aggressions are monitored and that they do not recur
once the historical status quo has been restored, as
opposed to the new situation being created on a daily
basis by the Israeli actions in the Islamic and Christian
holy sites. We must restore and preserve that historical
status quo, in both word and deed.

Jordan, under the leadership of His Majesty King
Abdullah II, has undertaken a number of measures
to protect the holy sites in Al-Quds. The King has a
crucial role to play with regard to Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and to the Islamic and Christian holy sites within the
framework of the historic Hashemite protection of the
holy sites, which must be strengthened and supported
at the Arab-Islamic level through words, deeds and
various measures. Israeli occupation aggression and
schemes in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and against the holy
sites, especially Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Al-Aqsa Mosque,
cannot be successfully and comprehensively challenged
except through collective, coordinated, comprehensive
and harmonized Arab, Islamic and international efforts
that effectively utilize the available measures to deter
Israeli aggression against the holy sites. These measures
should be strengthened, especially with respect to the
historical Hashemite protection and the protection
afforded by His Majesty the King to the holy sites. We
need to promote the role and work of the Islamic waqfs,
which are part and parcel the prerogative of the Waqf
Ministry.

The topic of our meeting is "The situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question". I
would now like to touch upon Syria, where the situation
is deteriorating.

We have all been witness to a number of alarming
trends. The impact of the deteriorating situation has
gone beyond Syria and its immediate neighbours to
be felt internationally. I refer to the Syrian displaced
and asylum-seekers, who no longer limit themselves to
seeking refuge in neighbouring States. Jordan is among
those States that have welcomed a growing number of
Syrian refugees, who now number 1.5 million in Jordan,
some ofwhom are officially registerted as refugees and
some are not. That is a burden on our budget and costs
us billions ofdollars at a time when my country is facing
huge economic challenges as a result, in great part, of
the very difficult situation in the Middle East. We are
sharing our very limited resources with our brothers and
sisters and making our infrastructure available to them,
on behalf of humankind as a whole, but our capacities
are overstretched. The international community should
help us in bearing this very heavy burden. Criminal
gangs and terrorists continue to control vast stretches
of territory in Syria, which of course constitutes a very
significant threat to that brotherly country.

We in Jordan reiterate our firm belief, as we have
over the past five years, that a comprehensive diplomatic
solution is the only solution to this crisis. Such a
political solution, based on the decisions of the Geneva
I Conference on Syria and supported by the whole
world, must be comprehensive. It must be inclusive and
meets the aspirations of the Syrian people, the outcome

of agreement among all components of Syria, and
lead to transition to a new political realitydesired by
the Syrian people. It must enable us to put an end to
terrorism, which is also an objective we all agree upon.
It should restore stability and security throughout Syria,
allowing for voluntary return of internally displaced
persons and refugees to their cities, towns and villages.
And it must preserve the territorial integrity of Syria
and its political independence. We therefore renew our
continued support to all efforts to open the door to a
new comprehensive political solution.

I reiterate my country's support to efforts aimed
at confronting and defeating terrorism in brotherly
Iraq. I emphasize that our Victory in that regard
hinges quite organically on our efforts to combat and
eliminate terrorism in Syria and requires a unified,
comprehensive and coordinated approach from all us
to fight terrorism in those two brotherly countries and
the region as a whole. Terrorism is now a major and
immediate threat and is no longer a challenge faced by
any single country. It is a spreading scourge leading
to violence, hatred, division and rejection of others.
Today gangs of terrorists and criminals are spreading
and extending in various forms and manifestations
and have become a threat to international peace and
security. Terrorism exploits and distorts the very noble
Muslim religion to serve its own callous interests. As
His Majesty King Abdullah has said,

"The war against those terrorism gangs and
mavericks of this era is above all that of Arabs and
Muslims before any other, and we do wage it to
defend our great religion, our noble civilization and
to preserve peace and security in our States and for
our peoples."

My country's position concerning the ongoing
crises in Libya and the situation in brotherly Yemen
and efforts to restore legality, of which we are part, is
well known, and I will distribute it in the full text of my
written statement. But I would just like to emphasize
that the political process in Libya should continue.
We urge all states and parties to abide by the results
of the Skhirat agreement and the need for all to sign
this agreement, which ensures stable peace for Libya.
As far as Yemen is concerned, we endorse a political
path that underscores the legality of the Government
and presidency of that country.

Finally, I reiterate that the very dangerous and
unprecedented situation in our region, especially in
the occupied Palestinian territories, and the ongoing
and escalating Israeli Violations in East Jerusalem and
its holy sites, require the Council to act and assume
its responsibilities, in keeping with the Charter of the
United Nations, to manage and resolve the crisis and
prevent further escalation.

