Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to convey to you, Sir, on behalf
of the Group of Arab States, our most sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. We are convinced that,
thanks to your wisdom and skills, the Council's work
will be successful.

At this first open meeting of the Council this
year, I cannot fail to congratulate Guinea, Syria,
Cameroon, Bulgaria and Mexico on their election to
the Council. I would also like to take this opportunity
to wish my friend Jorge Navarrete much family
happiness and every success in his new functions back
home.

The Security Council is meeting today to discuss
international terrorism and, in particular, the efforts by
States at the regional level to coordinate their counter-
terrorism policies for combating these ignoble acts.

In his statement, Sir Jeremy Greenstock shed
light on a number of important aspects of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee which was established pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). What he
has told us enriches our debate and will help us focus
on practical measures to eradicate international
terrorism and make progress in terms of international
cooperation to this end.

In participating in this Security Council debate,
the Arab Group is animated by the wish to make a
positive, concrete contribution to international efforts
against terrorism, in compliance with resolution 1373
(2001) of 28 September. As soon as this resolution was
adopted, the Arab countries established all the national
and regional mechanisms necessary to ensure the
implementation of the provisions of the resolution in
the best possible conditions. The Arab countries that
did not yet have the required structures have now set
them up in order to coordinate action among the
various competent organs in this field. They have also
updated existing laws and legislation in order to act
effectively against terrorism. They have adopted
preventive and deterrent measures, including controls
on suspicious sources of financing. The Arab countries
will pursue these efforts to update their legal systems.
If necessary, they will call for assistance from countries
and organizations with experience in this field in order
to achieve the purposes and principles of the Charter.

At the regional level, the Arab countries have
taken the initiative of creating a group of experts
within the League of Arab States in order to coordinate
their efforts in the implementation of action taken by
our countries pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001). The
group met on 13 and 14 January of this year and issued
a statement in which it spoke of the Arab States'
support for United Nations efforts to adopt a
comprehensive international convention against
terrorism and, in particular, to find a definition for this
phenomenon. The Arab States remain convinced that a
definition will facilitate the efforts of the international
community, especially those of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, to clarify various perspectives and
positions. The Arab countries also believe that we must
avoid any misuse of the term "terrorism" to serve
particular interests in political disputes.

Everyone knows that in times of conflict the rules
of international humanitarian law must be respected by
all parties, whether governmental or non-governmental.
Therefore, one cannot justify any infringement or
attack on the life and dignity of an innocent civilian
population, children, women and the elderly in
particular.

In keeping with these rules and standards, the
international legal system grants the Palestinian people,
whose most basic human rights are being flouted, the
right to self-defence in the current difficult and
sensitive conditions in the Middle East - conditions
and circumstances that have led to tragic events on a
daily basis with respect to the suffering of the
Palestinian people. We cannot but condemn the grave
violations of international humanitarian law being
endured by the Palestinian people, in particular,
attempts to kill people, starve them, displace them,
deprive them of their freedoms, block and lay siege to
their cities and restrict their freedom of movement.
Such practices, among others, strike international
public opinion and awaken its conscience, leading to
the demand for action to put an end to these practices.

What is even more serious is some people's
attempt to take advantage of the events of 11
September to achieve advances at the expense of the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. Such
attempts would have a disastrous effect on the peace
process and undeniably negative consequences for the
credibility of any efforts by the international
community in combating terrorism.

Despite all these challenges, the Arab Group
hopes that dialogue and negotiation will prevail over
violence so that the Middle East may break the cycle of
threats, accusation and violence.

The international legal system, as enshrined in
United Nations resolutions since 1947, stipulates that
two States should exist, recognize each other and co-
exist in peace and security. The time has come for the
Palestinians to obtain a State, with Jerusalem as its
capital. It is also time for Israel to be convinced that its
best guarantee of security comes through this basic
demand of the Palestinian people and through Israeli
withdrawal from occupied Syrian and Lebanese land,
in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions.

This statement, made to the Council today on
behalf of the Arab Group, is not just a one-time event.
We are reaffirming cultural principles and values
enshrined in our civilization that have guided us for
centuries.

History has recorded that the Islamic world was
at the forefront of the implementation of humanitarian
principles well before international humanitarian law
was codified, and it sought to secure respect for the
rights of minorities. They ensured that dialogue and
coexistence with other peoples and religions prevailed.

Based on these cultural values, the Arab States
have condemned international terrorism in all its forms
and sources.

Combating terrorism requires that measures be
taken to prevent the recurrence of such terrorist acts. It
also requires that we address the fundamental causes of
these events, with the understanding that attempts to
understand the motives of terrorism does not in any
way mean that one is attempting to justify or
rationalize it. It is one thing to understand this
phenomenon and another to justify it. I must recall
what the Secretary-General himself said on more than
one occasion, which was that the events of 11
September should not make us forget the problems that
the world faced on 10 September and that pushed some
to the edge of despair and recklessness. The basic
problems are the spread of ignorance, misery,
deprivation and the aggravation of the economic and
social gap between peoples.

If we truly wish to be worthy of humanity, we
must mobilize all our energies to face these challenges,
despite their severity. It is our duty today to eliminate
all displays of hatred or rancour against minorities,
wherever they may occur. We must act to prevent all
slander and defamation campaigns against the Arab
and Muslim communities.

The Arab Group is convinced that every effort
must be made to deal with these scourges, because by
addressing them we will be able to eliminate
international terrorism. Globalization, which has
become a reality of life politically, strategically and
economically, requires us to act at the level of the
international community as a whole. This collective
concerted effort does not negate or diminish the
responsibility that we must each shoulder, but, to the
contrary, it helps us shoulder our responsibilities in the
best possible way.

