Mr. Oshima: I am grateful for the opportunity to
address the Council once again on the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

There could be no more appropriate occasion to
review the progress we have made and the challenges
remaining in protecting the lives, rights and
fundamental freedoms of civilians around the world
than this day - International Human Rights Day. In
this respect, I would like to take the opportunity to
convey the special thanks of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Sergio Vieira de Mello, for the
holding of this open session on protection of civilian
populations in armed conflict today, 10 December,
World Human Rights Day. This is a clear recognition
on the part of the Council that this is a central concern
in both the human rights and the humanitarian fields.

Over the past three years, we have provided the
Council and Member States with a solid framework of
practical measures to protect and assist vulnerable
populations caught in conflict situations. Much
progress has been made in drawing attention to the
plight of the millions of civilians who have died over
the last decade alone as a result of armed conflict, the
tens of millions who have been displaced by war and
the countless numbers of women and children deprived
of a future and a life free from fear.

We have raised awareness of the steps and
measures that are needed to protect civilians more
effectively, both physically and legally. We have
succeeded in drawing greater attention to the
complexity and interconnectedness of the challenges
posed by the vulnerability of civilians in violent
conflict. The Council itself has given greater priority to
the protection of civilians and has on several occasions
indicated its willingness to apply the findings and
lessons enshrined in the Aide Memoire it adopted 15
March 2002 (S/PRST/2002/6, annex). The review of
the mandates of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and, just recently, of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) for the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo is only one example
that demonstrates that there is no substitute for the
willingness to act if we want to transcend the sheer
endless cycles of violence.

Also, a number of the world's protracted
conflicts- Afghanistan, Angola, Sudan, Sri Lanka
and now Aceh in Indonesia - have started to subside
or have entered a transitional period from conflict to
peace. That is additional proof of the indispensability
of engaging the parties to a conflict in a political
process and of the responsibility to provide incentives
for sustainable peace in which we do not lose sight of
protection priorities. However, those encouraging
developments must not make us complacent or make us
slow down. The establishment of the culture of
protection called for by the Secretary-General in his
most recent report is still a distant goal.

Civilians remain the main casualties of conflict
today. The violence and attacks in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in Cote
d'Ivoire, in the occupied Palestinian territory and in
Burundi are only the most recent reminders of that fact.
Daily, such violence and attacks take an unacceptable,
high toll in human life and livelihood. Civilians are
also in dire need of protection and assistance in many
other crisis situations around the world.

While we continue to move on, jointly,
implementing and mainstreaming the recommendations
of the previous two reports of the Secretary-General
(S/l999/957 and S/200l/33l), we must not forget to
bring new challenges to the Council's attention and to
remind its member States of the many unresolved
challenges that remain in protecting the vulnerable. In
my view, the Security Council has been, and continues
to be, an appropriate forum in which to discuss those
1ssues.

This third report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (8/2002/1300)
identifies three significant new challenges to the
international community, Member States and agencies
alike: the gender-based violence in humanitarian crisis
and conflict situations; the harmful consequences of
the commercial exploitation of conflict; and the
escalating threat of global terrorism. At the same time,
the report reiterates three key findings of previous
reports: the need for safe and unimpeded access to
vulnerable populations; the importance of separating
civilians from armed elements in camps for displaced
persons; and the centrality of vigorously promoting
respect for the rule of law in conflict areas.

In order to create a culture of protection, the
States Members of the United Nations, as well as
departments, funds and agencies, have worked
collectively to devise the necessary policy and
analytical framework for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. In addition, we have intensified our
efforts to raise the level of awareness and
understanding of Member States and agencies of the
multifaceted nature of protection and of the toolkit now
available to us.

The aide-memoire adopted by the Council in
March after an exemplary interactive process among
Council members and United Nations departments and
agencies is the centrepiece of those efforts. Serving as
a checklist for Council deliberations, it also represents
the Ten Commandments, as it were, of protection and
is the backbone of our training exercises. Its first
practical application came in July as the Security
Council convened a workshop reviewing the
peacekeeping mandate in Sierra Leone. Along the lines
of the aide-memoire, participants reviewed the United
Nations mandate in the Mano river region, measuring
its operational effectiveness by its success in meeting
the protection and assistance needs of civilians. We
welcome that approach and look forward to additional
and regular reviews of other peace operation efforts in
areas of serious concern in terms of the protection of
civilians.

Also, as indicated earlier, the Security Council
has started to take into account the protection needs of
civilians in its recent revision of the United Nations
mandate in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
resulting resolution, resolution 1445 (2002), affirmed
an expansion and the location of additional resources,
taking into account the Council's deep concern over the
humanitarian situation throughout the country and, in
particular, in the Ituri region. It called for full
humanitarian access and guarantees of the physical
security of humanitarian workers. That is the
implementation we are calling for: the protection of
civilians agenda in action.

Moreover, as suggested during my last briefing to
the Council on this matter, in March, we have now held
the first three of a series of regional workshops on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The first one,
held in South Africa, covered the Southern African
region; the second, held in Japan, covered South-East
Asia and the Pacific; and the third, recently held in the
United Kingdom, covered Europe, including the
Balkans and Russia. To date, some 30 countries have
participated in those workshops. I wish to express my
special thanks to the Governments of South Africa,
Canada, Japan and the United Kingdom for their
support in that respect.

Aiming specifically at Government officials,
diplomats and military staff of Member States, the
workshops are an important means of familiarizing
participants with the basic concept and multiple facets
of protection, of providing the tools for more effective
physical and legal protection in practice, and of
building a growing consensus and constituency around
the concept of protection. The workshops specifically
promote the use of diagnostic tools such as the aide-
memoire to assess potential regional threats to peace
and security and to identify ways to address them. In
that way, the policy work that has been deliberated here
in New York is making its way into political capitals
and, ultimately, into the communities experiencing
conflict. Those are the first steps on a long march
towards establishing the culture of protection. The
workshops will be followed by at least three more next
year, in the Pacific Rim, Africa and Latin America. So
far, I am very encouraged by the response of Member
States to the workshops and by their commitment.

As we all know, progress in protecting civilians
cannot be measured in workshops and policy
discussions. What ultimately matters is the effect those
efforts have on the concrete situation of civilians in the
field. What matters is the implementation of the
recommendations made in previous reports. I am aware
that this is not an easy task and that it will require a
continuing and persistent effort. However, it is the
humanitarian imperative to persist. Great importance is
therefore attached to the road map called for by the
Security Council in June 2001. Clarity of
responsibilities and tasks will help bring about
expeditious implementation.

The initial road map that has been annexed to the
third report of the Secretary-General is a preliminary
version, prepared in consultation with the relevant
United Nations departments, agencies and funds. It
reorganizes recommendations from the previous two
reports, on which the Council has agreed, by theme. It
is intended to provide a broad initial picture. A more
thorough process of detailed consultation with Member
States, United Nations bodies, departments, funds and
agencies is now needed. The ultimate objective is to
produce a plan of action for implementation, with
specific responsibilities assigned, and with time frames
where appropriate.

Effective implementation of the agenda on the
protection of civilians requires the continued
engagement and support of Member States. I am
extremely encouraged by the establishment this week
of a support group of Member States, led by Norway,
to create a broader support base for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The group aims to develop
momentum and focus among Member States by
creating a forum to promote conceptual, technical,
financial and political support for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. It will also serve as a forum
for information exchange between Member States and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) on behalf of the humanitarian
community. I thank the Government of Norway for
taking the lead in this very important initiative; we
look forward to working closely with the members of
the support group.

Secondly, within the Secretariat, the Secretary-
General's Executive Committee on Humanitarian
Affairs, the coordinating body of United Nations
agencies dealing with humanitarian concerns, decided
recently to create an implementation group for the
protection of civilians. That group will spearhead the
production of the plan of action. Moreover, it will
liaise with the Member States' support group for the
protection of civilians to which I have just referred,
with donors and with members of the Security Council.
It will also provide guidance and input for the regional
workshops and will work to develop training materials
and modules for United Nations staff and national
authorities on the subject.

For its part, my office, OCHA, will continue to
work with concerned departments and agencies to
ensure that the United Nations system addresses the
implementation of the protection of civilians agenda in
a coordinated manner. We will also continue to engage
with members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
throughout this process.

A memorandum of understanding between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
OCHA has now been signed, committing both
departments to collaboration and the protection of
civilians in peace operations, as called for in the
Secretary-General's report. This collaborative approach
has been exemplified by joint OCHA-DPKO briefings
to the Security Council on the Mano river in July,
which I mentioned earlier, and more recently on the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

OCHA and the Department of Political Affairs
(DPA) will also strengthen their collaboration to ensure
the full integration of civilian protection issues in the
planning and implementation of peace missions and
peace processes, particularly during the period of
transition from conflict to a sustainable peace.

In order to facilitate this greater interdepartmental
cooperation, we will be conducting joint training for
staff, at Headquarters and in the field, within OCHA,
DPKO and DPA, and in peacekeeping operations. Our
goal is to ensure that United Nations personnel and
their national counterparts more systematically give
priority to the humanitarian and protection needs of
civilians in conflict.

In my comments today I have reviewed what I
consider to be the three core tasks of the protection of
civilians agenda, namely to advocate, to educate and to
implement. To advocate and educate we are using the
regional workshops, developing training materials and
setting up collaborative planning mechanisms to
mainstream the protection of civilians in the daily work
of the United Nations. To implement this, we are
systematically drawing up plans of action with our
partners, and working alongside Member States to put
new energy, political will and resources into this
ongoing commitment. We must match momentum with
action.

With the Council's agreement I will report back
on our progress in six months, while the Secretary-
General will report comprehensively to the Security
Council every 18 months. When confronted with a
challenge of this magnitude it is important to recognize
that progress depends on incremental change. The steps
we have taken so far will make a difference in
awareness and in the commitment to provide better
protection to civilians.

The practical actions outlined in the report will
help to address some of the most immediate threats
challenging civilians today. We must systematically
build awareness, responsibility and support among
Governments and armed non-State actors to ensure that
where there is conflict there is proper regard for the
protection of civilians.

