Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I should like to
thank all our briefers today for their insightful remarks
on the threats posed by foreign terrorist fighters. I
extend a particularly warm welcome to Ms. Michele
Coninsx on her debut.

In recent weeks and months, we have seen the near
total military collapse of Da'esh in Iraq and Syria. The
permanent defeat of terrorism in Syria still requires a
long-term political settlement and a political transition
away from the Al-Assad regime, but it is clear that we are
now, thankfully and finally, witnessing the crumbling
of Da'esh's so-called caliphate. That is prominently
thanks to the courage and resolve of the Iraqi security
forces, our partners in Syria and the 73 members of
the Global Coalition against Da'esh. Together, we have
shown that by working collectively with unflinching
commitment we can defeat that global plague.

However, with the defeat of Da'esh in Iraq and
Syria, the terrorist threat has evolved in such a way that
we now face new challenges. Foreign terrorist fighters
pose a particular risk, as we know that many members
of that dreadful organization remain committed to
Da'esh's ideology and to exporting their fight to new
locations beyond Iraq and Syria. Others are trying to
return home following Da'esh's military defeat. Some
among those returnees will still be committed to Da'esh.
Others will be disillusioned. Our job is to help those
who are disillusioned to reintegrate into society and,
at the same time, to guard against the threat posed by
those who are still committed. On top of that growing
challenge, we need to carry on tackling some ongoing
challenges such as homegrown violent extremism and
the spread of terrorists' poisonous messages online.

All of that means that our combined counter-
terrorism efforts and our commitment to cooperating
and working together cannot end as Da'esh crumbles in
Iraq and Syria. We must remain proactive, committed to
working together and ahead of the threat. That is why our
work here at the United Nations is so important. Three
years ago, the Security Council adopted resolution 2178
(2014). An important pillar in the international counter-
terrorism framework, it established measures binding
on States aimed at preventing travel by and support
for foreign terrorist fighters associated with Al-Qaida
and other groups. Three years on, the United Kingdom
fully supports the United States initiative to work on a
new resolution that tackles the new challenge posed by
foreign terrorist fighters no longer traveling to Iraq and
Syria but relocating to new theatres or returning home.

The United Kingdom is already taking its own
action and is supporting others. We are helping our
partners identify and prevent the movement of foreign
terrorist fighters by strengthening their borders
through information-sharing and the creation of watch
lists and controls. We are helping partners prosecute
terrorist criminals by improving the use and handling
of evidence, particularly that retrieved from the
battlefield. We are working with partners to ensure that
countries have effective deradicalization programmes
for processing returning foreign fighters so that they
no longer pose a threat to their home communities.
We are enhancing intelligence collaboration and
military capacity-building to help States improve their
ability to disrupt terrorist attack planning. And we are
continuing to combat relentlessly the evil ideology of
terrorist groups. We will continue to do that and more,
working closely with our Security Council partners to
raise international standards and set out new measures
in those areas.

There are two other points I would like to address.
First, the United Kingdom will maintain its focus on
preventing the terrorist use of the Internet. There was
a very useful event on this in the General Assembly
in September, co-hosted by Prime Minister Theresa
May, President Macron of France and Prime Minister
Gentiloni of Italy.

The planning and organization of many attacks can
be traced back to the Internet. Governments and private
companies must work in partnership and with civil
society to tackle the threat and protect those vulnerable
to radicalization.

Secondly, we cannot hope to eradicate the threat for
the long term without tackling the root causes. Terrorist
organizations flourish where there is instability. They
use instability to drive radicalization and to drive
recruitment. The best defence against this is a globally
unified rejection of extremism and support for the
international order based on unassailable human rights
and tolerance.

That is why we encourage the United Nations,
in particular the new Office of Counter-Terrorism,
headed by Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, to put
prevention at the heart of our counter-terrorism support
to States. I agree with him that our efforts will be more
effective if we tackle the causes, not just the symptoms,
of the scourge of terrorism and extremism.

