It is my honour to deliver this statement on behalf of Indonesia and Viet Nam, two States members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and current members of the Security Council. At the outset, we warmly welcome Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, to today's meeting. We would like to thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the Secretary- General and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for his insightful briefing. Colombia's Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace in 2016 was a remarkable achievement. While we acknowledge several positive developments that have been achieved, as well as the progress that has been generated by the Peace Agreement, it is regrettable that we have yet to see its full implementation. As a result, the peace process has remained fragile while progress on reintegration has remained a challenge. We therefore continue to call on all relevant parties to redouble their efforts to deliver on their individual commitments. Against this background, we would like to stress the following three points. First, on the peace process, we support the three priorities recommended in the March 2020 report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/239). We highly commend efforts to increase the participation of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comutn (FARC) political parties in the political life of the country. Their participation in initiating draft legislation, constitutional reforms and the five pillars of a "New commitment for Colombia" to overcome the effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is welcomed and encouraged. However, we are concerned about both the approach and progress in the implementation of the Final Peace Agreement and other peace-related programmes in the country. We also remain concerned about the delay of a 90-day bilateral ceasefire proposal by the Ejercito de Liberacien Nacional to the Government. In this regard, we would like to stress the importance of national unity on the way forward for the country. We call on the relevant parties in Colombia to set aside their differences and engage in constructive dialogue with a view to bringing about reconciliation and solidarity for the country as well as progress in the peace process. Secondly, on security, the most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/943) provided very worrisome information on the unabated violence and attacks against Colombian communities. Hlegal armed groups and criminal organizations have continued to take advantage of the COVID-19 pandemic to strengthen their social and territorial control. Confrontations between security forces and local communities over operations of forced eradication of illicit crops have continued in various regions. We condemn all these attacks and urge all the groups concerned to immediately stop these appalling acts of violence. We reiterate that such violence and attacks are unacceptable and that their perpetrators must be brought to justice. In this regard, we welcome the convening of a plenary session of the National Commission on Security Guarantees in August. We look forward to seeing more fruitful discussions on the dismantling of illegal armed groups, criminal organizations and their support networks. We urge all relevant parties to uphold their responsibilities in protecting civilians, especially women and children. Thirdly, on reintegration and development, we take note of the progress on the reintegration of former combatants through individual and collective economic and social development programmes and projects, especially in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. While efforts aimed at reintegration are highly appreciated, it is also important to note that this is a long-term process that requires patience, political will and practical steps. The reintegration process should be implemented in a comprehensive and sustained manner. We emphasize the need for further measures to promote economic and inclusive development, social cohesion, rural development, housing, education, job creation and so on, in order to sustain the progress that has been achieved so far. The country's development plans must take into account the particular needs of its communities. We expect to see a greater role played by the Government, the FARC and the National Reintegration Council - working together with the United Nations and regional and international organizations - in developing a joint strategy for strengthened socioeconomic development, which lays out concrete measures to assist former combatants in stabilizing their lives. Before concluding, we would like to reiterate our support for the United Nations Verification Mission in facilitating the peace process and promoting stability in Colombia. Indonesia and Viet Nam are committed to working constructively with the United Nations, regional and international organizations and relevant parties in contributing to the process of peace, security, unity and development in Colombia.
