Mr. Motoc (Romania): I thank you, Mr.
President, for arranging this most welcome exchange
between members of the Security Council and the
Executive Director of the World Food Programme. I
would like to join other members of the Council in
thanking the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Needs in Southern Africa, Mr. James
Morris, for a highly useful and timely - though grim
and sobering - briefing. Today, the serious
humanitarian challenges facing the African continent
once again demand the Council's attention and careful
consideration.

The practice of periodic briefings to the Council
on humanitarian developments in Africa and elsewhere
is indeed very welcome and very useful. We commend
Mr. Morris and his Programme for their dedication and
efforts. The periodic missions he has conducted to the
Southern African region are proof of the special
emphasis the United Nations places on addressing the
humanitarian crisis and the needs of the region as
effectively and as urgently as possible.

Regarding today's meeting, we welcome the
opportunity for the Security Council to be informed of
and to examine humanitarian challenges that could
constitute ominous threats to regional peace, security
and stability, although those particular situations have
not at this time been formally taken up by the Council.

Romania cannot get used to the idea that there
can be any such thing as "silent" or "ignored" crises
for the main international organ entrusted with the
maintenance and safeguarding of peace and security:
the Security Council. The areas in Southern Africa to
which Mr. Morris so eloquently referred - such as
Zimbabwe, Malawi, Namibia and Swaziland - appear
to be most vulnerable and most severely affected by
the triple threat of food insecurity, high rates of
HIV/AIDS infection and weak governance. In many
cases under scrutiny, the political disenfranchisement
of considerable segments of the population only adds
to that combination of factors. If they are not
adequately dealt with, those factors, taken together,
have the real potential to affect peace and stability in
the region.

Romania fully agrees that, because of its
magnitude and severity, the crisis in Southern Africa
requires sustained support from the international
community in addressing it. The humanitarian response
seems critical for those countries, particularly with
regard to food assistance, since in many cases food
insecurity has recently been exacerbated.

In that regard, the situation in Zimbabwe is of
particular concern to us. The situation is deteriorating;
food shortages are becoming chronic; and the number
of people in need of assistance is increasing. We call
upon the Government to work together with the
international community and the humanitarian agencies
to improve the food security situation and to meet the
needs of the vulnerable population. The Government
should waste no time in providing the donor
community with credible figures with respect to the
need for food assistance.

Finally, we would like perhaps to hear from
Executive Director Morris about how he would suggest
the Council could do more to support and complement
the humanitarian efforts of the various United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes in Southern Africa.
For it remains our belief that only integrated and
coordinated actions can break the cycle of poverty and
instability in that region.

