Mr. Inzko: I thank you, Sir, for giving me the
opportunity to present my seventh report as High
Representative - the forty-first report of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/2012/307).

This month is special for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as it will celebrate 20 years since its
admission as a Member State to the United Nations,
along with Croatia and Slovenia, on 22 May. But this
month is also special for my home country, Austria, as
it presided over the Security Council in the month of
May exactly 20 years ago. The then-Austrian
Ambassador, Mr. Peter Hohenfellner, as President of
the Security Council, proposed on 20 May 1992 to the
Council to adopt a draft resolution recommending to
2

the General Assembly that Bosnia and Herzegovina be
admitted to the United Nations (see S/PV.3079). At the
same meeting the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 755 (1992) endorsing his
recommendation. The Security Council President,
Mr. Peter Hohenfellner, also expressed in a prophetic
way that "[a]11 the members of the Council are
confident that Bosnia and Herzegovina will make a
significant contribution to the work of the
Organization" (S/PV.3079, p. 4). Upon this historic
recommendation, Bosnia and Herzegovina was
admitted, through General Assembly resolution 46/237,
adopted without a vote 20 years ago on 22 May 1992,
as a Member of the United Nations.

I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
Bosnia and Herzegovina wholeheartedly, and I am very
glad that - as predicted 20 years ago - Bosnia and
Herzegovina is indeed making a significant
contribution to the work of the Organization, most
recently with its successful tenure as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council.

I also wish to take this opportunity to
congratulate both Croatia and Slovenia on this
occasion. In Slovenia, the date of admission to the
United Nations is even commemorated as the Day of
Slovenian Diplomacy. Such anniversaries are a time for
reflection. Looking back, nobody can dispute that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way, but
neither can we dispute that the country has some way
to go before the job is completed. At the same time, I
am very pleased to be able to report that 2012 has
started well, with signs of positive change in the
country. I should like to brief the Council on the most
notable positive developments of recent months, which
I believe offer real hope that 2012 can be a good year
for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

On 10 February - more than 16 months after the
elections - a State Government was finally appointed
with a Croat Chairman. The Government is based on a
coalition of the six strongest parties. I was especially
pleased by this outcome as I have consistently and
repeatedly insisted that the principle of rotation of the
ethnicity of the State Prime Minister between mandates
be respected. Accordingly, we now have a Prime
Minister who is from the constituent people of the
Bosnian Croats. And, by the way, his mandate is off to
an excellent start. Had the authorities not followed the
principle of rotation this time, it would be very
12-33985
difficult to re-establish what is, for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a very important procedure.

Furthermore, I have also consistently and
repeatedly advocated that the six parties forming the
Council of Ministers, given the support they receive at
the elections, have the greatest responsibility for
forming the Government and taking the country
forward. I have encouraged the parties to do so, but I
have made it equally clear that it is up to them to form
a Government and that the international community
would not intervene. Government formation was
preceded by the adoption of two long outstanding
State-level laws - the State Aid Law and the Census
Law, both of which are important for the European
Union (EU) accession process.

Then, on 9 March, the leaders of the six leading
parties reached a political agreement on two of the
issues that have been identified as preconditions for the
closure of my Office: the issue of the ownership and
use of military property, and the broader question of
ownership and use of State property. Overall, the
9 March party leaders' agreement is a positive step and
offers real hope of progress. Most significantly,
progress on the issue of military property would help to
set the stage for Bosnia and Herzegovina's full
participation in NATO's membership action plan - a
step that I have consistently and strongly supported. I
hope that, in a few days time, there will be good news
from the Chicago summit. This would be a real boost
for Bosnia and Herzegovina and a signal to the country
that progress on the Euro-Atlantic path is achievable.
Of course, the benchmark is implementation. What we
need to see now is action by the State and entity
authorities to implement their agreement.

In addition to the progress on defence and State
property, the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board is currently discussing the future of the
international supervisory regime in the Brcko district.
This question is another of the five objectives and two
conditions set for the closure of Office of the High
Representative. My Office will be encouraging and
supporting the domestic authorities to make progress,
but I will not do the job for them. Those times are over.
Progress can be delivered only by domestic
institutions.

This also applies to the implementation of the
Sejdic-Finci judgement of the European Court of
Human Rights, which requires Bosnia and Herzegovina
12-33985

to change the way its Presidency members and
representatives in the House of Peoples are elected.
Progress on this issue is important for Bosnia and
Herzegovina's EU path, but first and foremost it is
important in and of itself because human rights and the
rule of law matter. Let me take this opportunity to once
again call on the leaders to go the extra mile and to
reach an agreement.

All the positive developments that I have just
mentioned are the result of politicians finally sitting
down and talking to each other. This is so simple, and
yet so elusive. At the same time, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to benefit from a positive
regional climate, to which President Josipovic' and
Foreign Minister Pusic' of Croatia, as well as President
Tadie of Serbia, have contributed to greatly. The role of
Montenegro as third neighbour in this improved
regional environment has also been extremely
constructive.

So now, within Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
first time in a long time we have a political process
based on dialogue and a readiness to compromise. This
long overdue return to political dialogue, negotiation
and compromise is very good news. If it is nurtured
and developed - if Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders
honour the commitments they have made - 2012
could indeed be a breakthrough year on the path
towards full Euro-Atlantic integration. In any case, it
has started as a very promising year.

At the same time, given my mandate, I must also
be on record in regard to less welcome developments.
Alongside this positive dynamic, we continue to see a
parallel dynamic of the divisive political agendas that
have been played out over the past six years. A number
of troubling challenges to the Dayton Agreement and
Bosnia and Herzegovina's territorial integrity took
place during the reporting period, including a series of
statements challenging the statehood of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Relevant quotations and details of these
developments can be found in my report. These are
unwelcome aspects of an otherwise positive political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we must keep
them in view. Given my mandate, I must take these
challenges seriously.

Another issue I am watching closely is the issue
of the State budget. The 2011 State budget was not
adopted until 2012, and we still await the adoption of
the 2012 budget and a global fiscal framework for
2012-2014. The 2012 budget has now passed the first
reading in the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Representatives. I warmly welcome this step, and I am
hopeful that Parliament will finish the job swiftly so
that we can finally have a budget in place at the State
level. It remains to be seen how the budget, which is
smaller than the last regular budget, adopted for 2010,
will impact on the functioning of the State-level
institutions. We hope, however, that the basic functions
of the State, including those relevant to the country's
EU and NATO perspectives, can be maintained.

This year is an election year and will bring
challenges of its own. The electoral rules for Mostar
and Srebrenica have been hotly debated and may very
well shape the election campaign. Both places are
special and deserve our ongoing attention. My Office
will certainly be making an extra effort in 2012 to help
both communities to make progress in the interests of
the citizens who live there and to contribute to the
creation of an environment that will enable self-
sustaining coexistence for many generations to come.

While pointing to these difficulties and
challenges, I do not wish to diminish the very real and
long-awaited signs of positive political progress that
the European integration dynamic appears to be
delivering. At the same time, I want to recall that
Bosnia is a very specific country with a troubled recent
history. It needs a special and calibrated approach. We
should not ignore this as we look to the future.

As Bosnia and Herzegovina's Constitution was
drafted as part of the Peace Agreement, the Dayton
factor will always be present in some form in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. However, it is vital that the European
Union factor continues to be steadily strengthened, as
the Euro-Atlantic future is Bosnia and Herzegovina's
future - its only future. Needless to say, this trajectory
has my full respect and wholehearted support.

My hope is that the country will draw strength
from how far it has come during the past 20 years and
that this reality will inspire political leaders to meet
their responsibilities to their citizens and, I dare say, to
the international community as well.

Given how much the international community has
invested in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the years, it
is only natural that we have expectations of the
political leaders and authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. They have proven in the past six months
that they can make progress; now we expect, and need,
to see more.

Allow me to conclude by making three points.
First, recent developments offer hope of genuine
progress, but it is still early days. We need to see far
more in the way of concrete results, and I believe that
we will. The year 2012 can be a breakthrough year for
the country in its efforts to progress towards full
Euro-Atlantic integration. NATO and European
Union's membership are two parts of a single path for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. They are complimentary and
I fully support both.

Secondly, we cannot ignore that challenges to the
Peace Agreement continue. We must ensure that we are
equipped to deal with such challenges. In doing so, we
will also be supporting the efforts of those forces in the
country that want to move forward and progress
towards Euro-Atlantic integration.

Thirdly, our unity is our strength - the unity of
the international community. Bosnia and Herzegovina
could be a role model and an example of how the
international community works together successfully
and speaks with one voice. On the ground in Sarajevo
that has been achieved already. Peter Sorensen, the new
EU Special Representative, has had a brilliant start in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Let us give him our full
support. He and I, as well as our offices, are working
together well. I stand ready to continue to cooperate
with him and all other actors, including the Security
Council, for I firmly believe that as long as we remain
united we will succeed.

We have come a long way in the past 20 years
and invested a huge amount of energy and resources.
Let us make sure we remain committed and complete
our mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina successfully. It
can be achieved.

