I would like to start by thanking Special Representative Fall for today's informative briefing, as well as to express my appreciation for the work that the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) is undertaking across the Central African region. Countries across Central Africa continue to face serious political, economic and security challenges, which have been exacerbated by the pandemic. However, it has been encouraging to witness strong regional cooperation in meeting those challenges. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) regional response strategy adopted by a newly reinforced Economic Community of Central African States is a welcome development, as are the numerous initiatives undertaken to enhance cross-border cooperation - for example, by Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Neighbourly cooperation is essential for mitigating the effects of the pandemic while also protecting human rights, enabling an inclusive economic recovery and maintaining regional peace and security. Continued armed attacks by Boko Haram are alarming. Regional security efforts that involve the sharing of intelligence, civil- military cooperation and human rights compliance are essential for combating Boko Haram insurgency. Cameroon continues to witness mounting levels of violence and continued human rights violations and abuses. Particularly tragic have been the attacks against schools and schoolchildren. Correspondingly, the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance has surpassed 6 million. Estonia condemns attacks against civilians in the strongest terms, including against humanitarian workers. Furthermore, accountability for violations and abuses must be established in order to avoid the establishment of a culture of impunity, which would only breed more violence. We call for all parties to show restraint and engage in dialogue in order to find a peaceful and lasting resolution to the crisis. The role of UNOCA in enabling mediation and supporting the political momentum towards reconciliation in Cameroon is most welcome. Turning to the situation in the Central African Republic, I would like to recognize the efforts made to ensure timely and safe elections. Elections-related violence perpetrated by several armed groups is in direct breach of their commitments under the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, the full implementation of which is the only path towards lasting peace in the Central African Republic. I would like to conclude by noting that the complex and fragile situation in Central Africa continues to be adversely impacted by the destructive effects of climate change. There is no denying that climate change is affecting, and will continue to have effects on, international peace and security. This threat will continue to grow without focused action to tackle it. We commend UNOCA for addressing this issue in the report (S/2020/1154).
