Mr. Karsgaard (Canada): On behalf of my
delegation, I would first like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of November. We are confident that the affairs of
the Council are in capable hands. I would also like to pay
tribute to the representative of Nigeria, Ambassador
Ibrahim Gambari, for the excellent manner in which he
guided the work of the Council last month.

It is with a sense of its historical significance that
we finally use the word "peace" today when addressing
the situation in the former Yugoslavia. We sincerely hope
that yesterday, 21 November 1995, will be remembered
as the day that finally put an end to the immense human
suffering that has ravaged the former Yugoslavia for the
last four years.

Canada warmly welcomes the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina,

 

initialled yesterday in Dayton, Ohio. Together with the
other agreements signed in Dayton to resolve the status of
Eastern Slavonia in Croatia and to strengthen the Bosnian
Muslim-Croat federation, yesterday's peace accord
establishes a strong framework for future relations between
the States of the former Yugoslavia.

Canada's Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Honourable
Mr. Andre Ouellet, yesterday congratulated the parties on
their achievement and urged them to continue to work
constructively with the international community in a spirit
of cooperation and flexibility in implementing the peace
plan.

We would also like to underline Minister Ouellet's
thanks to the American, Russian and European Union
negotiators, who did an outstanding job in balancing the
aspirations of the parties on a wide range of constitutional
and territorial issues, and, in particular, we would like to
register our appreciation for the unique and determined
leadership of President Clinton and the Secretary of State
of the United States, Warren Christopher, in facilitating this
peace process. We would also like to pay tribute to the
untiring and dedicated efforts over a long period of time of
the United Nations negotiators, who helped bring the parties
closer together.

We now need to look at the next steps necessary to
consolidate this historic Agreement and to ensure its full
implementation. The London, Paris and Bonn conferences
will be key in this regard, and Canada looks forward to
participating in their deliberations.

The success in Dayton has demonstrated that sanctions
can have an important effect. We support the suspension
and lifting of sanctions within the context of the Peace
Agreement.

Re-establishing peace and stability in the region
remains a major Canadian objective. We welcome the
agreement of the parties to establish a regional arms control
regime with the assistance of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We urge the
international community to exercise restraint in arms
transfers and to ensure full transparency. We encourage the
States of the former Yugoslavia to contribute data annually
to the United Nations arms Register.
The Peace Agreement marks the end of the war in the
former Yugoslavia, but it also marks the beginning of a
long process of reconstruction and rehabilitation that will
require our concerted efforts as well as the unflagging
commitment of all the parties so as to ensure a lasting
peace in the former Yugoslavia.

