Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We also would like to begin by welcoming our new
colleague, the Ambassador of Ethiopia, and to express
our support to him as he goes about his work. We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and
the important briefings by Mr. Michael Keating,
Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira and Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka. We welcome the appointment of
Nicholas Haysom as the new Special Representative
for Somalia and thank Michael Keating for his valuable
efforts to bring about peace and stability in Somalia
during a very complex transition period.

Peru notes with concern the situation in Somalia.
Inter-clan conflicts, violent extremism and the adverse
effects of climate change have resulted in a serious
humanitarian situation for millions of Somalis and
in political instability that constrains the Federal
Government's efforts to rebuild the country.

We vigorously condemn the terrorist attacks
by Al-Shabaab and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. We stand in solidarity with the victims and
encourage the Government not to allow those attacks
aimed at underming peace to impede its efforts aimed
at achieving sustainable peace in Somalia. We highly
value efforts to build a federal State, including the
initial agreements on the electoral model and the
distribution of natural resources. We look forward to
the review of the Constitution and preparations for the
2020-2021 general elections. We hope that, by resuming
its activities this week, the Somali Parliament will be
able to swiftly make progress on those issues.

We would also like to stress the importance of
promoting the active participation of women and young
people in the political life of the country and in the fight
against Violent extremism and terrorism. We welcome
the fact that the draft electoral law provides for greater
political representation for women. As Ms. Mlambo-
Ngcuka mentioned, the situation of women and girls
who are victims of sexual violence needs to be addressed
more effectively. We also welcome the participation of
young Somalis in the International Youth Conference
on the Prevention and Countering of Violent Extremism
and Terrorism, which was held in Egypt in May.

We underscore the need to fully implement the
national security architecture, which defines the roles
and responsibilities of federal and regional forces,
and the transition plan so that the Somali authorities
assume responsibility for the security of the country.
To that end, we note that coordination between the
Federal Government and the federal states, as well as
the support of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (UNSOM), the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS) and international partners,
is essential.
We are playing close attention to the most recent
developments in the Horn of Africa subregion. We believe
that the normalization of relations between Ethiopia and
Eritrea, and now Somalia, should facilitate an increase
in investment for the benefit of the development of the
three countries and their citizens. Nevertheless, we
believe it is essential that the international community
increase its support for the implementation of the
recovery and resilience framework for Somalia and
the 2018 humanitarian response plan by providing the
required financial resources.

I would like to conclude by highlighting the work
done by AMISOM, UNSOM. and UNSOS in support of
the efforts of the authorities and the people of Somalia
to achieve sustainable peace in spite of the remaining
difficulties and challenges.

