Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this important
month, whose agenda is full of important, sensitive
topics. We are fully confident of your wisdom and
ability, and we assure you of our full cooperation with
you and your delegation. I would also like to extend
our thanks and appreciation to the delegation of
Indonesia for its outstanding work during the month of
November.
Allow me also to thank Mr. Luis Moreno-
Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for his report on the situation in Darfur,
submitted pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). We wish
him continued success in his work.

Everyone agrees on the need to apply and uphold
the principles of the rule of law, criminal
accountability and justice, both in Darfur and in other
areas of conflict, especially through punishing those
who have committed violations of international
humanitarian law. We therefore remain concerned
about the direct and deliberate attacks by factions of
rebel movement that remain outside the framework of
the Darfur Peace Agreement, targeting peacekeepers,
humanitarian personnel and even vehicles delivering
humanitarian assistance, as well as setting up
ambushes, looting and killing humanitarian personnel
and African Union military observers, or threatening
them at gunpoint.

The most striking evidence of this situation is
October's murderous terrorist attack on the African
Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) in Haskanita. The
Security Council has already condemned that attack
and has demanded that no effort be spared to identify
the perpetrators and bring them to justice. All such
violations are crimes within the jurisdiction of the
Sudanese judiciary and the International Criminal
Court. The criminals stand in the way of progress
towards peace in Darfur and should therefore be
punished in accordance with the law.

My delegation calls on the Government of the
Sudan to pursue its investigations, to prosecute all
those charged with crimes against humanity in Darfur,
pursuant to Sudanese criminal law, international
humanitarian law and the relevant international
conventions, and to take all actions necessary to
prevent impunity. In this regard, we also call on the
Prosecutor unfailingly to recall that the jurisdiction of
the ICC is complementary to national jurisdiction. We
therefore call on him to refer his cases and
investigations to the Sudanese judiciary, as appropriate.

We also call on the Prosecutor to continue to
perform his work in a discreet and professional manner
and not to draw conclusions about the nature of the
crimes committed or the persons accused of
committing them until he has fully and impartially
completed his investigations and until he has carefully
and objectively evaluated the investigations and
proceedings conducted by the Sudanese judiciary. We
call on the Government of the Sudan, for its part, to
cooperate with the Prosecutor of the ICC to achieve
those goals.

I would like on this occasion to assure the
Council that the State of Qatar has made strenuous and
sustained efforts to urge the Government of the Sudan
to cooperate with the Court in accordance with
international legitimacy. We should not View the ICC
or its Prosecutor as political tools in the hands of the
Security Council; rather, the Court must be seen as an
independent and impartial judicial body that strives to
reach a loftier goal: achieving justice and not political
goals or purposes.

In this regard, we support the finding of the
Prosecutor that there is considerable uncertainty
surrounding the list of names submitted by the
International Commission of Inquiry and persons
named by the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) or by the Security
Council itself in resolution 1672 (2006), and that the
identification of indictees by the Office of the
Prosecutor is not limited to the list of suspects
established by those bodies.

Expediting the investigations and indicting or
prosecuting all those suspected of committing
violations of international humanitarian law, both at the
national and international levels, must not be to the
detriment of justice and the rights of indictees to a fair
trial where all their procedural rights are guaranteed
and the standards and principles of due process
respected. Having said that, we call on all parties to
take into account national and international judicial
procedures and not to seek to influence them in any
way whatsoever, but rather to support them fully in
order to reach the ultimate goal, namely, justice and the
rule of law, so that security, peace and stability can
prevail in Darfur.

The references in the Prosecutor's report to the
lack of information regarding measures taken by the
Government of the Sudan to protect the international
forces - apart from being undocumented allegations
that have been denied by the Government of the
Sudan - constitute a departure from the purview of
the report mandated by the Security Council in
resolution 1593 (2005), since that matter constitutes a
political issue unrelated to the work of the Court.
That is also the case, for instance, with respect to
the report's assessment of the policies of the
Government of the Sudan, the allegation that Sudanese
aircraft have been painted with African Union or
United Nations colours and flags to be used in the
campaign against the rebellion in Darfur, and the
conclusion that such actions undermine the work of the
United Nations and the African Union. All those views
mark a change in the Prosecutor's methodology, to
which we have become accustomed, in which he has
confined himself to addressing issues that are related
to the judicial process, not to the political process or
the Hybrid Operation.

It is worth noting that the Government of the
Sudan, from the legal point of view, has several
options, not only that of handing over the suspects. In
fact, the Government of the Sudan can, in accordance
with articles 19 and 82 of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court, challenge the
admissibility of the case. We must, therefore, not
prejudge an offence by putting emphasis on the arrest
and handing over of the wanted individuals as the only
option. That option is not the only one as long as the
possibility of appeal is still open.

Consequently, we must understand the legal and
judicial rights of the Sudan according to the Statute of
the Court. As we have already said, taking any action
outside the legal and judiciary processes would be at
the expense of justice and the right of the indictees to a
fair trial, including the right to appeal. As for our
observations on the briefing by the Prosecutor and the
statements of some States, we see that the right of the
Government of the Sudan to challenge the decision of
the Pre-Trial Chamber based on articles 19 and 82 of
the Statute of the ICC is being ignored while focus is
being put only on the aspect of arresting the indictees
and handing them over.

Once again, we stress that the Council must
proceed cautiously in this case. The invitation by the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to the
Security Council and the regional organizations to urge
the Government of the Sudan to cooperate with the
Court must not be interpreted as a request for action on
the part of the Council against the Sudan, for this issue
is a legal and judicial issue that we do not want to
politicize in any way. We believe that the Prosecutor
agrees with us on that matter.
