Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour of
resolution 2482 (2019), prepared by Peruvian delegation,
on the links between international terrorism and
organized crime. We thank the authors of the document
and you personally, Mr. President, for your consistent
efforts to improve the Security Council's toolkit for
combating the various forms of support to terrorists.

We believe that resolution 2482 (2019) should not
be seen in and of itself as the end result of our work in
that area. The nature of the threat is changing rapidly
and the Council will have to revisit the issue of the
nexus between terrorism and criminal activity. In
that regard, we call on our colleagues to refrain from
further attempts to use the issue to promote politicized
ideas that have nothing to do with the Council's efforts
to maintain international peace and security.

We are pleased to note that we have succeeded
in focusing the resolution on the genuinely pressing
issue of terrorist financing derived from the traffic
in arms, drugs and human beings. Above all, we were
able to substantially expand the Security Council's
toolkit on the issue of arms set forth in resolutions
2370 (2017) and 2462 (2019). As of today, all States
that, for some reason, have not yet taken measures in
that area should criminalize the illicit trafficking of
explosives, military products and dual-use goods and
adopt legislation banning the production of unmarked
or improperly marked small arms and light weapons.
In addition, resolution 2482 (2019) provides guidance
on strengthening border cooperation to combat
such crimes.

We also recall the obligations set out in resolution
2178 (2014) with regard to prosecuting those who train
terrorists. Regrettably, some countries naively believe
that those provisions do not address training in the
production and use of weapons, explosives and other
specific materials used to perpetrate acts of terrorism.
We believe that the implementation of the package
of measures approved today by States will be closely
monitored by the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
In turn, we stand ready to share our experiences in
disrupting the supply of arms to terrorists and provide
the necessary assistance to interested States.

