Mr. Simonovic': I thank you, Madam President,
for this opportunity to brief the Council on my mission
to Ukraine. Ijoined the Deputy Secretary-General in
Kyiv on 9 March at the urgent request of the Secretary-
General and the High Commissioner for Human
Rights. My mandate was to make an initial assessment
of the human rights situation, to highlight the critical
importance of respect for human rights in working
towards the de-escalation of tensions, and to make
recommendations on the way forward.

I met with individuals from across the cultural,
ethnic, linguistic and political spectrums in Kyiv,
Kharkiv and Lviv, including legislative and executive
officials, the Ombudsperson, civil society organizations
representing various communities, including victims of
human rights violations, as well as members of regional
organizations and the diplomatic community. My team
also collected numerous written materials.

I was not able to go to Crimea, as the authorities
there initially would not receive the mission or ensure its
security. Eventually, on Sunday, I received an invitation
to visit Simferopol. I hope that a visit to Crimea,
possibly by the head of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission, Mr. Armen Harutyunyan,
will soon take place. I also welcome the request made
on 19 March by the Independent Expert on the minority
issues to visit Ukraine. I hope that the mission will take
place as soon as possible and contribute to decreasing
tensions.

Chronic human rights violations were among the
major reasons for the upheaval in Ukraine in recent
months. For many years, there have been concerns
about the weak rule of law, the lack of accountability
and resulting impunity. The right to a fair trial, equal
access tojustice, cases oftorture, ill-treatment and poor
detention conditions are all matters of long-standing
concern. The lack of independence of the judiciary
must be remedied and the reform of the security sector
and of the Prosecutor's Office are also urgent tasks.
Corruption is a cross-cutting problem that affects the
rule of law, as well as equal access to public services,
and also needs to be addressed swiftly.

All reforms and new policy measures must
be adopted without any spirit of revenge and in a
consultative, transparent and inclusive manner. It is
crucial to ensure that one does not respond to human
rights violations with other human rights violations. In
the context of ongoing legislative measures concerning
lustration, those must fully respect human rights and
the rule of law, including the right to individual review
and to appeal.

Let me now move to protest-related violations. In
the context of the recent protests in Kyiv and elsewhere,
I am deeply concerned about alleged gross human
rights violations, including the excessive use of force
and extrajudicial killings, torture, disappearances and
arbitrary arrests and detentions. The actions of snipers
on the Maidan are of particularly grave concern and
need to be fully investigated. More than 100 people,
mostly protesters, but also some members of the
security forces, have also lost their lives and many more
were injured. I visited protest-related victims in the
hospital. I also spoke to physicians who helped victims
in makeshift hospitals, including the current Minister
of Health, Mr. Oleh Musiy, and Ms. Olga Bogomolets.
All of them confirmed that sniper killings of protesters
were undertaken in the style of an execution, in which
heads and chests were targeted. The perpetrators of
those and other human rights violations against all
victims must be promptly brought to justice, whatever
their background, status or affiliation, following
independent, impartial and thorough investigations.

Let me turn now to the ongoing violations and the
way to address them. I have urged all the authorities I
encountered to ensure inclusivity in governance and,
while ensuring freedom of expression, to curb hate
speech. Ukraine is a multi-ethnic, multilingual and
multicultural country. Nationalistic rhetoric and policies
will be counterproductive and will further deepen the
internal dividing lines within society. All views should
be expressed freely in a democracy, as long as their
expression does not incite hatred and violence against
others. Any attempt to escalate the violence and hatred
should be prevented, or stopped when it has occurred,
before it escalates into further violence. It is incumbent
upon all authorities to ensure equal protection for all,
especially for minority groups.

The hasty repeal of the law on languages by
Parliament was a mistake. The decision of Parliament
was fortunately not approved by the acting President,
so that the old law will continue to be in force while
a new text is prepared. That process should be done
in full consultation with all concerned and be fully
participatory, transparent and inclusive.

During my visit, I met with a wide range of
representatives of civil society, including with
representatives of ethnic Russians. There seem to be
some cases where members of the Russian minority
have been harassed or even attacked, such as in the
case of the attack against a member of Parliament. All
allegations of human rights violations, in particular
against minorities, have to be thoroughly investigated.
However, it seems that those violations are neither
widespread nor systematic.

I have serious concerns about the situation in Crimea,
which remains tense with respect to the protection
of human rights. I have met with victims of arbitrary
arrest and detention, torture and ill-treatment and other
human rights violations. I spoke to representatives of
displaced Tatar persons in Lviv, Chairman of the Mejlis
of the Crimean Tatar People, Mr. Refat Chubarov, and
Mr. Nadir Bekirov, President of the Foundation for
Research and Support of Indigenous Peoples of Crimea.
I am deeply concerned about the human rights of those
who oppose the recent political events in Crimea. It has
been reported that a local Crimean Tatar activist who
disappeared after participating in a protest on 3 March
was found dead on 16 March in a forest near the town of
Belogorsk. According to reports from credible sources,
his body bore marks that suggest he had been subjected
to mistreatment.

In addition to cases of violence between various
political Ukrainian and Russian groups, with the alleged
participation of groups from outside of the region,
resulting in recent deaths and injuries, the spreading
of rumours, including through the media, particularly
in eastern Ukraine, is adding to a sense of insecurity
among the population. I understand that this is partly
due to rumours and perceptions about whether the
new authorities in Kyiv would ensure decentralization
policies, an inclusive Government and protect and
support the use of the Russian language.

There is an urgent need for independent monitors to
objectively assess and report on human rights violations,
as well as on the implications of recent events and to
monitor the current human rights situation throughout
the country. An independent, objective establishment
of the facts and circumstances surrounding alleged
human rights violations can help investigation, can
prevent further occurrences and can counter the spread
of false information.

We have received a request from the acting
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine to dispatch
human rights monitors, and we have immediately
begun their deployment. The team will be composed
of 9 international and approximately 25 national staff.
The head of the human rights monitoring mission
arrived last week, and others are gradually joining him.
By Friday, monitors will be in place in Kharkiv and in
Donetsk.

In the roll-out of that mission, we will work
very closely with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which has plans for a
larger monitoring mission. Both the Deputy Secretary-
General and I have maintained close contacts with
the OSCE leadership in that regard, and that will be
replicated on the ground.

The United Nations stands ready to help ensure
human rights are respected and protected in Ukraine
with the support of international and regional
organizations, including the OSCE, the Council of
Europe and others. In addition to monitoring the
human rights situation, the United Nations can assist by
providing technical assistance for legislative and other
reforms necessary to ensure that the recommendations
received by Ukraine from United Nations human rights
mechanisms are fully implemented so that they can
effectively contribute to both peace and development
efforts.

