Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
first of all, to congratulate the United Kingdom on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August and for its efforts in organizing
the work of the Council. I thank Sir Mark Lyall Grant
and the members of his team for their fruitful efforts in
conducting the Council's work. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank the Rwandan delegation for
its outstanding presidency of the Council last month.

The siege of cities, the massacres, the displacement
and the ethnic cleansing practiced by the Islamic State
of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) against the Iraqi people,
the propagation and application of its extremist thought
and the crimes against humanity that it commits against
all sectors of Iraqi society have targeted unarmed
civilians. In that regard, horrible massacres have been
committed, children have been recruited, and churches
and other religious, cultural and historical sites have
been destroyed. ISIL is also persecuting whole religious

groups on the basis of their ethnic identity and their
religious beliefs, targeting in particular the Yazidi and
Christian minorities and the Turkmen Shiites. That has
led to the exodus of hundreds of thousands of peaceful
families. Those are the numerous horrible acts that
illustrate its criminal, extremist thought.

The displaced live in tragic conditions. They are
forced to live in tents or to take shelter in schools
and churches, and many of them do not receive
any basic humanitarian assistance. That is why the
United Nations, through Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nikolay Mladenov, has declared a
level 3 state of emergency, which is the Organization's
highest level. To date, entire besieged regions continue
to await assistance. Mount Sinjar and the area around
Nahiyat Imberli are completely under attack, as they are
sheltering a large number of Turkmen Shiite families.

My Government continues to make considerable
efforts to mobilize all its materiel and logistical
resources to ease the suffering of the internally
displaced persons. Iraq condemns in the strongest
possible terms the barbaric terrorist acts carried out
by ISIL and groups affiliated with Al-Qaida across
borders. We want to show that the danger represented
by the existence of those terrorist groups is far from
limited to threatening the security of the people and the
State of Iraq; it is a threat to international security and
to all peoples of the region without exception.

That is why Iraq fully supports the adoption of this
resolution at this very difficult time and critical juncture
for our country. We thank the United Kingdom for its
efforts in preparing and circulating the resolution among
the other members ofthe Council. The importance ofthe
resolution lies in the fact that it combines all previous
resolutions on combating terrorism and focuses the
efforts of Member States in combating ISIL, J abhat
Al-Nusra and all affiliated groups. The resolution also
supports human rights, religious freedom, tolerance
and the protection of civilians.

Terrorism is an international scourge that knows
no borders. The proliferation of ISIL across the
Syrian, Iraqi and Lebanese borders is clear proof of
that. That group must be defeated, which requires the
united efforts of all regional and international actors.
Iraq therefore calls for the implementation of all the
resolution's provisions in order to ensure the following.

First, it is essential to ensure the cooperation of the
international community, including the neighbouring
countries, through the adoption of national measures
to paralyse terrorist movements by blocking the flow
across borders of foreign terrorists who are trying to
join the ranks ofISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra in the field. It
is essential to control the borders and to bring criminals
to justice under international law, while respecting the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Iraq.

Secondly, States need to follow very closely the
individuals and entities on their territory, in particular
those who might be recruited by terrorist groups, by
preventing them from travelling to Iraq or Syria to join
the ranks of ISIL or Jabhat Al-Nusra. It is also crucial
to ban the dissemination of radical documents and
extremist ideology through social networks around the
world.

Thirdly, it is essential to prohibit all kinds of
direct or indirect transactions with ISIL and the Nusra
Front, as well as individuals and entities affiliated with
Al-Qaida, by ceasing to provide them with weapons
and military equipment.

Fourthly, States should take strong national
measures to eliminate the sources of financing for
terrorists by freezing the assets of individuals and
entities that finance terrorism.

Fifthly, Iraq calls on all States to criminalize ISIL
and urges them to present the names of individuals and
entities that support such groups.

Sixthly, we need to call for the adoption of an
international statement that clearly states that such
terrorist groups are criminals. That statement must be
endorsed by all States, which must commit to defeating
such terrorist groups.

On behalf of the people and Government of Iraq, I
thank the United States and its President. I also thank
the United Nations and call on the Council to assume its
responsibilities in implementing the resolution.

