Ms. Sharief: This opportunity to address the
Security Council is an opportunity any member of
Libyan civil society would appreciate. I want to thank
Kazakhstan for inviting me today as a representative of
the Together We Build It organization to share my civil-
society perspective with the Council.
The Libya we are discussing today is no longer the
wealthy country it used to be. Nowadays women, men,
youth and even elderly people sleep in front of banks
in the hope that they can withdraw some cash to cover
their basic needs. In hospitals, patients must provide
their own medications, as hospitals do not have even
these essential resources.

Just last week I saw the extensive bruises covering
a fellow activist's face after she was badly beaten by
members of an armed group in the streets of Tripoli.
In 2011, the Security Council adopted resolution
1973 (2011), which called for the protection of
Libyan civilians.

The Libya we are discussing today is witnessing
forms of violence that go far beyond what the Security
Council aimed to protect against in 2011. For many
Libyans at that time, the resolution was a life-saver.
It was a rescue signal indicating that the international
community and the Security Council were willing to do
everything in their power to protect civilians.

Our hope turned to despair as many Libyans then
quickly felt abandoned by the international community
and the Council. There was no follow-up plan or strategy
to empower the Libyan people beyond the military
intervention. Neither was there a plan for recovery from
the extreme form of violence that was introduced into
the society in 2011.

While volunteering at Tripoli central hospital
during the war of 2011, I was struck by the fact that
the first patient I met was not the typical war victim
I used to see in the media. He was a civilian who had
been injured on his way to the grocery store. I still
remember his son's words when his father passed away
a few days later: "What did my father do to them?",
asked the young boy through his tears. At that very
moment, I knew that the actions of the international
community had not changed only a political regime;
they had changed people's lives dramatically. However,
despite all the disappointments, extreme violence and
lack of resources the country is enduring, Libyans are
doing their best to ensure that life goes on.

In Libya, support from the international community
continues to be greatly needed, but this support going
forward must be completely and urgently redesigned to
empower the Libyan people, including men and youth,
to play an active role in peacebuilding. We cannot have
a repeat ofthe 2011 international support efforts, which
directly affected power structures on the ground.
As such, when implementing the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) action plan
on Libya, crucial questions therefore need to be
addressed. Who receives support from the international
community? Who is invited to take part in negotiations,
and who needs mediation? Who is recognized by the
action plan as an important player, and what security
threats will the action plan identify and prioritize?

For example, the threat of open borders in Libya is
a matter of people's security, as it poses the threat of
arms smuggling and human trafficking. However, most
of the international community's recent efforts address
it only as a threat posed by immigration. For Libya,
Violent extremism is a threat to personal freedom and
human rights, but for the international community it is
addressed only as an external threat to the West.

The role of civil society must be a necessary focus
of the UNSMIL action plan. In that regard, I would
like to focus on women and youth. In Libya, there are
many national and local initiatives that strengthen
peacebuilding, conflict prevention and conflict
resolution. My organization - Together We Build
It - created the 1325 Network in Libya, which works
in different parts of the country to provide women and
young people with a platform for self-development in
areas related to human security and countering and
preventing violent extremism.

The work of my organization as a civil society actor
has inspired many women and young people to become
active in promoting peace in the country. We recently
launched a new platform called Peace and Security
from the Libyan Woman's Perspective, in which more
than 1,000 Libyan women participated in fewer than
three days. This shows that women and young people
participate in peace efforts whenever the opportunity
arises. However, their efforts must be supported by the
international community so that the outcome of their
work will be reflected throughout the country.

Determining the real problem is the first step
towards the right solution. As such, the problem in Libya
is not only a conflict-related issue; it matters how parties
to the conflict communicate with each other. Part of the
Libyan solution would be to establish communication
channels not only among the parties directly involved
in the conflict, but among all actors in Libya - State
actors and non-State actors, including civil society.
Such channels must ensure that all actors have an equal
opportunity and the space to communicate feedback,
opinions and feelings with each other.

If UNSMIL's action plan is to be a shared agenda
where international interests meet Libyan priorities and
needs, then the implementation of every aspect of the
plan must be systematically integrated with resolutions
1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015). Those resolutions should
serve as guidelines for the implementation of the action
plan, not only to position women and young people to
lead mediation and conflict resolution efforts, but also
to address the long-term structural issues that often
fail to sustain peace. As such, arising from our belief
in the United Nations and its principles, and based
on our belief that peace is based on equality, justice,
demilitarized security, non-Violence and inclusive
social transformation, we urge UNSMIL and the
Security Council to ensure the full implementation of
the recently adopted resolution 2376 (2017), and take
the gender perspective into account by ensuring the full
and effective participation of women in the democratic
transition process, reconciliation efforts, the security
sector and national institutions, in line with resolution
1325 (2000). Moreover, for resolution 2376 (2017) to be
implemented, specific human and financial resources
must be allocated.

Women make up more than 50 per cent of Libyan
society and young people make up more than 50 per
cent. It is clear from the political process that the people
in charge of bringing about sustainable peace in our
country, our leadership, do not reflect the demographic
structure of our country. We would like to see greater
representation and participation of women and youth
throughout the political process. We would also like
UNSMIL to ensure the meaningful participation of
women and young people in the upcoming national
conference. We would like to see women and young
people taking part in all conference meetings - open
and closed-door meetings alike. Furthermore, we would
like the upcoming elections laws to ensure that women
and young people have a fair chance to participate,
with a minimum quota for women and a separate one
for youth. In addition, as Libyan civil society, we
would like the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to hold regular meetings with women and young
people in order to consult with them on all aspects of
UNSMIL's action plan; strengthen disarmament efforts
as disarmament is the key element in preventing the
further escalation of conflict; and promote the full and
effective participation of women and young people in
all disarmament-related discussions.

A violence-free society is one in which Libyans
desire to live. Moreover, ensuring investigations
into and the monitoring of human rights violations,
including sexual violence, the safety, dignity and
longer-term needs of survivors and their families
should be at the heart of the such efforts. Grass-roots
civil society organizations, including local women
and youth organizations, should be supported in their
efforts to advocate that approach.

I would like to conclude my statement by echoing
the words of Tawfik Bin Saud, a young activist who
was shot dead in 2014. He stated that working for
peace should never stop; only war should stop. All
Libyans dream of prosperity, peace and stability. The
responsibility to make that dream come true rests on
the Council's shoulders.

