Mr. Theron (Namibia): We, too, would like to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Carl Bildt, for his informative briefing this
morning. We should also like to thank and
acknowledge the positive statements made by
Mr. Solana and Mr. Monteiro ofthe European Union.

Namibia remains concerned about the unsettled
political situation in the Balkans, in particular Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the province of Kosovo.
However, for today, we think it worthwhile to reflect
on reasons for optimism over the future of the Balkans,
despite the many problems and difficulties that face the
region.

In this regard, the Stability Pact programme put
forward by States members of the European Union and
others outside Europe is an important programme for
reviving the socio-economic situation in the Balkans.
However, we would like to see the programme applied
to cover the entire region. Namibia believes that the
idea behind the Stability Pact was and remains an
excellent concept to bring stability to the region and to
allow these regional States to join the rest of the
European family.

With regard to some of the specific areas of
concern, my delegation supports the forthcoming
municipal elections in Kosovo and commends the work
of the United Nations Interim Administration in
Kosovo command, under the leadership of
Mr. Kouchner.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, we agree with
Mr. Bildt that the road ahead is still long and
precarious. Therefore, the role of the international
community is essential because refugees, inter alia,
must be given the opportunity to return to their homes
and internally displaced persons must be afforded the
dignity and freedom to reclaim their right to
citizenship.

In order to provide momentum for peace and
stability efforts in the Balkans, my delegation still
believes that it is incumbent upon the international
community to invest in the possibility of organizing a
conference for dialogue and reconciliation to
complement the elements of regional cooperation very
well articulated today in the Stability Pact programme.
This indaba must bring members of the political
leadership, civil society and the private sector together
to deliberate on their region and devise appropriate
solutions to the problems that have bedevilled the
region for decades, if not centuries. This, in our View,
will consolidate the situation and provide appropriate
strategies for the way forward, and might prevent
further crises in the future.

In conclusion, I once again wish to express our
appreciation for the briefing by the Special Envoy and
my delegation wishes to encourage him to continue the
good work of engaging the leaders ofthe region.

