Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My country has been following the
question of Palestine within the context of events in the
Middle East. Over the years the restoration of the
Palestinian people's rights over the territories occupied
since 1967 has been a matter of constant concern. The
signing by Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) in September 1993 of the historic
Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements in the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area was
a great step forward, and it gave rise to great expectations
that a just and wide-ranging solution to the question of
Palestine would be achieved. Similarly, the Agreement on
the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area, signed between the
Government of Israel and the PLO in Cairo on 4 May
1994, was a significant and positive event in the search
for a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine.

Those efforts are now clouded, however, by the
settlements in the occupied territories, which constitute an
obstacle to the peace process. My delegation considers it
imperative that during the transitional period the practice
of establishing settlements in the occupied territories be
eliminated. The achievement of a peaceful, just and
lasting settlement of the question of Palestine and the

 

Arab-Israeli conflict must be based on the principle of
"land for peace" and on the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council calling for a withdrawal from all the
occupied territories in order to guarantee the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people.

Undeniably, the success of the peace process between
Palestine and Israel depends to a great extent on the
fulfilment of the commitments contained in the Agreement
I have mentioned. In addition, the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 must be respected in the
Palestinian territories. Two reports submitted to the General
Assembly last year - one by the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of
the Palestinian People and other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories, and the other by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East -
note that since September 1993 the practices of expanding
settlements and constructing dwellings in the occupied
territories have been stepped up. Two letters recently
addressed to the Secretary-General by the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People and by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations also confirm the Israeli
practice of establishing settlements and constructing
dwellings in the occupied territory of the West Bank.

My delegation considers that the question of the
settlements is one of the issues that, in accordance with the
Declaration of Principles, should be resolved in the
permanent-status negotiations during the last phase of the
peace process. But at the same time we believe that,
besides the necessity of respecting the provisions of the
Declaration, the parties are obliged to refrain from engaging
in behaviour or practices that jeopardize the

 

objectives of the Declaration, undermine confidence,
create difficulties during the transitional process or impair
the results of the permanent-status negotiations in the
Palestinian-Israeli track of the Middle East peace process.

My delegation considers that recognition of the
rights of the Palestinian people is an essential requirement
for ensuring peace in the Middle East. What is most
important in the peace negotiations is that they move
forward, not slip backwards. This opportunity to provide
a definitive solution to the Middle East question is unique
and historic. The parties participating in the process must
seize this opportunity and avoid taking rigid or negative
attitudes.

We believe that this Organization, which has been
making considerable contribution to the peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine, must play a
fundamental role in the peace process by taking on the
responsibility of overseeing the successful implementation
of the commitments reached between the PLO and Israel.
We hope the peace process in the Middle East will be
further strengthened by the effective implementation of
the Declaration of Principles and all the other agreements
reached between the two parties. The final objective must
be the attainment of a just, comprehensive and definitive
settlement in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the Council.

My delegation would therefore support any action by
the Council calling upon the parties to show a genuine
desire for peace, by respecting their commitments under
the Declaration of Principles, the Cairo Agreement and all
subsequent agreements by putting an end to the
settlements policy and by continuing to negotiate in good
faith to resolve remaining questions.

