Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Because I am speaking on behalf of the Human
Security Network, I will deliver my statement in
English.
(spoke in English)

It is my honour to speak on behalf of Austria,
Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali,
Norway, Slovenia, Thailand, South Africa as an
observer, and my own country, Switzerland. The
Human Security Network is an informal group of
States that advocates a people-centred, holistic
approach to security, which complements the more
traditional understanding of national and international
security.

Let me join the other speakers in thanking the
Chairs of the three Committees for their informative
briefings.

Terrorism is undeniably a major threat to human
security. The Human Security Network therefore
supports the fight against international terrorism based
on the principles of the Charter, international law and
the relevant international conventions, and it welcomes
the strong leading role the United Nations has taken in
this field. From a human security perspective, the
strength of the United Nations actions against terrorism
is commensurate with the respect for the founding
objectives of the United Nations.

Of particular importance is the adherence to
human rights and fundamental freedoms and the
observance of the rule of law in situations where the
United Nations actions directly affect individual rights,
which is the case in the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities.

Against that background, the Human Security
Network welcomes the adoption of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly 
resolution 60/288) five years ago - recently
reaffirmed, in 2010 (General Assembly resolution 64/297) - which offers a comprehensive framework

for a coherent international response to terrorism. We
affirm the important role of the United Nations system
in strengthening the international legal architecture by
promoting the rule of law, respect for human rights and
effective criminal justice systems, which constitute the
fundamental basis of our common fight against
terrorism.

The Human Security Network also emphasizes
that further international cooperation among States,
international and regional organizations and the United
32

Nations is essential in the fight against international
terrorism in order not just to combat and eliminate
terrorism but also to prevent it.

The Human Security Network applauds the
considerable efforts of the Security Council to make
the procedures of its Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee clearer and fairer, in particular through the
adoption of resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009),
which introduced periodic reviews of the Consolidated
List and an enhanced system of notifications and
established the Office of the Ombudsperson. We are
convinced that clearer and fairer procedures render the
work of the 1267 Committee more legitimate and thus
more effective.

The Network observes, however, that concerns
still remain as to the rights of listed individuals and
entities. Accordingly, we have taken note with interest
of the suggestions of the group of like-minded States
on targeted sanctions - as presented earlier by my
colleague from Costa Rica - on how the procedures of
the 1267 Sanctions Committee could be improved, in
particular in the field of listing, de-listing and
strengthening the mandate of the Ombudsperson. We
therefore encourage the Security Council to consider
the recommendations of the group of like-minded
States, also in view of the adoption of a follow up to
resolution 1904 (2009) in June 2011.

