Mr. Vukasinovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to thank the leaders
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for their respective reports (see S/2018/347 and S/2018/471) and for today's detailed briefings on
the progress in the Mechanism's work.

We note the continued progress by the Mechanism
in implementing residual activities of the now-closed
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY). The successful conclusion of the Mechanism's
mandate in an efficient manner and within a reasonable
time frame is of crucial importance for justice and
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
region. Throughout the years, the cooperation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina with the ICTY has been steadfast and
full, as evidenced by the Tribunal's reports. In the same
vein, we remain committed to contributing actively to
the Mechanism's efforts to accomplish its mission.

In addition to its cooperation with the ICTY, Bosnia
and Herzegovina remains committed to improving
the efficiency of domestic war-crimes institutions.
Accountable and independent judicial institutions that
enjoy public trust throughout the entire country is a
precondition not only for prosecuting and punishing
individual perpetrators of war crimes, but also for
achieving reconciliation among Bosniaks, Croats
and Serbs, who are the constituent peoples of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's national war crimes
strategy plays a crucial role in making progress on
reconciliation. The implementation of the strategy is a
complex process in which many institutions at all levels
of authority in Bosnia and Herzegovina participate. In
that regard, we continue to make efforts to strengthen
the national justice system at all levels. We are currently
in the process of identifying and further defining
activities for promoting the implementation of the
national war crimes strategy with a view to bringing to
justice persons responsible for war crimes.

The Prosecutor's Office ofBosnia and Herzegovina
filed 29 new indictments during the reporting period,
having shifted its activities over the past two years
from processing category 2 cases to addressing a large
number of important indictments in complex cases
involving senior- and mid-level suspects. We welcome
the support of the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
United Nations Development Programme, in terms
of strengthening the human and material resources of
judicial institutions that are processing war crimes cases
in the country and in terms of general capacity-building
important for the full achievement of the benchmarks
and goals set out in the national war crimes strategy.
Consistent cooperation among the Prosecutors'
Offices and the relevant authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia, in accordance with
the principles of international justice and the rule of
law, is crucial to investigating and prosecuting war
crimes. We are pleased that Prosecutor Brammertz has
recognized that the productive cooperation between
the Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the Prosecutor's Office for War Crimes of Serbia
continues to develop and grow stronger and that, as
such, sets a positive example for the region. Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains committed to the promotion of
stronger and more coordinated regional cooperation.

The fight against impunity in a complex,
multinational State such as Bosnia and Herzegovina
is a crucial precondition for achieving reconciliation
and sustaining peace. In that regard, prosecuting war
crimes, regardless of the national or religious origin of
the perpetrators or victims, is of crucial importance for
long-term stability in the country and the region.

