Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I wish to thank Malaysia
for convening this open debate and for its leadership as
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/360) and briefing. I am also grateful to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
and the Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony
Lake, for their insights.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Thailand on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Children and armed conflict has been firmly high
on the agenda of the United Nations and the Security
Council in particular. Tangible progress has been
made, especially the strong momentum generated by
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign. Thousands of
children have been released from armed groups. States
concerned are implementing their respective Council-
mandated action plans. Child protection policies have
been incorporated in peacekeeping operations. Civil
and social organizations are energetically contributing
to these endeavours.

Yet, these efforts are still falling far short of
our hopes and aspirations. Children continue to be
deprived of their basic rights and needs in both armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. The longer-term
impacts on children's development are equally of
serious concern. Viet Nam condemns the continued
killing of and violence against children, including
sexual violence, as well as the recruitment and use
of child soldiers, the acts of abduction and attacks
targeting schools and hospitals. We call on all parties
to conflicts to put an end to these outrageous acts, first
and foremost, by complying with international human
rights and humanitarian law.

We wish to underline the importance of a
preventive strategy that addresses the root causes of
armed conflict by promoting sustainable development,
poverty eradication, national reconciliation, the rule
of law at both national and international levels, the
promotion and protection of human rights, and the
reintegration and rehabilitation of children affected by
armed conflict.

There are also challenges in responding to the needs
of children not only during, but also after conflicts. My
delegation is ofthe view that, in post-conflict situations,
priority should be given to children and United Nations
agencies should devote more resources to programmes
targeting children in the areas of education, mental and
physical health, as well as addressing the long-term
impacts on children, particularly girls and children
with disabilities.

As a country where generations of children have
suffered immensely from devastating wars, and
suffer even today, Viet Nam is strongly committed to
defending and promoting the best interests of children,
especially those affected by conflicts.

Viet Nam is making every possible effort to care
for and protect children with disabilities caused by
explosive remnants of war and agent orange/dioxin.
Viet Nam was one of the first countries to ratify the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and has ratified
its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in
armed conflict. During its term in the Council in 2008-
2009, Viet Nam convened an open debate on children
and armed conflict (see S/PV.5936) and worked with
other Council members to adopt resolution 1882 (2009).

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Viet
Nam will continue to work with the Council and the
international community for the protection and the
betterment of children affected by armed conflict.

