Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Sir, to preside
over the Security Council.

It is clear today that, in essence, the so-called
Arab Spring some time ago ceased being a democratic
rebuilding. The turbulent processes in the region have
led to the fall offormer regimes in a number ofcountries,
and to the emergence of difficult crises in others.
However, it did not create productive momentum. For
example, the recent events in Yemen make it clear that,
even in those States that were being touted as models
of successful political transformation, events have
taken a violent and unpredictable turn. We consider the
events in the Middle East as the manifestation of some
dangerous universal trends today. The intervention in
States of the Middle East and embarking on projects
of regime change for undesirable regimes have led to
chaos and destabilization in the region. the subject of
foreign intervention in 2011, Libya today has parallel
Parliaments and Governments. There are also clashes
between armed elements. Another example is last
year's events in Syria and Iraq, where extremists from
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) took a
number of key provinces in a very short period.

Given the scale of the events and the threats under
way from ISIS and other such jihadist organizations, it
is clear that the threats spread far beyond the Middle
East. We have already seen them manifest in Denmark,
France, Australia and Canada. Based on our position
of principle, we believe that there is a need to combat
terrorism. That position has not changed. There is
also a need to shore up international efforts to counter
this global threat. Counter-terrorism activities must
be based on international law and be carried out
under the auspices of the Security Council. That is
the very foundation upon which we resolved the issue
of eliminating chemical weapons in Syria and drew
up efforts to counter foreign terrorist fighters. It was
on Russia's initiative that resolution 2199 (2015) was
adopted, in order to halt the financing of armed terrorist
groups by way of the illegal sale of oil.

Russia is interested in a democratic and prosperous
Middle East where all sides are brought together by
traditional ties of friendship. Unlike others, we draw no
benefit from chaos and destabilization. We stand ready
to cooperate with all interested parties so as to support
the States of the region to resolve the challenges they
face. With regard to chronic conflicts in the region,
events cannot be allowed to run their course - first
and foremost when it comes to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, which is a basic factor of instability in the
entire Middle East that helps extremists recruit new
members. We think that a fair solution to the long-
standing problems in the region will foster overeall
stability in the Middle East and North Africa.

We underscore our readiness to work bilaterally
with Palestinians and Israelis, as well as in international
forums, first and foremost the Middle East Quartet of
international mediators. In that regard, the Quartet's
Munich ministerial statement of 5 February 2011
(SG/2168), concerning closer cooperation between the
Quartet and the League of Arab States and interested
Arab countries, remains relevant.

In order to resolve the Gaza issue, there is a need
for a two-track solution to address the core issues on
the basis of principled positions. In that regard, two
things must be dealt with: extending the control of the
Palestinian Authority and ensuring stability in enclaves.
We reiterate our commitment to moving forward with
intra-Palestinian dialogue on the basis of the political
platform of the Palestine Liberation Organization
and the Arab Peace Initiative. Among other things, a
long-term solution in Gaza can guarantee Palestinians
the timely provision of the donor resources pledged
by participating countries at the October 2014 Cairo
international confernce on Gaza reconstruction.

It is also with that logic in mind that we will continue
to be guided in establishing intra-Syrian consultations
in Moscow. We believe that, following the first round in
April, certain progress has been made in relaunching a
search for a political settlement to the Syrian crisis. The
main outcome of the last round was agreement on the
so-called Moscow platform document, supported by
most participants at the meeting, which sets out various
assessments of the current state of affairs in Syria. It is
clear that, without stepping up direct contacts between
the Government and the moderate opposition, there
will be no implementation of the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). Syrians must come together to
counter the growing terrorist threat emanating from
ISIS, J abhat Al-Nusra and other terrorist and extremist
groups. For our part, we stand ready to continue to
assist intra-Syrian dialogue. We hope that the Moscow
momentum will continue to be drawn upon thanks to
the efforts of Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura, as was the case with the launching
of the political process for the Geneva communique
and his efforts at confidence-building efforts on local
truces.

