I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your country's presidency of the Security Council, and I thank you for convening this meeting. We appreciate the valuable briefings given by Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and the other speakers. The three pillars on which the United Nations is founded reflect the international community's need for sustainable peace, security, development and human rights. Accordingly, peace is a fundamental pillar of Qatari policy. As a country in a region that has paid a heavy price as a result of crises and conflicts, we fully grasp just how vital peace and security are. As part of its commitment to the Charter of the United Nations, Qatar has supported the peaceful settlement of disputes as a means of achieving peace. My country's efforts have contributed to resolving a number of conflicts peacefully through mediation; it most recently facilitated and hosted the Afghan negotiations in Doha, which were hailed by the Security Council. This is in addition to the significant contributions made by Qatar to human development, in particular, providing education in conflict zones as a key peacebuilding tool. Given the essential role of youth in achieving peace, in May 2021 Qatar will host the High-Level Global Conference on Comprehensive Peace Paths for Youth, which is aimed at enabling young people to play an active part in peace processes in conflict-ridden areas, support reconstruction efforts and sustain post-conflict peace. The conference will be held in collaboration with the United Nations, Finland, Colombia and the Qatari Education Above All Foundation. As part of the partnership to address the repercussions of the coronavirus disease pandemic, Qatar has provided $89 million in medical assistance to nearly 78 countries, $10 million to the World Health Organization and $20 million to Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance. It has also provided $50 million in support of efforts to address the impact of the coronavirus crisis on and improve the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The protracted tensions and conflicts in the Middle East constitute a major challenge to peace. It is concerning that the region is in the grip of destabilizing new crises that make sustainable peace an elusive prospect. The unjust blockade against Qatar, now in its fourth year, flagrantly violates the Charter of the United Nations and the fundamental principles of friendly relations among States. The international community is therefore duty-bound to ensure respect for international law and to maintain international peace and security. Committed to upholding the Charter of the United Nations, Qatar has supported all initiatives based on the principle of peaceful settlement of disputes to resolve the Gulf crisis. His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, Emir of Qatar, has called for serious and constructive dialogue based on common interests, neighbourly relations, mutual respect for the sovereignty, independence and integrity of States and non-interference in their internal affairs. He conveyed to his Highness the late Amir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, his commitment to mediation and to the efforts of our friends and allies. In conclusion, Qatar renews its commitment to continue its efforts to build a sustainable peace and to support the Security Council's mandate to maintain international peace and security.
