Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): My delegation
would like to join others who expressed their
condemnation and disgust at the unfortunate attacks
on the United Nations compound in Mogadishu. Our
condolences go to all those affected.

My delegation wishes to thank the President of
the Council for convening this debate on conflict-
prevention and natural resources. We also wish to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, Under-
Secretary-General and Associate Administrator for
the United Nations Development Programme Rebeca
Grynspan, World Bank Managing Director Caroline
Anstey and Mr. Kofi Annan, Chair of the African
Progress Panel, for their statements to the Council this
morning.

Unfortunately, natural resources are a persistent
contributory factor in fuelling instability and conflict
across the globe. Countries endowed with natural
resources should ideally harness those invaluable
resources to improve socioeconomic conditions. South
Africa believes that, through the United Nations, the
international community has an obligation to eradicate
the nefarious factors behind intra-State and inter-State
conflicts that are fuelled by the struggle over natural
resources. Often such conflicts devastate States by
destroying already underdeveloped infrastructure,
undermine peacebuilding and fuel conflicts through
competition for access to natural resources.

In that context, we believe that Council sanctions
are an important tool for the international community
to ensure that revenues from natural resources do not
further fuel conflicts. We also believe that the work
of the Security Council should be seen in that regard.
While recognizing that the Security Council may
be called upon to impose coercive measures, such as
sanctions, we believe that such measures should be
exercised with great caution and only be used to support
the resumption of political dialogue and negotiations to
achieve a peaceful solution.

The role of the international community in
supporting regional organizations and countries with
natural resources is another factor in ensuring that
conflicts can either be prevented or resolved. For
example, in 2008, the African Union adopted the
Africa Mining Vision. The support of our international
partners will also extend to helping States develop
strong, accountable and transparent Government
institutions that can regulate their extractive industries.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission is also
critical to supporting States emerging from conflict
to develop the necessary capacity for the effective
management of their natural resources and ensuring
respect for national ownership.

There are several examples of various largely stable
resource-exporting countries where natural resources
have contributed to long-term economic growth. In
those countries, the resources with which they are
endowed have not necessarily led to violent conflict.
Rather, we have experienced major improvements in
the quality of life of the people. Clearly, the mechanism
through which natural resources induce conflict are
deeply rooted in economic and social structures. In
that respect, the acknowledged importance of the
governance and management of natural resources as the
core tools of conflict prevention should lead countries
to developing effective responses to the challenges
posed by the mismanagement of natural resources.
In that regard, national legislation and regulation
for the effective management of natural resources
is critical to ensuring that the risks emanating from
natural resources are reduced. Counter-measures
such as revenue-sharing, resumed social spending,
transparency and anti-corruption initiatives are some
of the ways by which tensions and conflict can be
reduced, if not avoided.

The Kimberley Process certification scheme is an
example of such a mechanism. That United Nations-
endorsed multi-stakeholder process, which South
Africa has the honour to chair this year, involves
more than 50 Governments, the European Union, the
diamond industry and civil society. The process has
established a set of minimum acceptable international
standards for national certification schemes relating to
the trade in rough diamonds. The certification scheme
ensures that the rough-diamond trade does not finance
violence by rebel movements and their allies seeking
to undermine legitimate Governments. This year we
celebrate 10 years of the international implementation
of the Kimberley Process. We must acknowledge
that the Kimberly Process has been instrumental in
stemming the flow of rough diamonds from rebel-
held conflict areas, thereby contributing substantially
to peace efforts. The Kimberly Process has also had a
significant developmental impact in improving the lives
of people dependent upon trade in rough diamonds.

In conclusion, South Africa recognizes that far-
reaching shifts in the global economic order over
recent years have created a fundamentally new
configuration of natural resource markets and trading
relations, as well as competition over real or perceived
natural-resource scarcity. However, the fundamental
changes should not provide an excuse for anybody to
ignore the strife created by international corruption in
the natural-resource sector. We should not ignore the fact
that parties involved in armed conflict have developed
access to the external markets of the developed world
to dispose of these resources. That makes the role of
traders, transport companies, international banks and
transnational corporations a critical part of this debate.
On the other hand, the home Governments of those
involved in trading with rebels, smugglers and arms
traders must also hold those entities who are involved
accountable.

