Mrs. Haley (United States of America): To my
friends on the Security Council, I must say that today is
a dark day, because yesterday's actions by North Korea
made the world a more dangerous place. Its illegal
missile launch was not only dangerous but also reckless
and irresponsible. It showed that North Korea does not
want to be part of a peaceful world. It has cast a dark
shadow of conflict on all nations that strive for peace.

Yesterday's act came from the same vicious dictator
who sent a young college student home to his parents
unresponsive and in a coma. For Americans, the true
nature of the North Korean regime was painfully
brought home with the images of two guards holding
Otto Warmbier up as they transported him from a
prison, in which he should never have been. Otto
Warmbier is but one person out of the millions who
have been killed, tortured or deprived of their human
rights by the North Korean regime.

To Americans, the death of one innocent person
can be as powerful as the death of millions because all
men and women are created in God's image. Depravity
towards one is a sure sign of willingness to do much
more harm. The nature of the North Korean regime is
clear. Only the scale of the damage that it does could
become different. That is why yesterday's escalation is
so alarming. If North Korea treats an innocent young
student the way it treated Otto Warmbier, we should
not be surprised if it acts barbarically on a larger scale.

The United States does not seek conflict. In
fact, we seek to avoid it. We seek only the peaceful
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and an end
to the threatening actions of North Korea. Regrettably
we are witnessing just the opposite. Make no
mistake - North Korea's launch of an intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM) is a clear and sharp military
escalation. The North Korean regime openly states that
its missiles are intended to deliver nuclear weapons
to strike cities in the United States, South Korea and
Japan, and now it has greater capacity to do so. In
truth, it is not only the United States and our allies that
are threatened. North Korea's destabilizing escalation
is a threat to all nations in and beyond the region.
Its actions are quickly closing off the possibility of a
diplomatic solution.

The United States is prepared to use the full range
of its capabilities to defend itself and its allies. One
of our capabilities lies with our considerable military
forces. We will use them if we must, but we prefer not
to have to go in that direction. We have other methods
of addressing those who threaten us and of addressing
those who supply the threats. We have great capabilities
in the area of trade. President Trump has spoken
repeatedly about that. I spoke with him at length about
it this morning.

There are countries that are allowing - even
encouraging - trade with North Korea in violation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Such countries
would also like to continue their trade arrangements
with the United States. That is not going to happen. Our
attitude on trade changes when countries do not take
international security threats seriously. Before the path
to a peaceful solution is entirely closed, however, there
remains more that the international community can and
must do diplomatically and economically.

In the coming days, we will bring before the
Security Council a draft resolution that raises the
international response in a way that is proportionate to
North Korea's new escalation. I will not detail the draft
resolution here today, but the options are all known to
us. If we are unified, the international community can
cut off the major sources of hard currency to the North
Korean regime. We can restrict the flow of oil to its
military and its weapons programme. We can increase
air and maritime restrictions. We can hold senior regime
officials accountable.

The international community has spoken
frequently against the illegal and dangerous actions
of the North Korean regime. For many years, there
have been numerous United Nations sanctions against
North Korea, but they have been insufficient to get
it to change its destructive course. If we are to have
an impact on and move North Korea off its military
escalation, we must therefore do more. We will not look
exclusively at North Korea. We will look at any country
that chooses to do business with that outlaw regime.
We will show no patience for stalling or talking our
way down to a watered-down resolution. Yesterday's
ICBM. escalation requires an escalated diplomatic and
economic response.

Time is short. Action is required. The world is
on notice. If we act together, we can still prevent a
catastrophe, and we can rid the world of a grave threat.
If we fail to act in a serious way, there will be a different
response. Much of the burden of enforcing United
Nations sanctions rests with China; 90 per cent of trade
with North Korea is from China. We will work with
China. We will work with any and every country that
believes in peace, but we will not repeat the inadequate
approaches of the past, which have brought us to this
dark day.

We cannot forget the multiple missile tests of this
year or yesterday's escalation. We cannot forget Otto
Warmbier and others whom North Korea continues to
hold. We cannot forget the threats to our friends and
allies around the world. We will not forget, and we will
not delay.

