Mr. Begec (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I will now make a statement in my
national capacity.

We too thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate. The security situation in the Gulf of Guinea
is assuming alarming proportions that threaten the
safety of civilian vessels from all over the world and
the national interests of the regional countries. Unlike
Somalia, where multilateral counter-piracy efforts have
led to a steady decline in attacks, the Gulf of Guinea has
seen an escalation in acts of maritime piracy, including
armed robbery and hostage-taking, since 2009.

Navigational safety in the Gulf of Guinea and
unimpeded transport of goods are crucial to regional
trade and the development efforts of the coastal
countries. As the abduction of Turkish crew members
of a freighter owned by a Turkish company and a failed
attempt by pirates to board another ship bearing the
Turkish flag have shown, no country is immune from
the growing menace in the region. The international
community should demonstrate the necessary cohesion
and solidarity to face and eliminate that challenge. In
the absence of robust responses, the Gulf of Guinea
pirates are consolidating and expanding their activities
and using increasingly sophisticated methods.

Turkey believes that effective counter-piracy action
must take into account the modus operandi of pirates,
as well as the piracy profile and emerging trends.
Effective responses should also be applied within the
scope of the broader maritime security context, with
particular attention to the evolving criminal networks.
The external actors, donor agencies and relevant
international organizations should engage with the
States of the Gulf of Guinea in a coordinated way. Such
an endeavour will require the involvement and support
of existing regional schemes, as exemplified by the 2013
Yaounde Summit of Heads of State and Government on
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, as
well as the Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of Central
African States, the Economic Community of Western
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission,
held again in Yaounde' in February 2016.

The lack of effective cooperation and coordination
among maritime security bodies is the core issue
in failing to counter piracy. The swift sharing of
information among the littoral States about acts of piracy
is of utmost importance. Moreover, the lack of hot-
pursuit arrangements among some countries hampers
the efforts to combat piracy and armed robbery at sea.
The littoral States should make necessary amendments
in their domestic legislation with a view to punish the
pirates arrested on the high seas.

The execution of various regional strategies already
in place could be coordinated in a wider forum specific
to the Gulf of Guinea, which would serve as an interface
between regional actors and those members of the
international community that are willing and capable to
extend support to this cause. The countries ofthe region
should receive assistance in building and enhancing the
capacities of their national naval forces. Equipment
support, training, intelligence-sharing and the
establishment of new modalities for cooperation could
be instrumental in that direction. In order to improve
the capacity of coastal countries, a special trust fund
could be established within the United Nations system
through the contributions of concerned Governments
and, if need be, of those private enterprises in the
shipping and maritime transport sector whose business
operations are directly damaged by those attacks.

Turkey is ready to explore all possible avenues of
cooperation among the nations affected by that threat
and to contribute, to the best of its ability, to the
implementation of new strategies that could be devised
in the period ahead.

