Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
this meeting of the Security Council. We also thank
Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his report to the Security Council on
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However,
we are obliged to note that we cannot agree with some
of the points made in the report.

For example, we do not agree with the alarmist
assessment of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We regard as not completely correct the reference in
the report to the communique of 26 June this year of
the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board,
which supposedly reflects "the justified concern of the
international community about the overall political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina" (S/2008/705, Summary).
The Russian Federation refused to support that
document, the content of which does not reflect reality
and runs counter to the agreed policy of the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board. A more
balanced assessment of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is to be found in the statement issued by
the Steering Board at the end of its Brussels meeting
on 19 and 20 November 2008.

We would like to draw attention to the fact that
the international observers did not find any serious
comments to offer on the preparations for or the
holding of the 5 October local elections. Those
elections were completely organized and held by the
Bosnian authorities. I think that this speaks to the
maturity and capacity of the State and local structures
and provides an additional argument in favour of
transferring responsibility for the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Bosnians.

We support the compromise agreed on
8 November by the leaders of the major parties of the
three peoples forming the State on most important
issues on the Bosnian agenda. This opens up the
possibility in coming months to move ahead
significantly in solving the most acute problems, for
example, those of State-owned property and the status
around Brcko. This will also help to enable further
development of the State and ensure implementation of
the programme set by the Steering Board calling for
transitioning from the Office of the High
Representative to the Mission of the European Union
Special Representative. I am thinking of
implementation of the so-called Five Plus Two formula
and the five objectives and two conditions set by the
Steering Board to be met before the Office of the High
Representative is closed. The basic task for the High
Representative at this stage is to help the parties
implement their own agreements, and we have
confirmed often our willingness to help with this.

We call for a balanced approach by the
international community to the Bosnian sides and an
objective assessment of what they actually do.
Unfortunately, there are still sharp disagreements
between the leaders of the Bosnian entities. In this
connection, we think it is essential that all sides
comply with the Dayton Peace Agreement. At this
stage, that Peace Agreement is the irreplaceable
foundation for stabilization in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It must be strictly complied with in all of its parts, in
all of its areas - the competences of the central organs
of power, the powers of the entities. Reform can be
only on the basis of consensus of the sides. Imposing
some kind of formula or prescription to improve the
Dayton Agreement, especially using the so-called Bonn

powers, is unacceptable and doomed to failure. We also
oppose additional conditions, such as constitutional
reform and the closing of the Office of the High
Representative.

