Mr. Konishi (Japan): The Angolan peace process
reached an important milestone last April with such
important progress as the establishment of the Government
of Unity and National Reconciliation. It was then hoped
that peace and stability would truly come to Angola.
However, the situation has since deteriorated to the point
that the Secretary-General was forced to declare in his
report of 13 August that the peace process was facing some
of the most serious difficulties since the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol. This is an extremely regrettable and grave
state of affairs.

As the draft resolution on which we are about to vote
makes clear, the main responsibility for the current impasse
must be borne by UNITA. Despite repeated urging by the
Security Council, it has consistently failed to fulfil its
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. Therefore, the
Council must now go beyond merely applying verbal
pressure on UNITA and take decisions on the concrete
measures to be taken against it, as provided for in the draft
resolution. UNITA can still avoid the imposition of these
measures if it immediately takes real steps to meet its
obligations at this eleventh hour. Indeed, this is what all of
us in the international community wish to see, and we
demand of UNITA, in the strongest terms, that it do so.

Japan attaches great importance to the effectiveness of
these measures, for which cooperation from the
neighbouring States is essential. UNITA should bear in
mind the Security Council's readiness to consider still
further measures in the event that UNITA persists in its
refusal to meet its obligations.

While it is mainly UNITA which has reneged on its
commitments concerning the peace process, the
Government of Angola must also meet all its obligations
and cooperate fully with United Nations Observer Mission
in Angola (MONUA). Both parties must ensure the freedom
of movement and safety of MONUA personnel, stop
obstructing MONUA's verification activities and refrain
from any use of force which could obstruct full
implementation of the peace process.

The long-awaited meeting between President Dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi on Angolan territory could also
help greatly in removing major obstacles in the search for
lasting stability. We therefore urge both parties to engage
in serious talks, with a view to finding a mutually
acceptable way of holding such a meeting.

The international community hopes for and expects
further progress in the Angolan peace process and will
monitor the future actions of the Angolan Government
and UNITA as before. It will continue to assist the peace
process provided the parties make serious efforts to fulfil
their commitments. Japan, too, will search for ways to
offer all possible support to Angola, carefully considering
the situation in the country.

In closing, I should like to reiterate my
Government's respect and gratitude to the Secretary-
General, to his Special Representative, Maitre Alioune
Blondin Beye, to the personnel of MONUA and to the
three observer States for their untiring efforts to promote
peace and stability in Angola.

