The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Boutros Assaker,
Secretary-General of the Lebanese Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and Emigrants.

Oh behalf of the Council, I also extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Fayssal Mekdad, Vice-
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab
Republic.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Assaker
(Lebanon) and Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) took seats at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Commissioner of the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Brammertz to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/375, which contains a letter dated
10 June 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
report of the United Nations International Independent
Investigation Commission.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2006/278, which contains a letter dated
5 May 2006 from the charge d'affaires ad interim of
the Permanent Mission of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

I now give the floor to Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Commissioner of the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission.


