Mr. Chaudhry (Pakistan): We are very happy to
see you, Sir, chairing this very important meeting. It
follows a very useful initiative taken on this issue by
the Mexican presidency of the Security Council in
April last year. We welcome the participation of the
Secretary-General and of the representatives of
regional and subregional organizations.

The Charter of the United Nations identifies the
role that regional organizations can play in the
preservation of international peace and security. The
Charter recognizes their role in the pacific settlement
of local disputes and sets out the parameters for the
involvement of regional arrangements in enforcement
action, solely under the authority of the Security
Council.

Indeed, regional organizations have played an
important part in promoting regional peace and
stability. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has promoted
confidence-building in Europe, and NATO - from
whose representative we just heard - has been a major
force for stability. Similarly, the African Union has
been making significant contributions in the promotion
of regional peace, particularly in Burundi and, most
recently, in Darfur, in Sudan. Likewise, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has
played an important security and stabilization role in
the West African subregion. The Organization of
American States has a similar role in the Americas.

Regional arrangements can have various
configurations and variable geometry. In the Asian
region, a number of subregional arrangements are
working for the promotion of peace and stability in
their respective subregions. The Association of South-
East Asian Nations (ASEAN) does not have a security
structure, but it has a regional forum to discuss security
issues. Similar arrangements, like the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, are making valuable
contributions in promoting stability in their respective
subregions. On our subcontinent, the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), which
is currently meeting at the level of the Council of
Ministers in Islamabad, is at present an economic
forum and is playing an important role in promoting
economic and social development. Along with
economic development, SAARC could contribute to
peace and stability.

The Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC), with 57 member States, spans four continents
and represents one fourth of the membership of the
United Nations. The OIC has played an important role
in dealing with several conflicts and crises - for
instance, in facilitating the end of the foreign
occupation of Afghanistan; in mediating the Iran-Iraq
conflict; in ending the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina;
and in supporting peace efforts in various other parts of
the world, including those aimed at achieving a just
and peaceful solution to the Jammu and Kashmir
dispute. The OIC can play a vital role in promoting
solutions to some of the principal items on the
Council's agenda, including Palestine and the Middle
East, Afghanistan, Iraq, terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. At its recent Kuala
Lumpur summit, the OIC initiated a process of internal
reform and revitalization to enhance its effectiveness
and efficiency.

Regional arrangements have been involved in
stabilization operations under the mandate of the
Security Council. These have included the Stabilization
Force (SFOR) and KFOR in the Balkans, and, more
recently, regional multinational forces in West Africa
and Haiti. While regional arrangements can take
enforcement action, it is clear from the provisions of
Article 54 of the Charter that no enforcement action
shall be taken through regional agencies without the
authorization of the Security Council. The Charter does
not permit national or regional unilateralism - only
collective action with the express sanction of the
Security Council or, if it cannot act, with the
authorization of the General Assembly.

The participation of regional arrangements in the
maintenance of local peace and security in their
respective regions must also be impartial. The purpose
must be to facilitate peace, not to promote the agenda
of any regional Power. If such a regional arrangement
had existed in South-West Asia, it could have played a
salutary role in stabilizing both Afghanistan and Iraq
and could have obviated reliance on the intervention of
forces from faraway nations.

Experience of various conflict situations has
taught us that stabilization does not simply imply the
cessation of hostilities or the consolidation of peace. It
also includes preventing conflict, addressing root
causes and building sustainable peace in conflict
situations. Stabilization is a complex task which
combines the two main priorities of the United
Nations: peace and development. It involves activities
ranging from disarmament, demobilization and
reconstruction to institutional development and
economic reconstruction and rehabilitation.

Regional organizations can assist the United
Nations in a complementary and mutually supportive
role in promoting post-conflict peace-building, not
only politically but also economically. The European
Union is playing an important role in that regard in the
Balkans and elsewhere. The South Asian Association
for Regional Cooperation can play a considerable,
though indirect, role by promoting trade and economic
cooperation in South Asia.

There is a requirement for the United Nations to
devote greater attention and resources to promoting
cooperation with regional arrangements in the political
and economic areas so as to advance their common and
mutual goals of consolidating peace, stability, progress
and prosperity.

