Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I am very
grateful to you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
discuss Somalia at such an important time, to the
Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2012/283)
and to his Special Representative Augustine Mahiga
for the briefing he has just given us. We greatly
appreciate the Special Representative's work and the
efforts of his team and all the United Nations agencies
12-33979
active in Somalia. I would also like to thank the
President of Somalia for being with us here today and
for his contribution to this debate.

I would like to address two key issues - the
political process, and security in Somalia. First, our
number-one priority now must be the political process.
There are only three months to go until the end of the
transition. It is imperative that we increase the
momentum, to ensure that the national Constituent
Assembly is convened as soon as possible, in a way
that is open and representative. The ultimate
responsibility for delivering the end of the transition
lies with the Somali leaders, but we, the international
community, must continue to provide the necessary
support. The United Kingdom is providing £1 million
to the United Nations to support the process, as well as
technical support staff. We call on others to provide
support in line with the needs identified by the United
Nations.

We must also support the process politically,
providing incentives to progress and being prepared to
take action against any who seek to block or undermine
the process. I welcome the letter from the United Nations,
the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, addressing potential spoilers.
I reaffirrn the United Kingdom's commitment to taking
action against those who seek to spoil the process,
including any attempt to fix the selection of members
of the Constituent Assembly.

There are increasing reports within Somalia that
the public is not content with the process. I want to be
clear that disagreement with the process itself is not
spoiling action. Dissent is not a bad thing; it shows
engagement with the process. Public debate is a key
element of democracy, but it is vital that space be
provided within the process for those dissenting voices
to be heard and taken into account without derailing
the process in its entirety.

Much of the discontent appears to be fuelled by
suspicion and a lack of information. It is therefore vital
that the process be made as transparent as possible.
The United Nations and the Garoowe signatories need
to make public the list of elders, the process by which
they will select the national Constituent Assembly's
members, and the process for dealing with contentious
issues within the constitution.

When ministers meet at the end of the month in
Istanbul, they will assess progress on delivering the
7

end of the transition. It is for the Somali leaders,
supported by United Nations Political Office for
Somalia to demonstrate delivery of progress against the
timelines set out in the road map and the Garoowe
principles by that point.

Secondly, while our focus is currently on the end
of the transition, it is no less important that we
continue to build security and stability across Somalia.
Resolution 2036 (2012) paved the way for an enhanced
and expanded presence of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). We welcome the efforts of the
African Union (AU) and the countries of the region to
put in place arrangements to implement that mandate.
It is vital that those efforts continue and in particular
that the rehatting of Kenyan troops take place as soon
as possible.

Although resolution 2036 (2012) provided
enhanced support for AMISOM, there is still a
requirement for additional funding to provide key force
enablers and equipment. In the past year, the United
Kingdom has contributed £16 million without caveats
to the United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM. We
call on others to continue to contribute to the Trust
Fund, and on additional donors to provide funding for
long-term requirements, such as the troop stipends
currently funded by the European Union.

But we also need to enhance our efforts to
develop Somali security capacity. AMISOM. needs
effective Somali national security forces alongside
whom they can fight and to whom they can eventually
hand over. We welcome the AU efforts to identify the
immediate needs of the national security forces. We
believe that the existing provisions of the arms
embargo allow sufficient flexibility to meet those
needs and that there are important security benefits in
maintaining the embargo.

We also need to increase our efforts on longer-
term capacity-building in the security and justice
sectors as a whole to provide security and access to
justice for people across Somalia. Enhanced security
will be key to underpinning efforts at stabilization and
the development of better governance, particularly in
newly recovered areas.

We are entering a critical period in Somalia. The
Garoowe signatories need to decide. Do they want to
play their part in bringing peace to Somalia after
21 years of war, improving the lives of thousands of
Somali people and setting Somalia on the path to
8
recovery? Or do they want to let this opportunity slide
and condemn their country to further years of conflict
and turmoil? I urge them to make the right choice. If
they do so, the United Nations and the international
community will work with them and provide the
support they need.

We look forward to discussing these issues
further in Istanbul.

