Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): First, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council this month, and say how
much we look forward to working with you and your
Mission. We assure you of our support. I should also
like to thank Ambassador Churkin and his Mission for
their skilful presidency of the Council last month.

I welcome Presidents Byron and Robinson and
Prosecutors Jallow and Brammertz to the Council, and
thank them for their briefings on the implementation of
the completion strategies of the International Criminal
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
These reports indicate that the work of the two
Tribunals is not now likely to finish until 2013, at the
earliest. My Government appreciates that both
Tribunals continue to face significant challenges in
completing their work. Some accused have been
arrested at a late stage. Both Tribunals still have heavy
caseloads, including complex multi-accused cases.
Trials have been delayed due to the ill health of some
accused, and there have been large numbers of
contempt cases. These are just some of the issues being
faced.

Nevertheless, the slippage in the completion
timeline is of concern. My Government acknowledges
the efforts which have been made so far by the
principals of the Tribunals and their staff to facilitate
completion, but we emphasize that it is vital that both
Tribunals continue to do everything possible to
minimize further delays in a manner consistent with
delivering fair trials for all the accused, including by
exploring and implementing further efficiency
measures.

We hope that the Tribunals will continue to
maximize the use of available judicial time and
courtroom space. At the same time, we believe that it is
important for the Security Council to support the
Tribunals and to take the necessary decisions to allow
them to complete their work, including by granting
appropriate extensions to judges' mandates and
allowing the redeployment of judicial staff to the
Appeals Chamber.

We recognize the two Presidents' continuing
concerns about staff retention as the Tribunals near
completion. These issues are not primarily matters for
the Security Council; however, we would encourage
the Tribunals to explore non-monetary incentives to
retain staff, particularly by awarding contracts in line
with completion time scales, as decided by the General
Assembly.

Full and effective cooperation from States is
critical to ensuring that the Tribunals are able to fulfil
their mandates. My Government warmly welcomes
Prosecutor Brammertz's report of improved
cooperation by Serbia on access to documents and in
operational-level efforts to locate the fugitive indictees
Ratko Mladic' and Goran Hadzie. Overall, my
Government believes that Serbia has now established a
strong record of cooperation which should be
recognized. So we regret that this record has on two
recent occasions been undermined by contradictory
public messages from Serbia accusing the Tribunal of
bias. We hope that the Serbian authorities will in future
avoid such remarks, which could otherwise negatively
affect the willingness of Serbian citizens to assist the
Tribunal as witnesses or by providing other
information.
My Government is disappointed, however, that
Croatia has still not been able to deliver a range of key
documents for Gotovina trial. We fully support the
Prosecutor's efforts to pursue this issue. We call on
Croatia to maintain the search for missing documents
and for its administrative investigation to be backed up
by criminal charges where there is evidence of illegal
removal or destruction of documents. This remains an
area where further work is needed against a
background of otherwise solid cooperation.

As regards cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), we note with
concern Prosecutor Jallow's oral report that problems
of cooperation with Kenya remain unresolved. It is
vital that all States where fugitive indictees are
suspected to be at large, particularly Kenya and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, provide full and
immediate cooperation to facilitate their arrest and
surrender to the Tribunal. Those who have committed
serious crimes in Rwanda must face justice.

The two Tribunals have made an enormous
contribution to restoring peace and security in their
regions through combating impunity for the most
serious crimes. Their legacy must be preserved after
the Tribunals close their doors. A key element of this
will be the establishment of an effective and
sustainable residual mechanism to carry out core
residual functions, including the prosecution of
remaining fugitive indictees.

We look forward to intensifying our discussion of
these issues in the light of the forthcoming report of
the Secretary-General and with a view to reaching
agreement this year on the residual mechanism's
structure and remit.

