Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): Allow me
to welcome you, Mr. President, and congratulate you
on organizing this open debate under the Malaysian
presidency of the Security Council, as well as on the
initiative of moving forward resolution 2225 (2015),
which incorporates the issue ofthe abduction ofchildren
in armed conflicts. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, his Special Representative
Leila Zerrougui, Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF, and Ms. Eunice Apio, from the
non-governmental organization Facilitation for Peace
and Development.

As we adopt this resolution in the month of June,
hundreds if not thousands of children are being abducted
to be used for various purposes in armed conflicts, in
particular to fight against their will in the forces ofparties
to conflict or to be used as bargaining chips, in flagrant
violation of international law. The vast majority of such
acts are committed by such armed or terrorist groups as
Boko Haram and Daesh. The members of the Security
Council deplore and condemn such abductions and the
extreme barbarity with which the perpetrators treat
the children concerned. Unfortunately, the Secretary-
General's annual report for 2014 (S/2015/409) states
that there has been an unprecedented rise in violence
against children and that their abduction has become
the defining characteristic of conflicts all over the
world. That constitutes a significant challenge to their
protection, bearing in mind that 230 million of them are
currently in the affected areas.

Resolution 2225 (2015), which we havejust adopted,
is crucial because it establishes the abduction of children
as one of the trigger violations for the listing of parties
to conflicts in the annexes to the Secretary-General's
annual report. Such listing reflects the will of the
entire international community and will undoubtedly
encourage international, regional and subregional
cooperation and effectively contribute to achieving the
objectives of the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign.
In that connection, we support the recommendation
in the Secretary-General's report that grave violations
against children be included as a criterion for sanctions
in Security Council committees so that child abduction
can be more effectively combated.

We think that States can also use such measures
to improve their national legislation on eliminating
violations against children, including abduction. To
mitigate and prevent such abduction, however, States
must also facilitate contact between United Nations
bodies and non-State armed groups. It was in fact
because of dialogue with such armed groups that
questions of child protection were incorporated into
the peace agreements in the Central African Republic,
making it possible to free several hundred children from
the clutches of armed groups at the end of the Bangui
Forum in May. The same goes for South Sudan, where
1,757 children have already been freed from the grasp
of the Cobra Faction, although that figure remains
lower than the 33,000 expected.

Impunity in relation to violence against children,
however, remains a major concern in most cases. In that
connection, we would emphasize the importance of the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report and
call upon the Member States to hold the perpetrators of
such violence accountable.

Schools, universities and hospitals continue to be
subject to violent attacks and occupation for military
purposes. We reiterate our call to the parties to armed
conflicts to respect the vital, civilian character of such
institutions. We also believe that the measures set out in
the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict, endorsed
through the Safe Schools Declaration, adopted in Oslo
on 29 May, will effectively ensure the protection of
such institutions.

We must also not overlook illegal transfers of
small arms and light weapons, the stockpiling of which
undermines the efforts of the United Nations and
adversely affects children in areas affected by armed
conflict.

We believe that the withdrawal of children from
the forces of parties to conflict is essential to their
reintegration, but given their lack of financial resources
and future prospects, they are often vulnerable to being
recruited again. We encourage States and financial
partners to further intensify their efforts so as to
consolidate the reintegration measures already taken
and to prevent further recruitment. An overarching
strategy for the protection of children and school
facilities needs to be defined more urgently now than
ever before, but that cannot be done without tackling
the causes of violence and eradicating terrorism.

We welcome the progress made in the "Children,
Not Soldiers" campaign in 2014 and the efforts of
the international community, particularly the United
Nations, through the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui. We encourage them to continue
their work to achieve the campaign's objectives by 2016.
We reiterate our support for regional and subregional
organizations' leadership in and contribution to efforts
to protect children, and we urge such organizations to
intensify their efforts in that area.

Chad has maintained its partnership with the
United Nations and is developing sustained cooperation
at the regional and subregional levels, in particular with
neighbouring States. In 2015, we have demobilized
and reintegrated children who had been forced to join
ex-Sele'ka fighters in the Central African Republic and
had crossed the border into Chad. In April we also
returned to their countries approximately 30 children
snatched by the Chadian National Army from the
clutches of Boko Haram. Chadian children in the same
situation have been entrusted to the Ministry of Social
Action for reintegration, with the help of UNICEF, for
whose valuable support we would like to reiterate our
appreciation.

Lastly, the inclusion of parties to conflict in the
Secretary-General's annual report on children and
armed conflict is an important tool for combating
violations of children's rights and could dissuade
many parties tempted to commit such violations. If
that measure is to have the desired effects, however,
it must apply indiscriminately to all those who are
committing such Violations today. We dare to hope that
the Secretary-General's next report on children and
armed conflict will reflect that concern.

