Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-Generals Lowcock and Feltman for
their clear, factual briefings and for reiterating to all
of us on the Security Council the ongoing horror of the
conflict in Syria - and in particular in eastern Ghouta,
because that is where it is clear the situation is most
dire by a huge order of magnitude.

It was five days ago (see S/PV.8188) that we sat in
this Chamber and all of us raised our hands in support
of a 30-day ceasefire, which we hoped would provide
some relief to Syria's people. That was a desperately
needed step, one that came too late for many. In eastern
Ghouta alone, Medecins Sans Frontieres reported that
at least 630 people were killed and 3,000 injured in the
week before resolution 2401 (2018) was adopted, with
women and children representing nearly 60 per cent
of the wounded and 50 per cent of the deceased. We
also continue to condemn attacks on Damascus from
eastern Ghouta.

Let us recall the demands of our resolution. It
called for at least a 30-day ceasefire without delay
to allow for the delivery of humanitarian aid and
medical evacuation. "Without delay" means right now,
immediately - that there should be no delay. We all
voted for those demands and we committed to using
our influence to ensure that. In response, Russia has
declared a five-hour daily humanitarian window. That is
not what the Council demanded, nor what Russia agreed
to use its influence to ensure. A five-hour window
has not delivered and cannot deliver any meaningful
improvement on the ground. Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock has made clear that the United Nations cannot
get humanitarian convoys in and out within that time
frame, as has the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Humanitarian pauses of a few meagre hours are
no substitute for a sustained ceasefire, which is vital
to ensuring the delivery of life-saving humanitarian
assistance and medical evacuations. If Russia is able to
deliver a five-hour pause, let it deliver a 24-hour pause,
as it agreed on Saturday.

Let us now take stock of the situation in Syria, and
specifically in eastern Ghouta, where the situation is at
its most desperate. Let us review if any real change has
occurred in the past five days. Has the resolution been
implemented? Has there been a ceasefire? Has there
been any delivery of humanitarian aid or any medical
evacuations? Has the adoption of the resolution brought
any relief to the people of Syria?

The fighting has not stopped. All of the main
armed opposition groups have committed to the
full implementation of resolution 2401 (2018). The
Al-Assad regime has not, and has in fact ignored the
resolution we adopted. Reports of attacks and air
strikes by pro-regime forces continue. Twenty-two air
strikes reportedly took place even during Russia's so-
called humanitarian pause. And, as if it could not get
any worse, there have been disturbing reports of the use
of chlorine gas. Doctors in eastern Ghouta reported to
the Syrian-American Medical Society that 16 patients,
including six children, were suffering from symptoms
indicative of exposure to chemical compounds,
following an alleged regime attack on Sunday - only
one day after the resolution was adopted. Since Saturday
not a single aid convoy has been able to access eastern
Ghouta to provide relief to the desperate civilians. The
World Health Organization estimates that 1,000 people
are now in need of medical evacuation from eastern
Ghouta. None have been evacuated since the resolution
was adopted.

The consequences of the failure to implement the
resolution are clear: the casualties continue to rise
and the horror continues. The Syrian Observatory for
Human Rights reports at least 14 civilians, including
three children, were killed on Sunday. In short, in the
words of one doctor from eastern Ghouta, "Nothing
has changed."

It is the responsibility of us all to ensure that
resolution 2401 (2018) is enacted in full. In the words
of my Foreign Secretary, the Al-Assad regime must
allow the United Nations to deliver humanitarian aid,
in compliance with resolution 2401 (2018), and we
look to Russia and Iran to make sure this happens, in
accordance with their own promises.

I implore all those with influence over the Syrian
regime to act now to ensure that the ceasefire that
they supported in the Chamber is implemented in full
and immediately. To do anything less is an affront to
the Council, the United Nations and the international
system that we live by. We will continue to monitor the
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018) and commit
to returning to the Council regularly until we see
it respected.

