Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
extend my congratulations to you, Mr. President, and to
your delegation for your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of December, which, as
we all know, is not the easiest month. Let me assure
you of the full cooperation of my delegation during
your presidency. At the same time, I would like to
thank Ambassador Mayr-Harting and his team for the
excellent manner in which they chaired the Council in
the month of November. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Mayr-Harting for chairing the informal
Working Group on international tribunals and the
excellent deliberations he chaired in that respect. Allow
me to also welcome Presidents Robinson and Byron, as
well as Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow, and thank
them for their contributions and their presence here
today.

Since their establishment, the two Tribunals have
had a profound impact on efforts to deny impunity for
the serious crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda, which continue to haunt our collective
conscience. We recognize their vital contribution to the
fight against impunity, advancing the rule of law and
paving the way for reconciliation and cooperation by
providing justice and dignity to victims and by
individualizing criminal accountability.

Croatia has been a staunch supporter of the
mandate of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) since its inception. The
Croatian Government is firm in its commitment to
continue to provide its full and unequivocal support to
the Tribunal's efforts to combat impunity by
prosecuting those responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law.

We look forward to the day when the Tribunals
can close their doors and transition to a residual
mechanism, but not before ensuring that those most
responsible for the crimes committed face justice. We
thus welcome the recent arrest of the high-level
fugitives indicted by the ICTR and hope to see the
early beginning of their respective trials.

We regret that the arrest of the remaining high-
level fugitives still remains elusive for the ICTY, thus
further complicating the projected completion strategy.
Croatia firmly believes that the mandate of the ICTY
cannot be declared complete without bringing to justice
the two remaining fugitives: Ratko Mladic and Goran
Hadzic, who have been indicted for the most atrocious
crimes committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in
Croatia, namely the massacres committed in Srebrenica
and in Vukovar.

More than a year ago another high-profile
fugitive was arrested - Radovan Karadzic. We regret
to note that his case will enter the trial phase only next
spring, despite the fact that more than a dozen years
have passed since his indictment. We also regret to see
the dismay that the trial delays have caused to victims
and their families. We hope that a protracted trial will
not repeat the scenario of the trial of Milosevic, whose
death made impossible a sentence which would have
clearly outlined the role of those most responsible for
the atrocities committed in the former Yugoslavia.
Locating and arresting high-profile fugitives must
remain a priority, not just for the Tribunals but for the
international community as well.

In facilitating the arrest of all suspects in the past,
in a framework of close cooperation with the Office of
the Prosecutor and in accordance with our
constitutional law on cooperation with the ICTY,
Croatia has established a solid and credible record of
support for the fulfilment of the Tribunal's goals. In the
same spirit, Croatia is now continuing its full
cooperation with respect to the request regarding
missing documents sought by the Office of the
Prosecutor. This is particularly important in the light of
the hearing scheduled for 16 December by the Trial
Chamber, which is to assess this issue.

In that regard, let me express our appreciation for
the Prosecutor's assessment indicating Croatia's
determination to further pursue this path of full
cooperation and the leadership shown by Prime
Minister Jadranka Kosor in that respect.

While the administrative investigation has shown
that the Republic of Croatia is not in possession of the
requested documents, the establishment of a task force
and the new findings mentioned by the Prosecutor
clearly indicate the Prime Minister's determination not
only in complying with the court's orders, but also
going further in our pursuit to retrieve or fully disclose
the fate of documents which are in the exclusive
ownership of the Republic of Croatia. In pursuing this
path, we look forward to developing even further our
cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor in this
final push, with the aim of securing our common goal
of serving justice, peace, reconciliation and, based on
these values, a future of prosperity in South-East
Europe.

Croatia appreciates the considerable efforts that
the Tribunals are investing in expediting the timely
completion of their work. We take note of the
anticipated dates for the closure of the Tribunals,
which will slip well into the next decade. While we
share the concerns expressed about lengthy trials, we
also recognize the need to be realistic. The early
closure of the two Tribunals is a legitimate objective,
but not at the expense of fair trial guarantees.

As a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, for the past two years Croatia has been
participating in the extensive deliberations of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
currently under the chairmanship of Austria, whose
efforts we greatly appreciate. Setting up a residual
mechanism that will continue the essential functions of
the Tribunals after their closure remains a pressing
need. The credibility of such a mechanism will
inevitably reflect on the legacy that the Tribunals are
leaving behind. This is an issue of most direct
relevance for the countries under the Tribunals'
jurisdiction. My country hopes that the Council will be
able to define timely solutions along the lines recently
presented by the Chairman of the Informal Working
Group and adopt the necessary decisions. We hope that
our participation has helped the process by factoring in
the experience of a county directly affected by a
Tribunal's jurisdiction.

