Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): Let me first
join others in welcoming you, Madam President, to the

 

presidency; no one can say that with a greater sense of
relief than the outgoing President. You have all our
confidence and support in the month ahead.

I would also like to thank you, and others, for the
more than generous words of appreciation addressed to the
United Kingdom for our stint during the month of January.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III). I would also like to pay tribute to the work
of his Special Representative, Mr. Beye, to the three
observer States to the Angolan peace process and to the
men and women of UNAVEM. III who are doing so much
to support the peace process in challenging conditions.

UNAVEM. III is now mid-way through the two-year
mission envisaged for it in this Council's resolution 976
(1995). During that time the United Nations has made a
heavy commitment to supporting the peace process. Over
37 different States have contributed staff to UNAVEM. to
construct quartering sites, clear roads of life-threatening
mines and to repair the roads, to raise the standards of
civilian police work, and to promote respect for human
rights.

This has been a truly international effort, and it is a
source of particular satisfaction to the British Government
that a British logistics battalion played a major part in
establishing the infrastructure for these tasks.

The British Government has also helped directly
through the provision of humanitarian assistance, rendered
vital to Angola by the prolongation of the conflict and then
by delays in implementation of the peace accords. As of
today the total value of such assistance by the British
Government to Angola was £40 million over the last three
years. I say this in order to underline the commitment of
my country to assisting Angola.

My second point, however, is that Angolans must help
themselves. We look to both parties now to stand by the
commitments they have entered into. We are concerned
that, one year into the mission of UNAVEM. III, there are
still major elements of the Lusaka Protocol which have yet
to be implemented. The plain fact is that the international
community cannot support indefinitely a peace process
which is not fully supported by the parties themselves.

We are particularly concerned about the slow pace of
quartering of UNITA troops. While we understand that
approximately 5,000 troops have now reported to the
quartering areas, this is a crucial component of the peace
process and it still has yet really to begin in earnest.
There will be no excuse if UNIT A fails to quarter 16,500
troops by 8 February as Mr. Savimbi publicly promised
you, Madam President, during your visit to Angola in
January this year.

Against that, we are pleased to note one or two
encouraging signs over the last few weeks. On 9 January
a new timetable for implementing the peace process was
agreed and we urge both parties to stick to it. We
welcome the positive steps which the Government of
Angola has taken to implement its commitments by
withdrawing its troops from offensive positions, and by
beginning to quarter its rapid reaction police. It is also
encouraging that the Government has reportedly released
all prisoners in its control. UNITA must follow suit. We
expect that mercenaries will now be repatriated promptly,
as the Government has promised. Similarly, we expect
that the agreement on integrating UNITA troops into the
Angolan armed forces will be implemented.

I would like to make two further points - the first
a particular one, the second of more general application.
First, the need for peace-keeping operations such as
UNAVEM. III to have their own broadcasting capability,
to put across an impartial message to all concerned in
their area of activity, is now widely accepted. We are
disappointed that UNAVEM. III radio is not yet properly
established, despite the Security Council's repeated calls
to the Government of Angola on the subject. We hope
that the Council's message on this will now be heeded,
and that the Angolan Government will grant the necessary
facilities to allow it to operate.

Secondly, financial arrears continue to build up in
UNAVEM. III's account, and in peace-keeping operations
more generally. If peace-keeping operations are to be
enabled to fulfil their mandates they must receive funds
in full and on time. The operation which we are
discussing today is crucial to the restoration of peace and
stability to a war-torn country. Conflict in Angola has
posed a threat to peace and security more widely in
southern Africa. It would be a tragedy if this United
Nations Mission were to fail because of lack of
commitment by one of the parties. It would also be a
tragedy if it failed because the United Nations had run out
of money for it.

