Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the members of the Human Security Network,
a cross-regional network composed of several States,
including Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland,
Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama, Switzerland, Thailand,
South Africa as an observer State, and my own country,
Slovenia.

For the sake of time, I will deliver a shorter of
my statement. A full version will be available on our
website.

I would like to start by thanking the delegation of
Uruguay for convening today's open debate. I would
also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and the representative of Oxfam for their
briefings.

Civilians continue to account for the majority of
casualties in armed conflicts. The regular discussion
of this topic is of the utmost importance to the work
of the Security Council to better ensure the security
and dignity of civilians affected by armed conflicts.
The humanitarian situation affecting the people in the
Syrian Arab Republic, South Sudan and Yemen, to
mention a few, needs an urgent response.

Ensuring the respect of all parties to a conflict,
including armed groups, for human rights law and
international humanitarian law is the first necessary
step in enhancing the protection of civilians. States
must comply with their obligation to allow and
facilitate rapid and unimpeded access of humanitarian
relief for civilians in need and freedom of movement of
humanitarian personnel. In the longer run, the political
settlement of armed conflicts, coupled with preventive
measures to ensure that there is no relapse into conflict,
is needed to achieve more sustainable answers to the
urgent challenge of the protection of civilians. The
Human Security Network recognizes the efforts
taken under the Secretary-General's Human Rights
Up Front initiative to strengthen the role of the entire
United Nations system to better prevent and respond to
large-scale violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in a timely and effective manner.

We continue to witness the grave abuses and
violence, including sexual violence, being perpetrated
against civilians, especially women and girls, in
conflict and post-conflict settings. We unequivocally
condemn sexual and gender-based violence and are
determined to prevent and address those heinous
crimes. At the same time, we recognize that women are
not merely victims of armed conflicts but are positive
agents of change. Accordingly, resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security, the global study on
its implementation, resolution 2242 (XXXX) and other
related resolutions should be taken into account when
addressing the issue of the protection of civilians.

Armed conflicts have a devastating effect on the
lives of children. We categorically condemn all forms of
violence against children. The international community
must do more to protect children's rights during and
after armed conflicts and guarantee that they have a
safe and secure childhood. We also call for greater
efforts to raise awareness of the plight of refugee and
internally displaced children and their human rights.

Accountability is another key element in the
protection of civilians. States must comply with their
obligations under international law and hold accountable
perpetrators of crimes committed against civilians.
The Human Security Network stresses the usefulness
of commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
in investigating and substantiating alleged violations
of international law. When States are unwilling or
unable to bring perpetrators to justice, a referral to the
International Criminal Court is a complementary means
to avoid impunity and restore dignity to survivors of
atrocities, their families and communities.

The Security Council has mandated several
peacekeeping missions to protect civilians. The Human
Security Network underlines the importance of clear
and achievable mandates with sufficient resources and
capabilities to fulfil the protection mandate. The Human
Security Network supports the recommendation of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
that all peacekeepers deployed are properly trained,
equipped and commanded so as to be able to deliver
on their responsibilities to protect civilians. The
Human Security Network considers it to be of utmost
importance that the Security Council remains seized
of the question of the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts and calls to continue this discussion on a
regular basis.

I would now like to make some additional remarks
in my national capacity. I would also like to say that
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union a few minutes ago.

Civilians continue to account for the majority of
casualties in conflicts and are too often deliberate
targets by parties to conflict. The tragedy of Madaya is
a stark reminder that civilians are not only affected by
bullets and bombs, but also by other conflict-induced
suffering. Safeguarding humanitarian access and
respect for humanitarian principles needs to remain at
the core of our endeavours. The impunity for violations
of international humanitarian law can no longer be
tolerated. Parties to conflict have to respect their
obligations to allow and facilitate rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access.

The World Humanitarian Summit later this year
will be a historic opportunity to build a truly global
partnership among all actors within and beyond the
existing humanitarian system so as to prevent and end
human suffering and address the root causes of crises.

In the past few years, situation-specific resolutions
adopted by the Security Council have increasingly
called for protection to be made a priority in the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates. Currently,
10 out of 16 United Nations peace operations have the
protection of civilians at the core of their mandates.
As these operations play a central role in protecting
civilians, it is essential that the Council consider
providing all peacekeeping missions with such
mandates, with special emphasis given to the protection
of the most vulnerable, such as children, the elderly and
the disabled.

Women are important players in the protection
of civilians. Their equal and full participation is of
vital importance in conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution, peacebuilding and post-conflict
recovery. Their involvement is crucial if we are to find
the best solutions for lessening the burden of civilians
in conflict situations.

To mitigate the harm on civilians, special attention
must also be given to prevent and address sexual
violence in conflict and the role of peace operations in
this regard. United Nations peacekeepers should be role
models in preventing and addressing sexual violence
and abuse - and should not be the perpetrators of
sexual abuse - and should respect the United Nations
zero-tolerance policy for all forms of sexual exploitation
and abuse.

In conclusion, I would stress that the continuous
support and engagement of the Council is crucial for
the protection of civilians on the ground.

