The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Cuba,
Denmark, Egypt, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Jordan, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sudan,
Tunisia and Turkey, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, Without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Baali (Algeria), Mr. Buallay (Bahrain),
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh), Mr. Rodgrt'guez
Parrilla (Cuba), Ms. Laj (Denmark), Mr. Aboul
Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Nambiar (India), Mr. Zarif
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Prince Zeid Ra'ad
Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia),
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan), Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar),
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia)
and Mr. Pamir (Turkey) took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
20 September 2002 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2002/1058 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
on Monday, 23 September 2002, regarding the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
Council's provisional rules of procedure and with
previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting today in response to
the requests contained in a letter dated 20 September
2002 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations and Chairman of the Arab Group,
document S/2002/1055, and a note verbale dated 20
September 2002 from the Permanent Representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic, document S/2002/1056.

Members of the Council also have before them a
letter dated 19 September 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2002/1049) and
a letter dated 20 September 2002 from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (8/2002/1052).

I welcome the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, and I invite him to take the floor.


