Mr. Fulci (Italy): Let me take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. The Italian delegation is sure that under your
wise guidance our work this month will be successful. At
the same time, I wish very much to thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Alfredo Lopes Cabral of
Guinea-Bissau, for his exemplary leadership of our work
last month.

Today, on behalf of Italy, I wish to warmly welcome
to the Council the delegation of Foreign Ministers of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC),
which is led by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zimbabwe, His Excellency Stanislaus Mudenge, and
includes the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Angola,
Venancio de Moura; of Botswana, Mompati Meraflie; and
of Mozambique, Leonardo Simao. Their presence, and
that of the Permanent Representative of South Africa, our
good friend Ambassador Jele, is the most valid testimony
to the regional dimension of the situation in Angola, and
their participation in our debate offers us a crucial African

 

perspective on the events we are being called upon to
assess in making our decision.

I also wish to address my heartfelt thanks to the
Secretary-General and to his Special Representative, Maitre
Alionne Blondin Beye, whose unwavering commitment is
one of the highest examples of diplomatic talent and
sacrifice for a just cause. Needless to say, the troika of
observers of the peace process, and the countries
contributing troops to the Angola operation, are equally
entitled to our appreciation and gratitude. Last but not least,
Italy fully associates itself with the statement to be made
later by Ireland on behalf of the European Union.

The latest developments in Angola are disappointing.
The implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is encountering
major difficulties and setbacks. Long-standing commitments
are not being respected. As the report of the Secretary-
General makes very clear, the main responsibility for these
failures lies with UNITA.

The hope that UNITA's Third Extraordinary Congress
would restore momentum to the peace process has been
dashed. Although the Congress confirmed the principle that
UNITA should be transformed into a political party, it is
clearly wavering at this fundamental juncture. Fortunately,
for the most part, the ceasefire continues to be respected.
However, as has already been said, the quartering of troops
is moving along with great uncertainty, raising doubts about
whether UNITA is holding back its true combatants.
Moreover, the weapons being handed in are almost always
old and unusable. Preparations for the unification of the
Angolan Armed Forces are still at the preliminary stage.
The delay in sending to Luanda the last four commanding
officers expected to join the Angolan Armed Forces is one
more reason for serious concern.

Mr. Savimbi' s non-participation in the summit meeting
of the States members of the Southern African
Development Community on 2 October - despite his
previous and precise commitment to attend - is very
upsetting. No clear reasons were given for his absence,
which was surprising, particularly in view of the fact that
many eminent Heads of State of the region were in
attendance.

The concerns of the neighboring States are, in our
View, fully justified. Angola is one of the largest and,
potentially, richest countries of the region. Its internal crisis
is indeed having a negative impact, not only on Angola, but
also on the security, stability and economies of the
neighbouring countries and many others in the area. Major

 

efforts are currently under way, especially within the
framework of the SADC, to stimulate economic
development in the area. Of course, these efforts would
be greatly enhanced if true reconciliation and true peace
were restored in Angola.

As far as the economy is concerned, the news
contained in the Secretary-General's report points in the
opposite direction. Despite its enormous resources and
growth potential, the economic conditions in Angola are
dramatic. Italy is one of a handful of countries that have
never ceased to assist Angola, even when security
conditions proved dangerous for members of Italian non-
governmental organizations, who, I remind the Council,
have already paid a heavy toll in precious human lives in
other peace operations. The Italian Government has
participated as one of the major donors in the European
Union's emergency assistance programme. In the past five
years Italy's donations have amounted to a total of
approximately $110 million. For 1996 we have allotted
$13 million for food aid and emergency assistance
activities, including demobilization. Furthermore, a team
of Italian instructors is participating in the demining
activities being conducted in Angola, with the assistance
of the United Nations and the international community.

We have been informed of initiatives taken in the
last few days by the UNITA leadership that seem to
indicate a greater willingness to respect its commitments.
This is an old story. Whenever the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) mandate is about to
expire, assurances of good will are made, but afterwards
nothing comes of them. This time, however, we believe
that we have reached the point of no return. This was
made abundantly clear by the Foreign Ministers now
sitting around this table in our bilateral meeting with them
yesterday. If the parties - first and foremost UNITA -
do not face up to their commitments to complete the
military aspects of the Lusaka Protocol immediately,
without further delay and procrastination, they must
understand that the entire peace process, and with it the
commitment of the international community, will be in
serious danger. Patience is running out.

