Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I also
want to thank Ambassadors Kamau, Skoog and
Rosenthal for their thoughtful contributions to this
debate and to this agenda.
John F. Kennedy once said, "the mere absence of
war is not peace". His words over half a century ago
go to the heart of the issue we are discussing today,
the issue of peacebuilding. Today it is no longer
enough just to stop the fighting. How many issues on
the Security Council's agenda are a result of countries
relapsing into conflict? How many are due to leaders
failing to capitalize on the absence of war, or failing to
build peace and prosperity for their citizens? Today I
would like to talk about Burundi, a country that sadly
fits that mold.

As Security Council members saw at first-hand last
month, that small, poor yetbeautiful country has suffered
a great deal. Just over a decade since the end ofthe civil
war - a war that claimed 300,000 lives - it now stands
on the precipice of civil war again. It is clear that the
dividends of 11 years ofpeace have been squandered. In
response, we in the Security Council have been united
in our demands to President Nkurunziza to de-escalate
the tensions, begin dialogue with the opposition and
agree to a deployment of some form of international
presence, as originally proposed by the African Union.
But as we drove through Bujumbura last month, I could
not help but think whether there was more that we - the
Council, the United Nations, regional actors - could
have done to prevent a return to violence. I hope that in
the Chamber today we can all consider what more we
can do in the future to prevent what we saw in Burundi
from happening again elsewhere.

We have plenty to guide us - reviews of
peacekeeping, of peacebuilding, of women and peace
and security, all agreed last year. But if we are to
avoid a failure in peacebuilding, whether in Burundi
or elsewhere, people on the ground need more that just
words on paper. They need meaningful action from the
Council and others. I see five steps to take.

First, a key theme of those review reports is the
centrality of political will at the national and the
international levels to build and sustain peace. But
even when the Council is united, as we have been
on Burundi, our efforts can be dampened by a lack
of political will by just one person - in this case
President Nkurunziza. We therefore need to bring
pressure to bear on those who refuse to find common
ground, who will not engage in dialogue, who exhibit
no trace of the political will needed to sustain peace.
To do so, let us recognize that the Council is not alone
in the fight. Burundi shows us the vital importance of
regional organizations, such as the African Union. We
need to continue and enhance that close collaboration
with regional organizations, and we should draw on the
support and advice of the Peacebuilding Commission
too, as our briefers today advised us.

Secondly, it is clear that crisis have often been
brought before the Council too late for effective
preventive action. We need to improve our ability to
tackle potential risks to stability before they escalate.
To do so, we need to match early warning with early
action. That is the best way to prevent enormous human
suffering, and it is also much more cost effective than
dealing with conflicts and their aftermath. Can we say
honestly that we achieved that on Burundi? We visited
twice in a year. Did we not we all see the warning
signs? I learned from our visit that improved horizon
scanning was really of no use on its own. We have
to do something as a result. The Council needs to be
proactive and action-oriented and to mobilize the tools
at our disposal to prevent relapses into violence.

Thirdly, we need to improve our ability to sustain
peace after the fighting has stopped. We must avoid
the peacebuilding gap when peacekeeping missions
transition out of a country and international attention
falls away. Perhaps that is the greatest lesson to learn
from Burundi. Sustaining engagement is challenging.
The Peacebuilding Commission provides a good way
to continue the political support and to draw together
the United Nations system and Member States and
the international financial institutions. Similarly, the
Peacebuilding Fund does excellent work, and I would
like to encourage all Member States tojoin us in making
voluntary contributions to that effective tool.

Fourthly, building peace must mean building
peace for all - for men, women, children, minorities,
the vulnerable, for those in Government and for those
in opposition. The peacebuilding review tells us
that building and sustaining peace rests on a social
consensus behind that peace. That is why inclusive
dialogue is so important in Burundi. And so we
welcome the Secretary-General's visit to Burundi
today and the progress he has made on that inclusive
dialogue. More broadly, as we provide practical support
for development, for services and for jobs in countries
emerging from conflict, let us all do so in a way that
fosters inclusivity.

Fifthly, and finally, we need a whole-of-system
approach that bridges the usual United Nations silos
so that the system together is more than the sum of
its parts. When the Security Council reaches across
those divides, it is not encroachment; it is necessary
joining up. I encourage other bodies too to join up
across the gaps, and I point to goal 16 of the Sustainable
Development Goals of doing that.

If we can take those five steps, we can build
something really sustainable and, in doing so, ensure
that the absence of war, as John F. Kennedy put it,
really does lead to a more permanent peace.

