Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Annadif for his briefing.

Today I want to emphasize the continued
importance of follow-through. We have seen that
essential quality in the sustained commitment of
those serving in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the most dangerous mission of the United Nations.
Both MINUSMA and the Malian Defence and Security
Forces have suffered heinous attacks in recent days,
with a Chadian peacekeeper killed in one attack and at
least 38 Malian troops killed in two others. The United
States owes a debt of gratitude to the families whose
loved ones' lives were taken, and we wish a speedy
recovery to all the injured.

On a personal note, we must not become numb
to this kind of violence. The deaths of those Malian
soldiers are wrong. The death of one soldier is wrong.
They come far too soon, and that should motivate
the Council to redouble its efforts. Such horrific acts
reinforce the reality that MINUSMA is no ordinary
peacekeeping mission and that Mali's security and
humanitarian crisis is continuing its dangerous spiral.
Terrorist organizations operate with impunity, and
civilians are being killed, injured or displaced in
unacceptable numbers. Affirming such a status quo
is unacceptable.

The Council unanimously adopted resolution 2480
(2019) on 28 June. Notably, the mandate created a
second strategy priority for MINUSMA, supporting the
Government of Mali in its efforts to protect civilians
in the centre of the country. We commend MINUSMA
for its efforts to address instability in that region,
particularly through the launch of Operation Oryx II,
as well as its work to re-establish State authority and
its assistance with local reconciliation efforts. We also
welcome the Mission's strategy of increasing its mobility
and concentrating on major population centres. Like my
colleague from Cote d'Ivoire, we encourage the greater
and continued participation of women in inclusive
national dialogue and in the monitoring mechanisms of
the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
The United States also recognizes the efforts made
by Mali's Government to stabilize the centre of the
country. The handing over of a MINUSMA camp to
Malian security forces is an example of a small but
concrete step in the right direction, and we want to see
more transitions like it in the future.

However, despite MINUSMA's commendable
efforts, the overall trend in this reporting period is
deeply worrying, as it speaks to a notable lack of follow-
through. The Government of Mali and the signatory
armed groups have made little progress in implementing
the Algiers peace agreement, despite the clear message
in resolution 2480 (2019) that the signatory parties
are expected to accelerate that implementation. In
the three months since the resolution was adopted,
we have yet to see any consensus reached on how the
inclusive national dialogue should proceed. A number
of critical parties have pulled out of the process, and
implementation has been hampered by administrative
shortages and a failure to fund local authorities at the
level the agreement requires. That is not acceptable.
We cannot continue to support a peacekeeping mission
where the signatory parties enjoy security provided by
international forces while refusing to fully implement
their own agreement. We have also heard calls for giving
MINUSMA a more robust counter-terrorism mandate.
In our view, however, MINUSMA, as a peacekeeping
mission, should not be viewed as a solution to a regional
counter-terrorism problem. The States of the Group of
Five for the Sahel have already developed a Joint Force
to address those specific challenges, and the United
States supports that effort.

In conclusion, I want to return to the theme of
follow-through. The late theologian Eugene Peterson
once wrote that beginnings are important, but that
a beginning without a continuation is a lie. We
cannot allow another promising beginning to evade
continuation. We cannot allow another year to pass in
which we are no closer to the implementation of the
Algiers accord or the achievement of the agreement's
key political goals. If all stakeholders remain unwilling
to break the status quo, we must be willing to begin
developing a different approach to peace, security and
renewed hope for the people of Mali.

