Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries of Turkey and Croatia, the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates of Albania, Montenegro and Serbia, the
European Free Trade Association country member of
the European Economic Area, Iceland, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement. In the
interest of time, I shall deliver an abbreviated version
of this statement. The complete official version is now
being distributed in the Chamber.

At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to discuss the issue
of the protection of civilians at this important thematic
debate of the Security Council. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his
comprehensive and compelling briefing.

The European Union is appalled by the number of
civilians who continue to be victims and targets in
armed conflicts. It is a sad reality that the changed

08-3528]
nature of contemporary conflicts has placed the safety
and security of unarmed men, women and children at
even greater risk. We strongly believe that the situation
of civilians in armed conflict would be more
encouraging if the existing provisions of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
were applied and observed.

It is our opinion that concerns for the well-being
and protection of civilians need to be mainstreamed
into the activities of the Organization, and in particular
into the decision making process of the Security
Council - while recognizing that conflict prevention
is a multi-stakeholder endeavour that also embraces
civil society and the business community.

The European Union commends the steps taken
to strengthen the normative framework for the
protection of civilians. In particular, we have
welcomed the endorsement by heads of State and
Government at the 2005 World Summit of the
responsibility of each State to protect its population
from genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. That recognizes the primary
responsibility of States for protecting their own
populations, but also underscores the shared
responsibility of the international community to help in
that regard.

We also welcomed resolution 1674 (2006), which
reaffirmed the responsibility of the international
community to protect civilians from those appalling
crimes when national authorities manifestly fail to
protect them. That was truly a decision of historic
magnitude, but it has not yet led to a sea change in the
protection of civilians worldwide. The European Union
emphasizes the need for further consideration by the
Security Council of the responsibility to protect, as
well as by the General Assembly, in order to find a
practical approach to its implementation.

An important aspect of protecting civilians in
armed conflict is safe, timely and unimpeded passage
of humanitarian relief for civilians in need. We are
deeply disturbed by the increase in attacks deliberately
targeting humanitarian workers. We would like to
emphasize that reaching those in need is a fundamental
principle of humanitarian assistance, and that
facilitating the passage of humanitarian relief for
civilians is required under international humanitarian
law. We call upon all parties to armed conflict to
comply with the relevant provisions of international

08-3528]
humanitarian law, and in particular to stop attacking
humanitarian workers.

It is equally important to highlight that women,
children, older persons and persons with disabilities, as
well as other vulnerable groups, are especially affected
by armed conflicts. Given the particular vulnerability
of women and girls, sexual violence seems to continue
unabated, including in its most worrisome form as a
policy to intimidate a civilian population. The
European Union is deeply concerned about the
continued use of sexual violence as a method of
warfare that each year destroys the lives of thousands
of women and girls, as well as men and boys. It is
unacceptable that United Nations officials should be
inactive witnesses to such atrocities or, even worse, be
part of such acts. We therefore reiterate our full support
for the zero-tolerance policy regarding sexual abuse
and exploitation by United Nations personnel. In
addition, we have also adopted the same policy in our
own European security and defence policy operations.

The primary responsibility for preventing and
addressing sexual violence lies with Member States.
Nevertheless, combating sexual violence and the
impunity on which it thrives requires efforts by the
whole international community, including the Security
Council. The Security Council should send a clear
message of deterrence by referring situations of grave
incidents of rape and other forms of sexual violence to
the International Criminal Court.

While addressing the vulnerability of civilians,
we should also bear in mind the needs of refugees and
displaced persons. The European Union calls for
ensuring their protection, in particular by maintaining
the security and civilian character of camps for
refugees and internally displaced persons. Furthermore,
the need to address the issue of housing, land and
property becomes highly significant as people are
forced to leave their homes and lands.

Another issue that needs to be addressed is that of
cluster munitions. Our aim is to conclude a legally
binding instrument prohibiting the use, production,
transfer and stockpiling of cluster munitions, which
cause unacceptable harm to civilians.

Controlling small arms and preventing violence
are multifaceted problems. The protection of civilians
cannot be addressed comprehensively unless small-
arms control policies are integrated into that
framework.

One of the last points that we would like to make
pertains to the fact that we continue to be appalled at
the high degree of impunity that has been allowed to
exist, which sends the message that the international
community is not prepared to take action, even when
fundamental human rights are breached. There is no
doubt that perpetrators of crime must be held
accountable for their actions; but, regrettably, impunity
prevails in many cases of conflict owing to the lack of
action. That impunity often leads to a circle of
violence.

The role of the International Criminal Court is
clearly central in the fight against impunity in general.
The Court is seized with a number of situations, and,
more importantly, its activities and its very existence
have also had a preventative effect. The European
Union encourages members to provide their full
support to the International Criminal Court by acceding
to the Rome Statute. We also call on all Member States,
especially States parties to the Rome Statute, to
cooperate fully with the Court. Universality and our
full support are crucial if we are to end impunity for
the perpetrators of the most serious crimes against
civilians. When we succeed in establishing the rule of
law and proper judicial systems, we will have
contributed greatly to durable peace and stability.

We have highlighted the primary responsibility of
Member States and the increased importance of
regional actors, peacebuilding and prevention
strategies. What is now required is a more systematic
assessment of the lessons we have learned. Equally
important is the provision of reliable data to the
Security Council through monitoring and reporting, so
that the Council can develop targeted and effective
strategies for civilian protection.

Nevertheless, fundamental to the protection of
civilians is the resolution of the conflicts that cause
their suffering. In order to reach this goal, we need to
continue the hard work to establish concepts of conflict
prevention and reach peace, to which the European
Union remains firmly committed.

