Mrs. Ogata: Let me start by wishing you, Mr.
President, and all members of the Security Council a
happy new year.

At this second meeting of the Security Council's
"month of Africa" session, my thoughts go to the African
people. A majority of them have spent Christmas,
Ramadan and the turn of the millennium struggling to
survive, in misery and fear. Let me, therefore,
congratulate the Council on launching the "month of
Africa". I hope it will also be the "Month of the
Africans" because, while we celebrate this time of
extraordinary hope, energy and opportunity, it is
important that we also speak about the millions of
dramatically deprived people living on the African
continent. As the head of an organization which devotes
a substantial portion of its resources to Africa, where the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) takes care of about 6 million people,
I feel encouraged by this initiative and wish to thank the
Council for inviting me.

Twice last year, discussing African problems with
the Council, I shared my hopes and expressed my
concerns, which, I should add, have further deepened. In
July, at the Organization of African Unity (OAU) summit
in Algiers, new and dynamic leadership in some key
African States and the signing of the Lome Peace
Agreement and the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement were the
cause of some optimism. Six months later, however, the
situation in many areas, especially in Central Africa, is
becoming more critical.

In the last few years, the pattern of refugee crises,
especially in Africa, has undergone significant changes.
Refugees continue to flee violence and conflict - almost
invariably compounded by poverty - and to seek asylum
in safer countries. Others, and increasingly so, seek
refuge as internally displaced people in safer parts of their
own countries. In Angola, for example, almost 20 per
cent of the population has fled, both outside and inside
the borders of the country.

Dealing with the internally displaced is often more
arduous than with refugees who cross borders. The
difficulty of having access to large numbers of people in

 

insecure and isolated areas is compounded by the
complexity of assisting civilians in their own country,
where their own State authorities or rebel forces in control
are frequently the very cause of their predicament.
Hundreds of thousands of people at risk in war areas, such
as the southern Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Burundi, Angola and Sierra Leone - a majority of
them internally displaced - are at present not accessible to
humanitarian agencies. Where such access is possible, it is
often very dangerous. The killing of two United Nations
staff members in Burundi last November is only the latest
of many such fatal incidents affecting humanitarian
personnel.

Current refugee crises also have other complex
aspects. The security, socio-economic and natural
environment of countries of asylum are severely affected by
large, forced population movements. It is the countries
which have most generously hosted refugees that have paid
the highest price, such as Tanzania and Guinea. Other
countries, in spite of their own difficult situations, have
nevertheless received large refugee groups - Liberia, for
example, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. War-
induced mass population movements have also contributed
to the spreading of conflicts, as has been the case in Central
and West Africa.

Throughout your recent African tour, Mr. President,
you repeatedly declared that we need to bring quick - or
should I say, quicker - solutions to refugee crises. Who
would not agree, knowing of the desperate plight of refugee
women and children in makeshift, inhospitable and
dangerous camps? Seeking solutions to refugee problems
has always been part of UNHCR's mandate, along with the
need to ensure the protection of refugees.

The international context also demands faster
solutions. Following the end of the cold war, the narrowing
links between forced human displacement and conflicts
have increased the concerns of Governments about human
displacement problems. Pressure to resolve them rapidly is
constantly mounting, and not only in Africa, as Kosovo and
East Timor have demonstrated.

However, there can be no solution to refugee crises -
and especially no voluntary repatriation - if wars that
force people to flee are not stopped. Conflicts, in turn, will
not be resolved unless some basic power-sharing problems
are addressed. In some regions of Africa, controlling natural
resources - oil, diamonds, wood - appears to be a more
pressing concern, for Governments and rebel groups alike,
than the welfare of people living in embattled areas. The
relative ease with which arms are trafficked between
countries all over the world means that conflicts are
continuously supplied. The worst pages of colonial history
seem to live again in situations in which people struggle
to survive while small groups benefit from Africa's
wealth and enormous resources are wasted in pursuing
war.

There are no effective conflict resolution
mechanisms in Africa; on the contrary, armed groups
waging war against Governments are often openly
supported by other Governments. And inputs to turn war
into peace - and even to consolidate peace when it is
attained, as in Rwanda and Liberia, for example - are
very timid and piecemeal. Can we speak of any
substantive reconstruction programme, like those
generously funded by Governments in Kosovo or East
Timor, in any African country today?

The effectiveness of humanitarian action can, thus,
only be limited. This kind of war offers little opportunity
for international humanitarian law to be promoted and
respected. With human displacement having become a
military objective, upholding the rights of refugees often
has unwarranted consequences, because armed groups
frequently infiltrate refugee populations. Clearly, refugee
crises cannot be resolved in a vacuum. I wish to insist on
this point. The "month of Africa" should be an
opportunity for the Council to seek more decisive
measures to address the problems that I have mentioned:
the indiscriminate struggle for resources, the uncontrolled
flow of arms, the lack of conflict resolution mechanisms
and weak support to post-conflict situations.

From UNHCR's perspective, I would also like to
insist once more on two security priorities: the need to
build everywhere an effective law enforcement capacity
and the need to provide systematic support to regional
peacekeeping. I will not elaborate further on these themes,
but would like to remind the Council of our proposal to
develop middle-level security measures in the overall
available ladder of options of which I have frequently
spoken, and which some Governments have decided to
examine. I hope that these initiatives, with the support of
the Council, will yield some concrete results in the future.

I am not saying that my Office should abdicate its
responsibility to promote the respect of refugees' rights,
particularly the right to asylum, and to assist refugees in
need. It is important that UNHCR make efforts at the
community level to assist affected populations, and
ultimately to help refugees return home. Helping

 

communities is an area in which humanitarian work, with
its emphasis on vulnerable groups, can be a valuable
complement to conflict resolution and peace-building
efforts.

You have seen for yourself, Mr. President, that even
in the absence of large developmental activities, UNHCR
and humanitarian agencies have been able to carry out a
substantive reintegration programme in Rwanda, a country
where 25 per cent of the population are recent returnees,
many of them women and girls heading large households.
All these efforts, however, will be neither effective nor
durable if they are not complemented at the political level
by African States, supporting Governments and
developmental institutions.

Therefore, I agree with anyone who argues that
refugee crises should not be allowed to linger; that for
humanitarian reasons, and in order to protect the security
and prosperity of areas affected by human displacement,
they should be resolved quickly. But without clearer, more
decisive action by Governments, which the Security
Council has a responsibility in inspiring, designing and
leading, refugee crises cannot be resolved - unless we
force people back from where they have fled, violating
principles, threatening the security and stability of entire
regions and, ultimately, failing to address the root causes of
conflict and human displacement.

The situation is critical in many parts of Africa.
Nowhere, however, do war and violence affect millions of
exhausted civilians more than in Central Africa. There are
unresolved and closely linked conflicts in or around at least
seven countries - Angola, Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Republic of the Congo
(Brazzaville), Rwanda, the Sudan and Uganda. This is an
area in which refugee movements have continued to occur
almost uninterruptedly since independence and have
worsened in the last few years. Armed groups control vast
areas in which security is very precarious and ethnic
tensions are being exacerbated again - witness the attack
in north-west Rwanda at the end of December, in which 30
people were killed and 40 were injured.

From the point of view of UNHCR, I would like to
draw the attention of the Council to three Central African
countries in particular.

First, Burundi. In the last quarter of 1999 alone,
30,000 new refugees fled to Tanzania. The total number of
Burundian refugees in that country is now about 300,000.
The number of internally displaced people has also
increased. There are an estimated 300,000 people in
regroupment sites, virtually internally displaced people
created by a Government policy. This is an issue of great
concern to humanitarian agencies. Although we
understand the Government's security priorities, it is
imperative that a number of conditions be fulfilled for
assistance to be provided at the sites. People must be
regrouped only on a voluntary basis; access by
humanitarian agencies to regrouped people must be
granted; and the internally displaced outside the sites must
also be assisted. The Government must also give fuller
and clearer guarantees for the security of humanitarian
staff.

Most importantly, however, the Arusha peace
process must be revitalized and strengthened. The
appointment of Nelson Mandela as Facilitator is most
welcome, and I hope that his statesmanship and charisma
will allow negotiations to yield positive results soon. If
Arusha fails, we can only expect more violence and,
inevitably, more forced human displacement in Burundi,
with unpredictable consequences for the stability of the
entire region.

Secondly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
There is a real risk that the Lusaka Agreement will not be
implemented. This would have frightful repercussions,
although, from the vantage point of the refugee agency,
the consequences of protracted war are already a
humanitarian tragedy. In my last visit, I was struck by the
visibly deteriorating conditions of the people, in spite of
the natural wealth of the country and the traditional
Congolese resourcefulness. On the one hand, in spite of
all difficulties, UNHCR continues to support the
repatriation of Rwandans - 36,000 returned through
Goma in 1999. On the other hand, however, over 130,000
Congolese have fled abroad - a large majority to
Tanzania; and a very large number - millions, probably,
although nobody can really estimate their total - are
internally displaced. In spite of their urgent humanitarian
needs, there can be little or no access to those internally
displaced unless hostilities end and peacekeepers are
deployed to protect humanitarian operations.

It is crucial that the Security Council provide more
decisive support to conflict resolution in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The priorities are clear: stop
conflict and deploy peacekeepers; obtain full access to all
people with humanitarian needs, particularly the internally
displaced; and start reconstruction and development. The
efforts of Ambassador Morjane, Special Representative of

 

the Secretary-General, to establish a United Nations
presence throughout the country must be supported.

Third, Angola. The humanitarian crisis there is
perhaps the worst in Africa. Once again, human
displacement statistics are an indicator of the gravity of the
situation. There are 370,000 Angolan refugees in
neighbouring countries, and the outflow continues. Zambia
has already 200,000, and since it also hosts other refugees,
particularly Congolese, it is now one of the largest asylum
countries in Africa. The number of internally displaced
people in Angola is very large - one to two million - but
it is impossible to estimate it precisely, since access by
humanitarian agencies is limited. Security is the main
obstacle. Fighting has resumed in many parts of the
country. There are perhaps up to 10 million landmines. The
peace process is all but stalled. Unless peace makes some
progress, with concrete and positive consequences for
security on the ground, it will be difficult to envisage the
resumption of large assistance programmes in Angola, let
alone a rapid solution to the problems of human
displacement, including the return of refugees and internally
displaced people.

In all three countries, renewed population movements
are therefore a clear consequence of unresolved, and
sometimes worsening, conflict. Everywhere there is a
pattern of growing internal displacement, with decreasing
possibilities of access by humanitarian agencies. This is of
great concern.

UNHCR assists internally displaced people when there
is a request by the Secretary-General or when the crisis is
closely linked to a refugee or returnee situation. Other
humanitarian agencies - particularly the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), the World Food Programme,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and non-
governmental organizations - intervene in some situations.
However, there is no established mechanism for the
assistance, and particularly the protection, of the internally
displaced. Donor Governments are very reluctant to allocate
resources for programmes in fragile, insecure areas.
UNHCR activities in Angola, for example, had to be
drastically curtailed because of insecurity and lack of funds.

Yet the presence of internally displaced people
throughout Central Africa is not only a humanitarian
problem, but also one of security. Action needs to be taken
urgently to compensate for the lack of protection
mechanisms for internally displaced people. However, I
would like to warn against isolating them as a separate
category. Today the root causes of displacement, be it of
refugees or of internally displaced people, do not
fundamentally differ: look at Kosovo, for example, or at
the situation in the North Caucasus. What is most
important is to devise comprehensive mechanisms to
protect people fleeing their homes because of persecution
and violence, as well as comprehensive, regionally based
solutions to their predicament.

In West Africa, there are more reasons for optimism,
although some of the complex, conflict-related
displacement problems persist.

For the 450,000 Sierra Leonean refugees, mostly in
Guinea and Liberia, the objective is voluntary repatriation.
This is clearly the solution of one of the largest refugee
problems in Africa, and UNHCR is tentatively planning
for the return of up to 170,000 refugees in the course of
2000, with organized repatriation - for those who need
it - starting in April. However, conditions in Sierra
Leone must improve. Action must be taken in three
priority areas. First, adequate pressure must be put on the
signatories of the Lome Agreement to abide by its
provisions. Recent episodes of renewed fighting inside the
country are very worrying. Secondly, peacekeepers and
military observers must be swiftly deployed to field
locations. Thirdly, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme must be given the necessary
resources and implemented as swiftly as possible. In all
these areas, the Security Council can play an important
role. And from the humanitarian viewpoint,

the rehabilitation and reintegration of amputees -
particularly children - is a very important priority that
needs to be adequately supported for a considerable
length of time.

Concerns about Sierra Leone should not make us
forget the situation in Liberia. The country has received
about 330,000 returnees from Guinea, Sierra Leone, Cote
d'Ivoire and Ghana in the last few years, and some
190,000 Liberians remain in exile. UNHCR would like to
end the organized repatriation by mid-2000. The situation
in the country, however, remains fragile. In some areas,
like Lofa County, security is particularly precarious.
Because this is a region of return and also of refuge for
Sierra Leoneans, UNHCR is promoting capacity-building
programmes for the local administration and police.
Broader programmes, however, are needed throughout the
country to consolidate peace and prevent renewed human
displacement. Resources for rehabilitation and
development are woefully lacking.

 

I should also mention the Horn of Africa, where
attempts to resolve refugee problems are conducted against
a background of ongoing political tensions, with uneven
results. There are many unresolved conflicts in the
region - civil war in Sudan; internal unrest in northern
Uganda; war between Ethiopia and Eritrea; and an unsettled
situation throughout Somalia. In spite of this, UNHCR is
working with Governments to try to bring solutions to the
plight of hundreds of thousands of people who have
lived - sometimes for decades - away from their homes.

The situation in Somalia is fragile, but repatriation
from Ethiopia to more stable areas in the north-west
continues and should be supported. Eritrea has recently
agreed to resume the repatriation of the remaining Eritrean
refugees still in Sudan. This is a very positive development.
With respect to Ethiopian refugees, UNHCR is pursuing the
implementation of the "clause of cessation" of their refugee
status, since the conditions that prompted their flight from
Ethiopia do not exist any longer; this is being discussed
with host Governments. In northern Uganda, in spite of
many security problems, we are proceeding with the local
integration of refugees from south Sudan, and we hope to
be able to promote the same solution for those in western
Ethiopia.

Needless to say, these efforts to resolve refugee
problems are greatly complicated by the tension prevailing
in the area, within certain countries and between others.
The Horn of Africa is another example of a situation in
which UNHCR's humanitarian efforts on the ground would
be much more effective if they were carried out in the
context of broader political initiatives. I hope that the
Security Council will take the opportunity of the "Month of
Africa" to strengthen its support for the OAU initiative
towards the resolution of the Ethiopian-Eritrean conflict. I
also hope that regional efforts to bring Somalia back into
the fold of nations will receive international encouragement
and support.

In spite of some improvements, the situation in West
Africa and the Horn is far from settled. The end of acute
emergency situations, however, should allow the
international community to adopt broader, regionally based
peace-building approaches. In West Africa, UNHCR is
planning to promote such an approach in order to address,
for example, the negative consequences of refugee
movements on the economy and the environment in some
West African countries. There is a host of problems which
should be tackled through a comprehensive, regional
strategy in both areas, ranging from the need to strengthen
administrative structures, to the collapse of civil society
institutions, to abuses of human rights. The Security
Council should promote regional initiatives - following,
for example, the model of the Stability Pact on
South-Eastern Europe - that could involve States in the
respective regions, supporting Governments, regional and
international organizations and civil society. Human
displacement being, of course, a regional problem by
definition, my Office would warmly welcome any such
initiatives.

There are other refugee problems that I have not
mentioned, of course, such as those concerning the
Sahrawis, and the refugees from the Republic of the
Congo (Brazzaville) in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Gabon. The examples I have given,
however, show that conflicts in Africa continue to have
the most serious humanitarian impact on people's lives,
especially when they compel people to flee their homes.

Let me say once more that humanitarian action alone
will not be able to solve any of the problems leading to
forced human displacement; it cannot substitute for
Governments and the Security Council in areas for which
they have a clear responsibility, such as peacekeeping and
peace-building. The Council has an essential role to play
in preventing, containing and resolving conflicts - and,
hence, refugee problems - in Africa. This can be done
by taking clear, strong and united positions; by supporting
more decisively, rapidly and substantively the follow-up
to peace agreements; by promoting the mobilization of
resources for reconstruction and peace-building - in
short, by moving from issuing statements to taking action.

The success of the "month of Africa", I am sure the
Council will agree, will depend on how rapidly and
effectively the Council's discussions here in New York
are translated into concrete action in the field. We must
strive to obtain what we have too often failed to achieve:
that what is discussed and decided here in the Security
Council actually helps the lives of women and men in
African cities and in African villages become safer and
better. We at UNHCR know very well that solutions are
difficult and that to have a positive impact on situations
that have deteriorated beyond description is a very, very
tall order. But we must make the effort. In the Council's
discussions, different approaches will certainly emerge,
and this is inevitable. The plight of Africans has become
so critical that I hope the Council will be able to put
aside differences and devise concrete measures to address
it. This is now dramatically urgent.

 

Let me go back to where I started - to the African
people. Africa, like the rest of the world, will not be secure
unless its people feel secure. Those, in particular, who are
of concern to my Office - refugees, internally displaced
people and returnees - are first and foremost human
beings in need of protection and care. I am thinking
especially of the most vulnerable among them: refugee
women and children exposed to even greater risks than
their peers living at home, such as rape, AIDS and other
epidemics, and forced recruitment; and the elderly, whom
I so frequently meet in my field trips, and whose fear,
despair and exhaustion, never fail to anguish me. They,
above all, are the victims of the wars that we do not stop.

I agree with you, Mr. President, that their plight
demands quick solutions. I have spoken of the support
which my Office expects from the Security Council.

Let me conclude, on a humanitarian note, by saying
that their plight also demands immediate attention. In spite
of all the problems that I have mentioned, States must
continue to uphold the rights of refugees and provide
asylum when people flee war and persecution. Donor
Governments must share the burden of asylum by ensuring
an adequate level of basic assistance in camps and
settlements, and for returnees going back home.

In both areas there has been little or no progress at all
in the past few years. What is provided to refugees in
Africa, including food and other basic survival items, is far
less than in other parts of the world. This is unacceptable.
I hope that the "month of Africa" in the Security Council
will prompt the international community to address
seriously this grave imbalance in material assistance.

On our side, at the end of the year 2000, we shall
observe the fiftieth anniversary of the establishment of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. Among other initiatives, we are planning to
launch a special refugee education trust, which would allow
refugees, especially in Africa, to pursue post-primary
education during their exile, an opportunity sadly lacking
today. True, it will be impossible to meet the needs of all
refugee students, but I hope that we shall be able to provide
at least some support to the most deserving and needy.

Amid so much violence, terror and despair, this will
be a powerful symbol of the willingness of the international
community to support refugees, to help them make a
contribution to their host communities and prepare
themselves for a stable life after their plight is resolved.

We must give them hope for a better future.

