Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank the People's Republic of China for organizing
this debate on counter-terrorism. This is not just another
debate, as we are talking about a topic that requires that
we intensify our common efforts to more effectively and
rapidly react to the growth of this unprecedented threat.

The geographic scope of the terrorist attacks
carried out in recent months - I am not going to name
cities and countries, because the list has, sadly, become
far too long 4 shows the magnitude of the threat. The
number of foreign terrorist fighters has reached 30,000,
from more than 100 countries. Why is violent extremism
so attractive? Why has the international community
not been able to foil the use for nefarious purposes of
information and communications technologies, which
has certainly contributed to globalizing terror?

Some are even wondering whether freedom of
expression should be placed above the right to life. The
debate on this issue is not without interest and, in our
view, deserves in-depth consideration.

Tunisia, thanks to the commitment of all
stakeholders to dialogue and compromise and to the
participation of civil society, has been able to overcome
the difficulties inherent in the transition to democracy.
This approach won it, inter alia, the 2015 Nobel Peace
Prize. Although these advances are significant and
honourable, they cannot mask the challenges that we
are facing and, in line with today's debate, I would cite
in particular the challenge of fighting terrorism.

Tunisia is endeavouring to try to effectively meet
the challenge of terrorism by adopting a comprehensive
long-term approach. This is not an easy fight; it has a
cost and takes a heavy toll. Tunisia has paid a price:
the valiant men and women, to whom I would like to
pay warm tribute today, who helped us to defend its
democratic advances and its commitment to human
rights and fundamental freedoms, to ensure respect for
its social choices, to preserve the anchoring ofits society
in its Arab Muslim identity, and, lastly, to translate the
success of its democratic transition into socioeconomic
benefits for the most vulnerable segments of the
population and thereby prevent the radicalization of
those persons who are most disadvantaged materially
and intellectually.

The task will not be easy in the short term. No
one can argue this point so long as our environment
remains fragilized by the repercussions of strong
tensions and conflicts that sometimes seem not to have
any real prospects ofa lasting solution. We are resolved
to combat this phenomenon through the power of the
law, and that is why we adopted a new organic law for
fighting terrorism and money laundering in August
2015, in line with the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, in particular resolution 2178 (2014). We also
recently developed, in close cooperation with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
a holistic, multisectoral national strategy on fighting
terrorism and violent extremism that rests on four
pillars: prevention, protection, follow-up and response.

A panoply of measures has been put in place in
that respect. I will simply mention here the launch
by the Ministry of Religious Affairs of a campaign
in 2016 with the slogan "Tomorrow will be better",
which is aimed at young people and promoting the
true face of moderate Islam through art, culture and
communication. The strategy brings together various
stakeholders; this is a fight that we all must wage. It is
notjust a fight for a better life; it is a fight for life itself.
It is a fight against a common enemy. That is why "We
the peoples of the United Nations", to quote the famous
phrase from the Preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations, must strengthen our support for the efforts of
those countries that require it in order to do away with
this transnational threat.

We welcome in this context the development by the
Counter-Terrorism Task Force of a plan to help build
the capacity of countries to combat the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters. This plan offers a more
concerted and coherent approach to the issue. We wish
also to state that sufficient support for the list of related

priority projects is critical if we wish to help countries
deploy the efforts necessary to strengthen border
control, which is a very sensitive area and which I am
citing as an example. It is within the framework of this
support and assistance that we will be able to assess
whether our actions have lived up to our talk.

Before concluding, I should like to touch upon the
strategic guiding role that the United Nations must
play in order to face up to the terrorist challenge. In
this context, I wish to echo the appeal launched today
by many speakers regarding the need to take a more
holistic approach to preventing this phenomenon by
complementing measures to fight terrorism, which
remain critical, with systematic measures for the
prevention of violent extremism. I would like also to
underscore the relevance of the Secretary-General's
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which
aims to strengthen our joint efforts at the national,
regional and international levels in order to address
the underlying causes of violent extremism in all of
their complexity.

Finally, we look forward to being able to continue
substantive discussions on the plan so as to arrive at
a consensus on measures that will help us advance on
issues of such urgent priority.

