Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): We thank the Special
Representative andHeadoftheUnitedNationsAssistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Ms. Jeanine Hennis-
Plasschaert, for her briefing. South Africa supports the
mandate renewal of UNAMI in its current format, as it
promotes the strengthening of the Government of Iraq
and its subsequent electoral processes.

South Africa further calls for an inclusive
Government that will bring together all of the diverse
aspects of Iraqi society into governance structures.
National reconciliation and unity in Iraq are vital in
order to avert future challenges stemming from the
fracturing of Government policies and actions. Peace
and security are fundamental for Iraq to develop its
infrastructure, grow its economy and provide basic
services to all of its citizens. In this regard, South
Africa supports the full consolidation of control of the
Iraqi army over its territories, and continued support
for the efforts of the Government to eradicate the threat
posed by Da'esh.

South Africa would like to suggest the use
of the Peacebuilding Commission to support the
inclusive efforts of the Government, especially in
institution-buildingandpost-conflictandreconstruction
development in Iraq. Alongside the report on missing
Kuwaiti nationals (S/2019/352), South Africa would
like to advocate for assistance and information on those
of its citizens who went missing after 2003.

We also welcome the increased involvement of
regional organizations in the political process and
reaffirm their role in assisting the Government of
Iraq in the reconstruction of the country. We further
welcome the renewed cooperation and talks between
the central Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
regional government and encourage both parties to
continue to seek consensus on areas of concern. We also
share the views of regional actors that the formation
of a Government in Iraq is an important step towards
building a stronger and more balanced relationship
among the countries in the Middle East region. In this
regard, we welcome the summit recently held by Iraq,
which brought together the countries of the region as
part of broader efforts by Iraq in spearheading regional
integration with its neighbours.

In conclusion, South African reiterates its support
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq, in line
with the principles of the United Nations Charter, and
will continue to support UNAMI in the implementation
of its mandate. Furthermore, we continue to support
the work of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant as part of
UNAMI's mandate, and we emphasize the importance
of the independence and impartiality of the mechanism,
in accordance with the principles of the Charter, United
Nations policies and best practices.

