Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, for the
valuable information they have provided to us in their
briefings. We would also like to express our thanks
and appreciation to the entire staff of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and other
international entities for their work in extremely
difficult circumstances in South Sudan.

We would like to express our grave concern over
the deterioration of the situation in South Sudan, the
ongoing killings and the serious humanitarian violations
by both parties to the conflict. We would also like to
stress the importance of putting an immediate end to
mutual incitement that contributes to the spread of
hatred and the promotion of ethnic and tribal divisions
within South Sudanese society. We would also like to
stress the following points.

First, it is clear that, several months after the outbreak
of the crisis in South Sudan, and despite the Council's
full involvement, the tireless international efforts
to contain the crisis and put an end to humanitarian
suffering and the efforts deployed by African parties
to translate the agreement on the cessation of hostilities
into a basis on which we can build, we are still far
from the lasting stability, political dialogue or national
reconciliation that we all seek.

A solution to the crisis in South Sudan is
directly linked to the fulfilment by both parties of
their commitments and pledges undertaken under
the agreement on the cessation of hostilities. That
presupposes the willingness, ability and commitment
of leaders in the field to implement such an agreement
on the ground.

However, it has become clear that, despite the
commitments made by the leaders of the two parties to
the international community in bilateral encounters, the
situation on the ground has further deteriorated. That in
turn gives rise to doubts about the credibility of those
parties in dealing with the international community
and its efforts.

We have previously stressed the importance of
identifying the areas most vulnerable to violations
and of the deployment of efforts to protect civilians.
We would like to once again stress the importance of
preventive measures to avoid the recurrence of the
events that recently took place in Bentiu and Bor. We
must also stress the importance of taking into account
the distribution of the population groupings most
vulnerable to violations when deploying further forces.

In conclusion, we reiterate the need for the
Government of South Sudan and the opposition
to shoulder their responsibilities in bringing the
perpetrators of violations and crimes to justice. The
international community and the Security Council must
bring pressure to bear on both parties in that regard and
consider measures that could be taken with a view to
bringing criminals to justice, including the possibility
of a referral to the International Criminal Court. We
would like to stress what Ms. Pillay and Mr. Dieng have
stated, that is, that there will be no peace withoutjustice.
Therefore, efforts should be undertaken to change the
culture of impunity in South Sudan, and the Security
Council should focus its efforts in line with that.

