Mr. Prasad (Fiji): First, let me thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Council on the impact of armed conflict on children.
I congratulate Poland on bringing forward this open
debate so early in its presidency.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509)
highlights the world's continuing collective failure to
protect children in armed conflicts. The Secretary-
General's report highlights grave violations of all
international conventions relating to the protection
of children in armed conflict. The Secretary-General
notes over 20,000 grave violations and over 12,000
deaths and incidences of the maiming of children in
2019 alone. Some 140 million children live in high-
intensity conflict zones today.

At the same time, the number of successfully
reintegrated children has increased as a result of
sustained actions on the ground by UNICEF and
other agencies. This is heart-warming. The scale of
the challenges, however, calls for a step change. Fiji
welcomes the efforts of the United Nations to strengthen
measures to prevent, protect and assist children in
armed conflicts. Armed conflicts are transforming
before our eyes; they are becoming more protracted
and more complex, with the growing prominence of
non- State actors.

Non-state actors operate across national borders,

but they are also increasingly economically strong and
independent. They monopolize trade and transit routes
on land and by sea and they capture drug production
and supply routes, as well as minerals, fish and other
commodities. Children are coerced to enter into this
space as forced labour or sexual slaves and in other
roles across these criminalized commodity chains. The
space between children in armed conflict and children
in slavery has therefore become increasingly grey.

Educational and health facilities must remain
designated prohibited areas for all parties involved in
armed conflicts. Keeping armed parties away from
schools is a key step in creating safe spaces for children
in conflict zones. Peacebuilding and post-conflict
development become so much harder when a whole
generation of children are denied education during the
conflict period. Fiji is a signatory to the Safe Schools
Declaration and we urge all Member States that have
not yet signed on to it to do so.

UnitedNations peacekeeping plays an important role
in protecting children in conflict zones. Peacekeepers
have the reach and capacity to deliver comfort, security
and protection. United Nations peacekeeping operations
also provide highly specialized skills through their
child protection advisers. Since 2001, child protection
advisers have been deployed in United Nations
peacekeeping missions around the world. They are
currently deployed in six United Nations peacekeeping
missions and it is paramount that they continue to be
well resourced. This function needs to be considerably
enhanced and expanded, however. Today, there are
only five child protection specialists in United Nations
peace operations across the world. This suggests that
we are not matching our words with resources.

More women peacekeepers are an important part of
a revamped, peacekeeping toolkit that is fit for purpose
and can better protect children. Women peacekeepers
are far better at identifying sexual violence faced by
children early on. Women in medical support units
help overcome deep barriers that victims 4 especially
girls - face in accessing medical, psychosocial and
other forms of support.

On the part of the United Nations, in peace
operations there is a need to better prepare missions
for child protection in complex conflicts, including by
increasing the number of women in policing, military,
corrections and all areas of peace operations. Fiji is
committed to strengthening its own capabilities in this
area and in better preparing for peace operations.

Fiji has been participating in United Nations
peacekeeping for the past 40 years. We understand that
the soft skills that peacekeepers bring to communities
are paramount. They allow positive rapport to be built
between peacekeepers and local communities. This
increases the chances of peacekeepers identifying
abuse, exploitation and grave violations of the rights of
children early and more systematically. These soft skills
increase the chances of identifying the weaponization
of food, health and other services in conflict zones. The
blunt truth remains that more children will die today
from the deliberate denial of food and health care than
from weapons.

We, as Member States, have given ourselves the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs); the protection
of children cuts across nearly all of them. The SDGs
apply equally to communities and children living in
conflict zones. The SDGs provide a framework and
a lens through which the United Nations system as a
whole can interact cohesively with the authorities in
conflict zones and systematically across all phases of
conflict. As they do so, they will expand opportunities
for development and thereby expand opportunities for
the successful reintegration of children.

When children are coerced through fear and
manipulation to take up arms, we cause irreparable
damage to their lives and to the future of their
communities. We take away their humanity when
they are locked up. Children associated with armed
groups are victims 4 nothing more and nothing less.
The United Nations system must do much better in
working with highly specialized civil society agencies
in reintegrating children at a considerably increased
speed and scale.

The Security Council may want to call on the
Secretariat to provide fresh proposals to improve
the mechanisms, expand the obligations of parties
and improve the capabilities of the United Nations
peacekeepers and specialized agencies in order to
aggressively reduce the unacceptable levels of grave
violations of the rights of children in conflict zones.

A step change is needed. That is the minimum we
can do to make the Security Council and the United
Nations relevant to the 140 million children living in
high-intensity conflict zones, who look to us with great
hope and with their prayers today.

