Mr. McNee (Canada): At the outset, I would like
to thank His Excellency the Foreign Minister of
Afghanistan, Mr. Rassoul, and Mr. De Mistura for
participating in this important debate and for their
extremely helpful statements this morning.

On 18 September, the Afghan people voted in the
first Afghan-led parliamentary elections since the
1960s. Following the challenges of the 2009 elections,
it was essential for the Independent Electoral
Commission to demonstrate an improved ability to
deliver elections. The Commission has met that
challenge in these parliamentary elections, which were
better organized than the previous ones.

Despite this, clearly, challenges were experienced
on polling day, which saw violence and has resulted in
many allegations of fraud. The violence perpetrated by
insurgents on polling day was an affront to the
democratic rights of the Afghan people. But the Afghan
authorities, supported by the United Nations,
demonstrated that it was still possible to give Afghans
the opportunity to vote. With the Afghan people, we in
the international community now await the final,
certified results. The final judgement on the credibility
of these elections will be determined by the way in
which the IEC and the Electoral Complaints
Commission (ECC) handle the counting period. This
period may not be without controversy. The IEC and
the ECC will need to work in a transparent and
efficient manner so that Afghans can see how their
complaints and challenges are handled.

Improved election processes are but one aspect of
the overall effort in Afghanistan. Canada notes with
great appreciation the latest report of the Secretary-
General on the situation (S/2010/463). The report
stated that the Kabul Conference marked a milestone in
Afghanistan's transition towards the full exercise of its
sovereign authority, and Canada fully agrees. The
sectoral plans prepared for the Conference by the
Government of Afghanistan demonstrated its increased
capacity to coordinate and lead on issues essential to
Afghanistan's future security and stability.

However, the Conference is only the first step in
the larger Kabul process. While the Secretary-
General's positive assessment of the process thus far is
encouraging, much work remains to be done. The
Government of Afghanistan needs to outline what it
believes the next steps of the Kabul process should be
and, in particular, to map out its hundred-day plan in
order for momentum to be maintained.

Essential to the Kabul process is a mechanism
that can ensure the transparent monitoring of the
commitments made. We suggest that progress on these
commitments should be communicated regularly to
Afghans so that they can increasingly hold their own
Government to account.

Central to the commitments made in Kabul this
July is the effective and sustainable phased transfer of
security responsibility to Afghan authorities by 2014.
The International Security Assistance Force will
facilitate the transition to Afghan security leadership.
But to be effective and sustainable, the transition must
be owned and accepted by the Afghan authorities and
people.

Engagement by the Government of Afghanistan
of its citizens will therefore be important throughout. It
is encouraging that the Afghan Government has shown
greater ownership in this area in recent months. The
short-term goals of enabling a security transition
should be transparently explained to the Afghan people
and appropriate resources set aside by the Government
to that end.

Effective transition is dependent upon improved
governance, which also featured strongly in the Kabul
Conference commitments. In our view, security actors
must work closely with their civilian counterparts to
ensure that the provinces identified for transition have
met the necessary governance conditions. Concrete
steps are also required in electoral reform, combating
corruption and upholding human rights, if the
Government of Afghanistan is going to be truly
responsive to the needs ofits people.

(spoke in French)

The conflict in Afghanistan cannot be resolved by
military means alone. Efforts to bring lasting peace to
Afghanistan must involve a dialogue with all parts of
Afghan society, including women and vulnerable
groups. Any viable reconciliation process in
Afghanistan must be Afghan-led, and it must reach out
to those who renounce terrorism and who declare their
respect for the Afghan Constitution.

The creation of the High Peace Council is an
important step in this regard. As the Council begins its
work, it will need to demonstrate that it can represent
the diverse interests of all people in Afghanistan,
regardless of the ethnicity, religion, tribe or gender.

The Kabul Conference recognized that regional
cooperation is vital to the long-term peace, stability
and recovery of Afghanistan. Sustained and
constructive support from Afghanistan's neighbours is
needed to undermine the safe havens of those who
would attack Afghanistan. Such support will not only
bring stability to Afghanistan, but also to the region as
a whole. Increased stability and cooperation in South
Asia is a precondition for regional trade, something
that can increase the prosperity of the region as a
whole.

In conclusion, we are encouraged by the progress
that has been seen in the past months, as well as by the
important commitments agreed upon by the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community at the Kabul Conference. However, a great
many challenges remain. It is now time to demonstrate
to the people of Afghanistan in a practical manner our
continued support in order to help the Government of
Afghanistan keep the promises it made at the Kabul
Conference.
