Mrs. Audouard (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Haysom and Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) Yury
Fedotov for their briefings. I also thank the Afghan
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement and echo the
tributes that have been paid to him and wish him success
in his new role. France aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union.

As highlighted in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/684), Afghan progress in political terms
has been significant. We welcome the National Unity
Government's efforts to make progress with reforms,
particularly electoral reform. The recent appointments
of the Governor of the Central Bank and a Judge of
the Supreme Court are also important decisions. The
Government's commitment to moving the peace process
forward, in consultation with the countries of the region,
also deserves our praise. The holding of discussions
in Pakistan at the beginning of July with the main
stakeholders was a positive development in seeking
a lasting political solution to the Afghan conflict. In
this respect, the support of countries of the region is
vital to ensuring that the Afghan reconciliation process
is successful and to ensuring also that conditions for
sustainable development in Afghanistan are met.

But many challenges remain, particularly in terms
of security. The conflict continues to spread, and the
level of violence is increasing, with civilians being the
primary victims. Afghan security forces have made
considerable progress, seem to be more and more
in a position to deal with attacks by the Taliban, and
maintain their control of Afghanistan's main urban
centres. Nevertheless, their capacities need to be
enhanced because the situation is still fragile in Kabul
and in many provinces, as was seen in the recent Taliban
attack on a prison in Ghazni province to help prisoners
to escape.

With respect to human rights, it is essential that
Afghan civil society and the authorities continue to
mobilize, especially on behalf of women and children,
who are particularly affected by this exacerbated
security situation. We therefore welcome the adoption
by Afghanistan of a National Action Plan on Women and
Peace and Security to implement resolution 1325 (2000)
from 2015 to 2022, and call on it to pursue its efforts
in this field. It is also important for the international
community to continue to support Afghanistan in
the implementation of its commitments to protecting
children in armed conflict.

The fight against narcotics and the illicit economy is
also among these challenges. As noted by Mr. Fedotov,
much remains to be done on this issue, which is of
great concern to France as it directly threatens the
security and development of Afghanistan, the health
of its population and the stability of the region. We
encourage the authorities to continue their work in the
fight against drugs through a comprehensive approach,
in close cooperation with UNODC, whose ongoing
efforts we welcome. France is resolved to see the United
Nations play a greater role in responding to this central
challenge, particularly in the coordination of the United
Nations agencies involved in the fight against drugs.

In this difficult context, the international community
should not stop working to accompany Afghanistan
towards greater stability, prosperity and democracy.
The commitments made at the London Conference
of December 2014 must be met, for Afghanistan still
needs the support of its partners.

While Afghanistan has fully entered the
transformation decade, the role of the United Nations
is more important than ever. its role in supporting the
Government remains crucial, notably to enable the
population to benefit from Government programmes
and international assistance. But this role must evolve
and adapt. In that regard, we welcome the tripartite
review and reflections being conducted jointly on the
desirable development of the support that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the
Organization can provide to countries.

France, meanwhile, will remain alongside
Afghanistan in the framework of the Franco-Afghan
Friendship and Cooperation Treaty and through its
contribution to the European Union commitment in
Afghanistan, which represents €l.4 billion over the
period 2014-2020.

To conclude, I hail the efforts of all United Nations
personnel in Afghanistan, who are working in difficult
conditions.

