Mr. Xu Zhongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting. We commend Malaysia's presidency during
the month of August and its steady steering of the
Council's work to a successful conclusion. With respect
to the Council's work during the month, I would like to
emphasize the following three points.

First, on South Sudan, the Council held several
thorough briefings and adopted resolution 2304 (2016),
which adjusted the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. The situation is grave and
complex. The international community must make
concerted efforts to assist all parties in the country
to return to the track of a political settlement and to
implement the peace agreement in order to achieve peace
and stability as soon as possible. China supports the
resolution ofAfrican problems by Africans themselves,
using their own methods. We appreciate the efforts
and good offices on the part of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the African
Union (AU) and States of the region on the question
of South Sudan. We support IGAD's leading role on
the issue. It is our hope that the United Nations will
establish political synergies with IGAD and the AU
through communication and consultation to address
the problem of South Sudan. We welcome the recent
consultations held between the Chief of General Staff
of the national forces of IGAD and the Transitional
Government of National Unity of South Sudan on the
regional protection force. We hope that they will also
fully heed the views of the Transitional Government
of National Unity in reaching an agreement on the
specifics concerning the force.
Secondly, on Syria, certain areas of the country
have recently experienced an escalation of conflict.
China is deeply concerned and believes that a political
solution is the only way out in addressing the question
of Syria. We support the efforts of the United States and
Russia, as co-Chairs of the International Syria Support
Group, with a View to intensifying coordination. The
international community should also take effective
measures aimed at easing the humanitarian situation
in the country, putting the ceasefire back on track and
creating conditions conducive to a political settlement
of the Syrian question. We welcome Russia's agreement
on the United Nations initiative to call for weekly 48-
hour humanitarian pauses in Aleppo. The international
community should continue to support the leading role
of the United Nations towards a political settlement of
the Syrian question, including the work of Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, as well as urge the parties to resume the Geneva
talks unconditionally. The parties in Syria should
abandon the mindset of a military settlement to the
Syrian question and commit themselves to dialogue and
negotiation with a view to gradually finding a solution
that is acceptable to all.

Thirdly, on counter-terrorism, on 30 August a
terrorist suicide-bomber attacked the Chinese Embassy
in Kyrgyzstan. China strongly condemns that serious
terrorist attack. Terrorism is a common enemy of
humankind. All forms of terrorism pose a threat to
international peace and security. The international
community should strengthen joint cooperation in order
to adopt universal standards aimed at firmly countering
any such activity, under any pretext or against any
country. The United Nations and the Security Council
should play the leading role in counter-terrorism
activities, which should be guided by the Charter of the
United Nations. The international community should
step up effective coordination to establish a united
front against terrorism and to ensure that terrorists
have nowhere to hide. As an important member of the
coalition against terrorism, China will continue actively
participating in bilateral and multilateral cooperation
against terrorism in order to contribute positively and
constructively to the maintenance of international
peace and security.

China also wishes New Zealand all the best during
its presidency during the month of September.

