Mr. Sidikou (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity
personally to present to the Security Council the latest
report (8/2016/233) of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and to brief members on the latest developments on
the ground.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is at a
pivotal moment. Elections should be held towards the
end of the year, while political tensions are rising as the
polls approach. The electoral process has long been at
an impasse, with significant obstacles to be overcome
in order to hold the elections. A credible dialogue
among all political stakeholders remains essential in
order to find a solution to the situation in which the
electoral process finds itself and to avoid an escalation
oftension. The risk of violence for us is real, unless the
political differences are resolved.

During his recent visit to the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo, the Secretary-General called on President
Kabila, the Presidents of the two chambers of Parliament
and members of the majority parties and civil society to
engage constructively in a political dialogue that has
the interests of the people at the centre. He highlighted
the need to hold credible elections in line with the
Constitution, with a view to consolidate the progress
made in the country over the past decade. In that regard,
we are working closely with the African Union and are
supporting its efforts to facilitate a political dialogue
with the support of regional and international partners.

Updating the voter rolls continues to be a key
element in holding credible elections. Progress in
that area will make it possible to lift one of the
existing obstacles. The support of MONUSCO will be
necessary in revising the voter lists. Nevertheless, to
limit the risks involved in its involvement, securing
political consensus beforehand is essential. That would
contribute to overcoming numerous impediments and
would mark a first, crucial step in the efforts aimed at
ensuring the holding of credible elections.

(spoke in English)

Another key message conveyed by the Secretary-
General during his visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo was that of the importance of there
being sufficient space for political activities and the
exercise of public liberties for the credibility of any
electoral process. Reports of increasing restriction
of the democratic space, in particular with regard to
members of the opposition, the media and civil society,
are of concern.

As set out in the report before the Council, the
situation in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo remains highly complex, in particular in
North Kivu and Ituri provinces, with the deterioration
of the security situation in some areas. In the Beni area
of North Kivu, the Allied Democratic Forces continue
to carry out brutal attacks against civilians, the
national security forces and MONUSCO. The Forces
democratiques pour la liberation du Rwanda (FDLR)
and the myriad Mayi-Mayi groups in North Kivu also
remain a significant threat to civilians. I am concerned
in particular about the situation in southern Lubero
and Walikale territories, where fighting between
newly emerged Mayi-Mayi groups and FDLR units
has resulted in mass displacements of civilians and
heightened tensions between local communities, with
an increasing number of human rights violations over
recent months. The rhetoric by some actors has become
increasingly strong, and there is a real risk of escalation
intercommunal conflict.

The spate of kidnappings in areas formerly occupied
by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) in Masisi and
Ituri territories is indicative of a lack of effective
State presence in conflict-affected areas. Inter-ethnic
tensions in Ituri province, fuelled by conflicts over
land, large-scale displacements owing to the situation
in North Kivu, and other population movements have
again raised the possibility of serious violence in
this area. Recent reported returns for former M-23
combatants to Masisi territory and other parts of the
Kivus serve to underscore the urgent need to implement
the Nairobi Declarations.

The situation in part of South Kivu also remains
fragile. In mid-February, Congolese security services
discovered weapons caches in the Ruzizi Plain, near
Uvira. The subsequent arrests of several Congolese
and Burundians on charges related to the caches and
participation in an insurrection movement, as well as
the remobilization of an ethnic militia in Haut Plateau,
are signs that the clashes in Burundi could destabilize
South Kivu.

MONUSCO has intensified efforts to approach the
protection of civilians and the neutralization of armed
groups as mission-wide priorities, with an added focus
on non-military initiatives, including strong political
advocacy, enhanced reporting and effective liaison with
communities. MONUSCO has also begun developing
tailored strategies to address the threat posed by armed
groups. The Mission continues to work closely with
Special Envoy Djinnit's Office with a view to dealing
better with the regional aspects.

I would like to highlight the importance of
renewing the partnership between the Government and
MONUSCO if such threats are to be addressed more
effectively. Since my arrival in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, I have intensified my engagement with
President Kabila himself, and he has indicated his
willingness to enhance cooperation with MONUSCO
and to re-engage in discussions on the joint development
of an exit strategy for MONUSCO. President Kabila's
commitment to renewing the coordination of military
operations, which resulted in January in a technical
agreement between the Government and MONUSCO
and in the recent resumption of greater cooperation in
planning operations, has paved the way for improved
cooperation. That is important, as MONUSCO Will be
more effective if challenges can be addressed in a spirit
of close cooperation with the Congolese authorities and
of mutual trust and confidence.

Military cooperation offers a clear opportunity to
significantly increase the military pressure on priority
armed groups and protect civilians more effectively.
The rate of surrender had risen in the past year, and
that trend could continue in the coming months with
a renewal of more coordinated military operations.
A key priority for the coming year will be linking
those efforts to a viable disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) process in order to ensure
that the military pressure leads to an eventual path to
reintegration or repatriation. It will also be important
to support those operations by managing weapons
and explosives effectively. All United Nations support
will be provided in accordance with the human-rights
due-diligence policy. MONUSCO has put in place robust
mitigating measures to ensure that our operations are
able to effectively target armed groups while reducing
the risk of human-rights abuses. The recent violence at
the Kitona demobilization camp, which left two dead
and several wounded, is a reminder of the need for
careful planning and coordinated support for the return
and reintegration of the more than 5,000 ex-combatants
now in the national DDR programme. Coordinating
advocacy for that phase of the programme with
partners such as the World Bank will be a priority in
the coming period.

The planned resumption of coordinated operations
between the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO is an
important part of a broader effort to renew and deepen
our partnership with the Government, recognizing that
a principled, transparent partnership is key to effective
implementation of our mandate. MONUSCO and
the Government took concrete steps in the context of
the strategic dialogue aimed at developing an agreed
exit strategy for MONUSCO, in line with resolution
2211 (2015) and taking into account the political and
security realities on the ground. MONUSCO and the
Government are discussing a framework for the exit
strategy, laying out a conditions-based approach for the
Mission's further drawdown and eventual withdrawal.
Working groups have been established to develop
agreed-on criteria for measuring progress in that
regard, and have already been working on that for the
past 10 days or so.

The process of force transformation is critical to
establishing the conditions that will enable the Mission's
drawdown and eventual withdrawal. Conducted
effectively, that process will ensure that MONUSCO
exercises greater operational capability in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, even
as the force's overall numbers are gradually reduced.
The core of the transformation is a more mobile and
agile force based largely on the new rapid deployment
battalions. The first of those arrived in the country last
month and has already conducted rehearsal exercises.
That approach, combined with increased aviation,
surveillance and engineering capabilities, is designed
to ensure enhanced responsiveness and the ability
to implement a robust strategy for the protection of
civilians in the coming period.

IwouId also like to take this opportunity to stress the
priority I have personally made of fully implementing
MONUSCO's zero-tolerance policy against sexual
exploitation and abuse. The Mission has reviewed
its overall strategy and introduced a new mechanism
aimed at ensuring that such exploitation and abuse can
be reported more easily, as well as a comprehensive
network for responding to and assisting victims. Under
my leadership, MONUSCO will take all possible steps
to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse, punish those
responsible to the maximum extent possible and address
the needs of victims and survivors.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight four issues
for the Council to consider as it finalizes MONUSCO'S
new mandate.

First, we need a credible and meaningful political
dialogue to overcome the impasse in the electoral
process. A strong message on the need for political
consensus and an agreed-on, sustainable way forward
will be important, while at the same time emphasizing
the link between a credible electoral process and
support for fundamental human rights. It will also be
particularly important to identify clear and realistic
conditions under which the United Nations could
support a revision of the voting registry, which we
believe would help enhance the process's credibility
and prevent the issue from becoming another obstacle
to timely elections.

Secondly, I am optimistic that we can capitalize on
the spirit of enhanced cooperation with the Government
to make rapid progress on the priority armed groups,
through improved cooperation between the Mission,
the Government and the FARDC, and with the support
of other partners. Neutralizing armed groups goes
beyond military operations and Will require improved
efforts to extend the State's authority and find durable
solutions for former combatants.

Thirdly, I count on the Council's support to
the Secretary-General's recommendation to draw
down an additional 1,700 military personnel. The
recommendation takes into account the Mission's plans
to transform the force and to take measures to address
inefficiencies. Going on the projected capability and
efficiency gains that the force transformation will
bring, the assessment has been made that we can
contemplate a further reduction in MONUSCO's
military personnel without compromising the Mission's
ability to implement its mandate to protect civilians,
including by neutralizing armed groups. As outlined
in the Secretary-General's letter of 16 December
(S/2015/983) and the report before the Council today,
the recommendation should be viewed as a concrete
step forward in facilitating the strategic dialogue
between the Mission and the Government, with a
view to achieving a common goal - a gradual and
progressive exit for MONUSCO that preserves the
gains and investments made so far.

Fourthly, military pressure will result in a
sustainable outcome only if there is an effective,
well-planned and nationally led DDR process that
ensures that ex-combatants are processed back into
their communities or countries of origin, while also
ensuring that hazardous war materials are removed and
stabilization efforts intensified. The Government has
begun planning for the reinsertion and reintegration of
thousands of demobilized ex-combatants in their home
communities, efforts that should be commended and
built on.

(spoke in French)

Lastly, it will be important to recognize the progress
made by the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo on ending the recruitment of children into the

armed forces and implementing the national plan aimed
at combating sexual violence. I would like to thank the
members of the Council and all Member States for their
continued active support to MONUSCO. I also want to
express my appreciation to the staff of MONUSCO and
the United Nations who work in difficult and sometimes
dangerous circumstances in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
