Mr. Serry: I brief the Security Council today
in the context of an increasingly volatile region with
developments on the ground unfolding at an alarming
pace. I intend to make short reference to the situations
in Syria and Lebanon, before focusing on the Israeli-
Palestinian issue, in particular on Gaza.

Let me start by putting on record the Secretary-
General's appreciation of Member States efforts to
counter terrorism and stop the so-called Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusra Front.
Let me equally stress that measures to counter ISIL
should be accompanied by political measures to end
the appalling violence in Syria and resolve the Syrian
conflict. Special Envoy de Mistura has just completed a
first visit to Damascus, looking for new openings.

As Council Members are aware from the recent
update on the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force's operations, the situation in the Golan remains
fluid. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
will brief the Council tomorrow on the most recent
developments and steps taken.

The Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) have regained
control of the border town of Arsal from militants from
Syria, including of the Nusra Front and ISIL, but efforts
to secure the release of 27 LAF hostages continue. We
commend the efforts of Lebanese authorities to ensure
calm and contain any popular reaction against Syrian
refugees.

Against the backdrop of the conflict in Gaza,
there were 10 separate incidents of rocket launchings
from southern Lebanon towards Israel between 11 July
and 25 August, and five occasions of Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) response with artillery fire across the
Blue Line. A relative calm has since been restored
and the parties have reaffirmed their commitment to
the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). Israeli
violations of Lebanese airspace continued.

We again urge Lebanon's political leaders to
elect a President without further delay. We reiterate
the international community's unified support for
Lebanon's security and stability in the evolving
regional context and look forward to the upcoming
ministerial meeting of the International Support Group
for Lebanon.

Let me now turn to Gaza. The Gaza conflict is an
appalling human tragedy and has also exacted a terrible
cost in already strained trust. While the ceasefire
brokered by Egypt has largely held since 26 August,
it remains worryingly fragile, with the underlying
dynamics still unaddressed.

I Visited Gaza last week and witnessed truly
shocking levels of destruction to infrastructure,
hospitals and schools. Large neighbourhoods lie in total
ruin. An estimated 18,000 houses were destroyed or
severely damaged. Some 100,000 people have lost their
homes, leaving families shattered and despairing. Over
65,000 displaced Palestinians remain in United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) shelters, while 111 UNRWA
installations sustained some sort of damage during
the conflict. More than 2,100 Palestinians were killed.
Most were civilians, including some 500 children and
250 women and 11 UNRWA staff. More than 11,000
Palestinians were injured. On the Israeli side, 66 IDF
soldiers and six civilians, including a child and a
foreign national, were killed. Some 130 Israeli civilians
and more than 450 soldiers were injured.

Israel struck over 5,000 locations in Gaza and
reportedly demolished 32 tunnels, 14 with openings
inside Israel. Over 3,500 rockets fired by Hamas and
other Palestinian militants struck Israel; another 700
were intercepted by the Iron Dome defence system.

We reiterate the Secretary-General's strong belief
that efforts must be undertaken to ensure that there is
accountability for alleged violations of international
law on both sides during the hostilities. I would also
note that the Secretary-General plans to commission a
board of inquiry to review and investigate a number of
incidents involving United Nations premises.

Leaving aside hollow claims of victory by one side
or the other, I sense a realization in my dealings with
the parties that a renewed conflict would be a disaster.
That means that we must change fundamentally the
dynamics in Gaza. If we do not, Gaza could implode
or, yet again, explode - possibly with a new and even
more devastating round of violence. While distrust is
acute, I hope all parties are ready to think afresh about
some long-held policies. If so, we may be able, together,
to walk a narrow path out of the current dangerous
impasse. What does such a path look like?

First, the fragile calm between Israel and Gaza
must be solidified at talks under Egyptian auspices in
Cairo, which we hope will resume shortly. The ceasefire
agreement already made general provision for entry of
humanitarian and relief aid and construction materials
and an expansion of the fishing zone to six nautical
miles. We hope that any further arrangements are as
clear as possible regarding the indefinite maintenance
of a ceasefire and the lifting of the closure, bearing in
mind the framework of resolution 1860 (2009) and any
further guidance that may be provided by the Security
Council.

Secondly, humanitarian issues require immediate
attention. Critical priorities include emergency shelter,
energy and water, the absence of which will make
progress in all other sectors impossible. In that regard,
on 10 September, the United Nations and the Palestinian
Government called for international donors to provide
$550 million in aid to help the hundreds of thousands of
Gazans affected by the conflict.

Thirdly, Gaza must now be opened up for
reconstruction and recovery, while legitimate security
concerns with regard to dual-use material must be
meaningfully addressed. The Governments of Israel
and Palestine understand that, and I appreciate the
constructive engagement of both sides in working
to find a solution on the issue. That reality is also
understood in Gaza.

In that regard, I am pleased to announce to the
Security Council that the Office of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
has brokered a trilateral agreement between Israel, the
Palestinian Authority and the United Nations to enable
work at the scale required in the Strip, involving the
private sector in Gaza and giving a lead role to the
Palestinian Authority in the reconstruction effort,
while providing security assurances through United
Nations monitoring that those materials will not be
diverted from their entirely civilian purpose. Reaching
agreement was not without its challenges. We consider
it to be a temporary mechanism, which must get up
and running without delay, but it as an important step
towards the objective of lifting all remaining closures
and a signal ofhope to the people of Gaza. We will brief
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC)
next week in more detail and update it on our progress.
We intend to keep the Council regularly informed.

The implementation of the agreement should be
facilitated by the proper overall context, and we would
welcome the Security Council's support and guidance
in that regard. I also note that we will need to have
sufficient resources to fulfil those additional duties, in
addition to any other tasks that may be asked of the
United Nations.

The temporary mechanism will also help to increase
donor confidence that investment in construction and
reconstruction works will be implemented expeditiously
and solely for their intended civilian purpose. That
is important and timely in anticipation of the Gaza
reconstruction conference scheduled for 12 October
to be hosted by Egypt and supported by Norway. I
appreciate Israel's announcement yesterday, in advance
of the AHLC meeting of 22 September, that it had
approved a programme of over $105 million worth of
United Nations projects that had been submitted prior
to the recent conflict. I look forward to Israeli approval
of an additional programme of work that the United
Nations will present before the Cairo conference.

Reconstruction will require significant increases
in the capacity of the crossings into Gaza to allow for
the importation of the required materials. We must
also look now to resume exports and West Bank-Gaza
trade and links, something that would be facilitated
if the Palestinian Authority were able to assume full
responsibility at Gaza crossing points.

That leads me to my fourth point. The Palestinian
Government of National Consensus, which is fully
committed to the principles of the Palestine Liberation
Organization under the leadership of President Abbas,
must be empowered and enabled to assume its rightful
responsibilities in Gaza and oversee the reconstruction
of the Strip. Civil and administrative reform must be
addressed urgently, moving beyond the current de facto
existence of two separate strands of administration,
in order to rationalize the public sector and create a
unified payroll. In that regard, I am very concerned
at the continued issue of unresolved payments to
staff hired by the former de facto authorities. The
problem needs immediate attention and should be
linked to the rationalization process, if the situation
is to be stabilized. As part of the continued efforts at
Palestinian reconciliation, we believe there must be
clear understanding that the control of security forces
is a matter solely for the legitimate authority, that the
issue of war and peace is a matter for that authority,
and not for militant factions, and that, ultimately, the
legitimate authority must have control over all armed
personnel, assets and weapons.

I do not underestimate the difficulties that remain
among the Palestinians, but I have been active in urging
them to address these issues during meetings that I
hope will take place this week. The United Nations also
stands ready to provide increased technical assistance
to the Palestinian Authority, drawing on and, as
required, expanding our unique presence in Gaza, as
the Government of National Consensus takes up its
challenges there.

Fifthly, as we focus on Gaza, we must give new
attention to the West Bank. We regularly draw attention
in these briefings to developments on the ground, and
I could give another recitation of statistics this month
regarding violence, clashes, arrests and demolitions.
However, I note in particular that Israel's declaration
of 1,000 acres in the Bethlehem area as so-called
"State land" risks paving the way for further settlement
activity - illegal under international law and contrary
to the pursuit of two States. Compounded with the
April 2014 declaration of approximately 250 acres of
land in the same governorate as "State land", these are
the largest "State land" declarations since the 19805.

The commitment of President Abbas and the
Palestinian Authority to coexistence and peace was
demonstrated by continued security coordination in the
West Bank, despite the conflict in Gaza and heightened
tensions on the ground. We must also not forget that
it was events in the West Bank that were part of the
downward spiral towards the recent war. Maintaining
the status quo in the West Bank while addressing Gaza
anew would send entirely the wrong signal. I am pleased
that Israel has confirmed that an additional 5,000 West
Bank Palestinians will receive work permits in Israel.
But positive Israeli actions on a range of issues, such
as empowering and enabling Palestinian planning and
construction in Area C, to say nothing of ceasing Israeli
settlement activity, would send a powerful message.

Finally, all of these efforts must be put into a
revised and credible political framework. This will
not be easy. The gaps on substance and the mistrust
evident in the last round of talks have not subsided; if
anything, positions may have further hardened. The
Palestinians remind us that prolonged occupation, as
well as extended closure, breeds despair, particularly
given the absence of an end-game based on the 1967
lines, something which will be a focus of Palestinian
diplomatic efforts in the coming period.

For their part, Israelis are alarmed at the tunnelling
and rocket fire from Gaza and View Hamas de facto
control of the Strip with grave concern. That is also
reinforcing their focus on the need for security
arrangements in any future political agreement for two
States. If the parties wish to break out of dynamics
that seem to portend deeper conflict and mistrust,
and if they still want two States, fresh thinking is
urgently needed - from them, and perhaps from the
international community as well.

The crisis in Gaza is far from over, and the window
of opportunity to address critical needs and stabilize
the situation is narrow. The devastation unleashed by
this most recent round of conflict has left civilians on
both sides feeling, once again, battered and embittered.
Yet the interdependence of these two peoples has only
been deepened, not lessened, by the latest disaster. If
they fall into a new round of violence, they will be
even more intertwined, yet even more distrustful in its
surely appalling aftermath. We - they - all of us must
act now and set a wiser and more responsible course.

The elements I have mentioned could, as a package,
fundamentally change the dynamics in Gaza and
rebuild the faith of both Israelis and Palestinians - in
themselves, each other, and the possibilities of peace
and two States, based on the end of occupation and the
end of conflict. Failing that, I see a danger of a further
downward spiral.

When I warn that Gaza could implode, or explode
again, or the two-State paradigm could slip irreversibly
away, I do not believe that I am crying wolf. The
Council should not underestimate the dangers. I
hope the Council will have the occasion to make its
own position clear. This would be a welcome step of
confidence, commitment and hope at a time when the
parties and the world desperately need it.

