Mr. Skinner-Klee Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate you and your delegation,
Sir, on organizing this open debate on a very important
issue in the field of international peace and security.
The presence of the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of
Sweden highlights that importance.

The concept note (S/2018/625, annex) also includes
guidelines for our debate and we appreciate the briefing
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
as well as that of the Executive Director of UNICEF,
Ms. Henrietta Fore.

Our first observation is about the importance of
carrying out this debate just as we embark upon a reform
of the United Nations focused mainly on prevention and
sustainable peace. Those two concepts, promoted by the
Secretary-General, have been supported by all Member
States this year through the adoption of two resolutions
this year, one in the General Assembly (resolution 72/276) and the other in the Security Council (resolution
2413 (2018)). Indeed, the protection of children is today,
more than ever, essential to fostering a culture ofpeace,
tolerance and coexistence in order to prevent conflicts
in the future or, as Ms. Fore asked, what will become of
children if we do not protect them?

We agree on the need to care for and assist children
not only because of their vulnerability, but also because
by protecting minors from all forms of Violence or
abuse, we are ensuring the very survival of society
in conditions of stability and harmony, which in turn
ensures the progress of nations in peace and security.
That is why we are very concerned that, in spite of
having legal instruments destined to protect children,
we still witness armed conflicts that perpetuate serious
abuses against girls and boys, as the Secretary-General
mentions in his recent report (S/2018/465). We are
utterly shocked by the indiscriminate use of chemical
weapons and internationally banned ordnance against
children, schools and hospitals, in flagrant violation
of international humanitarian and human rights law,
demonstrating heinous brutality against defenceless
and innocent civilian populations.
We reiterate our strongest condemnation of all
these abject acts and we call on not only States, the
United Nations and international specialized agencies,
but on every citizen of goodwill so that, together, we
can take responsibility for generating and ensuring that
children can enjoy their childhood without prejudice or
exclusion, without violence or wars. This is a direct and
inescapable responsibility of the Council. It means that
the Member States must totally reject any practice that,
even when it does not violate international humanitarian
law, violates universal human dignity, especially when
the victims are children separated from their parents
due to inhumane policies that traumatize them and,
by all accounts, is shameful. We call for the complete
cessation ofthese heinous practices that evoke historical
chapters of crimes against humanity.

As the Council is aware, Guatemala was affected by
a fratricidal conflict that lasted more than four decades,
the tragic consequences of which disproportionately
affected women and children. Since the signing of the
peace accords more than 20 years ago, we have succeeded
in building a more democratic and inclusive society
with greater respect for human rights. We recall with
gratitude how in 2002, with the support of UNICEF, the
National Commission for the Search for Disappeared
Children, enabled the documented reunification of
more than 1,000 children with their families.

In conclusion, we think that we come to this
debate with the intelligence of instilling hope for
building a better future, by appealing to the entire
human race to achieve the effective protection of
children. It is the Council's primary responsibility to
maintain international peace and security and, as such,
the prevention of conflicts and child protection are
urgent tasks.

That is why we decided to sponsor resolution 2427
(2018), adopted and promoted by your delegation,
Mr. President, as it prioritizes the protection of
children, promotes prevention and urges all humanity
to support States and intergovernmental organizations
with a renewed commitment to cooperating in ensuring
the respect of children's rights and thus creating a
protective environment that protects them from the
scourge of violence and abuse in order to safeguard
future generations from new conflicts.

