Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this meeting at such a timely juncture, as the
National Dialogue Conference in Yemen is drawing to
a close. I would like to thank the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Yemen, Mr. Jamal Benomar;
the Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation Council,
Mr. Al Zayani; and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Yemen, Mr. Al-Qirbi, for their statements.

Two years ago, Yemen was on the brink of civil war.
Since then the Yemeni parties have shown exemplary
commitment to ensuring a peaceful future for their
country. They have chosen dialogue over violence and
consensus over division. Remarkable progress has
already been made on the path to this peaceful political
transition, which responds to the legitimate democratic
aspirations of the Yemeni people.

Today it is necessary to redouble efforts to so as to
move forward, and to make that process irreversible.
We understand that the deliberations within the
working groups of the National Dialogue Conference
have not always been easy. There is nothing surprising
about that. The examination of long-standing disputes
and the establishment of a new social contract cannot
be done overnight. Nevertheless, we sincerely hope that
the Conference will be able to conclude over the next
few weeks and that the Yemeni parties will continue
to work together in a constructive manner to find fair
solutions to outstanding issues. It is important, in that
context, that the international community and the
Security Council stand beside the Yemenis, supporting
national reconciliation and recalling the provisions of
resolution 2051 (2012) to anyone behind the scenes who
may attempt to obstruct the process underway.

Yemen must also continue on the path of economic
reform. The Friends of Yemen stressed that the day
before yesterday. Progress is essential in the areas of
employment and combating unemployment, as well as
on the issue of subsidies to the ,energy sector. It is also
important that substantial reforms be undertaken to
modernize the civil service.

The Yemeni transition, moreover, remains seriously
constrained by security threats facing the country. The
recurrence of terrorist attacks against civil society,
Yemeni security forces, diplomats and humanitarian
workers is a real source of concern. In that area also,
we must come to the aid of the Yemeni authorities.

The humanitarian situation also remains very
worrying, as the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie Amos, spoke
of following her recent visit to Yemen. With one
of the highest levels of child malnutrition in the
world, more than 1 million children denied access
to education, 13 million people - more than half
of the population - without access to drinking
water or basic sanitation, and more than 10 million
people suffering from food insecurity, it is clear that
solving the humanitarian crisis is indispensable for
the stabilization of the country and for its economic
recovery. The humanitarian needs, therefore, must not
be neglected, and the economic challenges must be
addressed. Otherwise, the prospects for a successful
political transition could be seriously compromised.

In conclusion, allow me to say a few words on the
rights of the child and the problem of child soldiers. We
welcome the adoption by the Government of Yemen, at
the beginning of the month, of the action plan to put an
end to the recruitment and the employment of children
by Yemeni armed forces. Once that has been formally
signed, it should be implemented as soon as possible.
We also call upon the Yemeni Government to respect
the commitments it has made under international law,
including United Nations Convention on the Rights
of the Child, to which Yemen is a signatory, and to
pass a law establishing a minimum age for marriage
in line with international norms. Those steps are
indispensable, I believe, to ensure consistency with the
efforts deployed within the framework of the National
Dialogue Conference with a view to modernizing and
protecting human rights.

