Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): Mr. President, let
me begin by expressing my delegation's sincere
appreciation to the Russian delegation for its presidency
of the Council this month and to you, Ambassador
Churkin, for organizing this open debate and the well-
drafted concept note (S/20l4/384, annex). I also thank
the Secretary-General for his substantive briefing on
the issue.

Thailand has always attached great importance
to United Nations peacekeeping as one of the most
effective tools in assisting conflict-ridden countries
to return to the path of peace and security. We have
participated in over 20 United Nations peacekeeping
operations. United Nations peacekeeping operations
have evolved over the years. It is therefore most timely
and appropriate that the Council take stock of the
emerging trends, assess their implications and prepare
itself to meet the challenges ahead. As we learned from
the Secretary-General's briefing and from the concept
note, a number of discernible trends in modern-
day peacekeeping operations can be identified. My
delegation wishes to highlight two points.

First, the success of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is anchored in the basic principles of United
Nations peacekeeping, namely, the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
self-defence and in defence of the mandate. However,
recent developments towards more robust and proactive
peacekeeping may not be strictly consistent with such
principles.

The majority of current United Nations peacekeeping
missions operate in a situation of protracted intra-State
conflict. In that context, what does "consent of the
parties to the conflict" entail? There is the consent of
the host country. However, it is not the practice of the
United Nations to seek the consent of non-State actors,
since engagement with non-State actors has political
implications and must proceed with caution. That
means, therefore, that peacekeepers are often deployed
in politically sensitive environments or in the absence
ofa commitment to a political solution on the part of all
of the key parties to the conflict.

Regarding the principle of impartiality, a case
in point is resolution 2098 (2013), which created
the Force Intervention Brigade and authorized it to
neutralize armed groups in support of the authorities
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That raises
the question of impartiality. Do United Nations
peacekeepers become a party to the conflict on the
side of the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo? An affirmative answer to that question has
serious legal implications for the protected status of the
peacekeepers as well as for their safety and security.

Let me now turn to the protection-of-civilians
mandate in relation to the principle of the non-use of
force. While there is no argument regarding the need
to safeguard civilian lives, to do so effectively may
require peacekeepers to use force against those who
pose threats to civilians. It is indeed legitimate to use
force in defence of the mission's mandate. However,
when a mandate clearly necessitates the use of force,
such as the authorization given to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali to use "all necessary means" to deter threats
and to take active steps to prevent the return of armed
elements to key population centres, that creates a strain
on the principle of the non-use of force.

Secondly, it is not possible to achieve durable peace
if women are not included or are left on the margins.
We observe that, since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), there have been greater efforts to mainstream a
gender perspective and increase women's contribution
to United Nations peacekeeping. Women, peace and
security is now a mandate component of 12 United
Nations peacekeeping operations, including the newly
created United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
Thailand warmly welcomes the recent appointment by
the Secretary-General of the first female peacekeeping
force commander, Major General Kristin Lund of
Norway, as the Force Commander of the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus.

Despite the progress made, the proportion of female
peacekeepers remains very low. Women represent
approximately 10 per cent of the United Nations police
personnel and less than 3 per cent of the total United
Nations military personnel. We therefore still have a
long way to go before the full potential of women's
contribution to peace and security is realized. We
are of the view that the gender-mainstreaming effort
must continue to be prioritized in United Nations
peacekeeping. It may be necessary to revisit the issue,
in particular by working on how to translate the vision
of women, peace and security into reality on the ground.

United Nations peacekeeping is now a collective
enterprise with multidimensional aspects, each ofwhich
merits careful consideration. I have touched upon two
emerging trends and their implications. To meet the
challenges ahead, we wish to reiterate that important
policy discussions and decisions pertaining to United
Nations peacekeeping should be conducted and taken
in a consensual manner. The Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations - whose members includes
troop-contributing countries, police-contributing
countries, host countries, Council members and other
interested countries - is the appropriate forum for
such an exercise. In addition, effective and regular
consultations among the Council, the Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries should be held regularly,
and such discussions should form the basis for decisions
authorizing United Nations peacekeeping missions and
their mandates.

