Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset I wish to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and
European Union Special Representative, and to thank
him for his briefing. As this is the first time he is
participating in a Security Council meeting since
taking office, we wish him every success in carrying
out the work entrusted to him. We also wish to
welcome Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We very much
appreciate his statement today.

In the almost 15 years since the signing of the
Dayton Agreement Bosnia and Herzegovina has
achieved significant progress on the difficult path
towards national reconstruction and reconciliation. The

citizens of the country, irrespective of their origin, are
hoping for a future of stability, development and peace.
That is why all the leaders of the country must
redouble their efforts to ensure compliance with the
pending commitments, maintain the path of dialogue
and negotiation to settle disagreements and avoid
actions that would imperil the stability and
constitutional framework of the country. All that would
be most acceptable to the international community.

The reforms that preceded the signing of the
Stabilization Agreement with the European Union last
June, the political accord signed in November by the
leaders of the three communities and the reforms that
made it possible for the Brcko District to be granted
access to the constitutional court demonstrate that it is
possible to achieve consensus on relevant topics and to
promote an agenda of reform. Nevertheless, the High
Representative notes that the political environment has
obstructed the work of State institutions and has
reduced the options for opening up the legislative
agenda. In light of the foregoing, we appeal to all the
parties to fully meet the five objectives and two
conditions established for the transition from the Office
of the High Representative to the European Union
Representative, and we call upon them to cooperate
fully with the High Representative.

We note with satisfaction the adoption of the
National War Crimes Strategy and the implementation
of action plans of the National Justice sector Reform
Strategy. These are positive advances in enhancing
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. In this regard, we would
like to reiterate that all parties must continue to
cooperate with the Tribunal in the effective discharging
of its mandate and, in particular, provide any relevant
information that would contribute to the arrest of the
accused in the pending cases under its jurisdiction.

We are concerned that, over the past few months,
a deterioration in freedom of expression has been
noted, in particular through an increase in reports of
incidents of aggression, death threats and other
violations of the rights of journalists. The legal
framework and the institutional structure must
therefore be strengthened as regards the promotion of
protection of human rights.

Another important aspect is compliance with
annex 7 of the Peace Agreement, which concerns a
strategy for the return of displaced persons and
refugees by supporting the reconstruction of housing
and compensation for properties that cannot be restored
to the original owners. The authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with the support of the international
community, must adopt the necessary measures to
ensure the safe return of more than 100,000 displaced
persons and refugees to their places of origin. This
must be a central focus for national reconciliation
efforts.

I would like to conclude by reiterating my
country's support for the work of the High
Representative and expressing the hope that Bosnia
and Herzegovina will manage to overcome its
differences and be able to build a democratic, multi-
ethnic State, in which its citizens - along with those
of the entire Balkan area - will enjoy a more stable
and prosperous future as an integral part of Europe.

