Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa joins
the Secretary-General in condemning in the strongest
possible terms the bombing of the United Nations
building in Abuja. We express our deep sympathy and
condolences to the victims of this heinous crime, to
their families, to the people and Government of our
sister country Nigeria and to the United Nations family.

We thank the Indian delegation for organizing
this important debate on the state of United Nations
peacekeeping. We also thank the Secretary-General for
sharing his views on this flagship activity of the
Organization.

South Africa aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Morocco on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

This debate highlights once again the urgency of
meaningfully and collectively addressing the
complexity of peacekeeping today. Peacekeeping is one
of the major means at the disposal of the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, in fulfilling
its Charter-mandated responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security.

We would like to stress that peacekeeping is not
by itself a panacea for conflict resolution. It must be an
integral part of the broader political solution to the
underlying causes of conflict. South Africa therefore
supports efforts to promote and strengthen political
solutions to conflicts, including through mediation,
conflict prevention and management and
peacebuilding. That is clearly espoused in Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations.

In light of the changing nature of conflict
characterized by intra-State conflicts, strong military
States and well-resourced opposition groups, the
Security Council must emphasize making full use of
political processes, including those initiated by
regional organizations. In that way, peacekeeping
missions can simultaneously help to support efforts to
achieve sustainable peace.
My delegation wishes to reiterate that United
Nations peacekeeping missions must consistently be in
consonance with the principles and goals enshrined in
the United Nations Charter. The principles of consent
of parties, the non-use of force except in self-defence,
clear and robust mandates, and impartiality must be
faithfully adhered to. We must ensure that United
Nations peacekeeping is not politicized or misused in
any manner other than that mandated by the Council.
We must guard against the perception that United
Nations peacekeeping is partisan, as that undermines
the credibility of the United Nations.

The issue of flexible, predictable and sustainable
resources for peacekeeping operations - especially as
it relates to the African continent - is critical. The
African Union continues to play a leading role in
conflict prevention and management and the resolution
of conflicts on the continent, in line with Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter. It will be necessary for
this Council to take bold steps and move beyond well-
known rhetoric to ensure that African Union missions
that are authorized by the Council, including the
African Union Mission in Somalia, are provided with
sufficient resources, enablers and capabilities to carry
out their mandates.

While we are further encouraged by the
Secretary-General's observation in his report on
support to African Union peacekeeping operations
(S/2009/470), which acknowledges the African
contribution to peacekeeping, the report also highlights
Africa's needs in the area of conflict management. We
believe the report also reaffirms the role of regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security, as provided for in Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter.

My delegation is of the view that burden-sharing
is key to dealing with the complex challenges of
peacekeeping. While many of us acknowledge the
importance of our collective responsibility for effective
peacekeeping, that should be guided by political will
and matched by actual actions on the ground. For that
reason we encourage the general membership of the
United Nations to generously contribute to all
peacekeeping operations, both in personnel and
equipment.

South Africa supports the enhancement of the
triangular cooperation among the Security Council,
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and the
Secretariat, aimed at improving the effectiveness of
peacekeeping from the planning through to the exit
stages. We also commend the role of the Security
Council Working Group of the Whole on Peacekeeping
Operations, under the chairmanship of Nigeria, which
has been integral to enhancing the Council's
relationship with TCCs.

It is common knowledge that peacekeepers are
early peacebuilders, as they primarily provide a secure
environment conducive to the implementation of early
peacebuilding tasks. South Africa maintains that
integrated peacekeeping and peacebuilding can play an
important role in establishing the foundations for
sustainable peace, rule of law and good governance.
Creating, maintaining and sustaining peace require an
integrated approach that incorporates early
peacebuilding activities during the start-up of
peacekeeping missions.

We believe that gender mainstreaming in peace
missions ensures that women's concerns and
experiences are at the forefront of the policy aspects of
peacekeeping operations. We commend the work that
has been done so far by the Secretary-General to
ensure that the number of women in leadership
positions is increased. South Africa welcomes the
strategic role that UN-Women will play in facilitating
the integration of gender perspective in the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates.

We look forward to the adoption of the draft
presidential statement before us, as it will add impetus
to the Council's peacekeeping efforts and build on its
relationship with TCCs.

Finally, we pay tribute to all the men and women
who have served and to those who will continue to
serve in United Nations peacekeeping operations. We
commend their dedication and courage to keep the
world a safer and better place. We pay special tribute to
those who have paid the ultimate price in the service of
peace and humanity.

