Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa wishes
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), Mr. James Swan; the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten; the
Special Representative ofthe Chairperson ofthe African
Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Ambassador
Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira; and our sister, the
Executive Director of the Somali Women Development
Centre, Ms. Amina Arale, for their briefings.

My delegation commends the role that UNSOM,
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia
(UNSOS), AMISOM, the African Union (AU) and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, as
well as international partners, have been playing in
facilitating State-building and peacebuilding processes
in Somalia. We pay tribute to the sacrifices that are
being made by AMISOM. and the Somali security
forces to ensure that the vision ofa peaceful and stable
Somalia is realized.

My delegation would like to address the following
three issues: first, the political process and the imperative
of national dialogue and reconciliation; secondly, the
necessity of addressing security and humanitarian
issues; and, thirdly, the importance of creating suitable
conditions for the 2020-2021 national elections.

First, South Africa wishes to underline the critical
importance of ensuring that the political process in
Somalia is sustained. In that regard, my delegation
reiterates that the gains achieved in Somalia can be
strengthened and sustained only when all leaders
of the Federal Government and the federal member
States resume their efforts to engage in a genuine
national dialogue. That is the only way to address the
outstanding political issues and challenges that they are
currently encountering. That will require compromise,
cooperation and consensus on key issues on the part of
all stakeholders.

We also urge support and encouragement for
stakeholders to undertake dialogue and broad-based
and inclusive reconciliation at the regional level, with
the support and participation of the Federal Government
and the administrations of federal member states. That
will ensure that any differences or disagreements over
regional electoral processes are attended to as soon as
possible and resolved in a peaceful manner.

South Africa therefore welcomes the progress made
in the legislative process, especially the resumption of
cooperation between the two Houses of Parliament;
the submission of key legislation in Parliament; the
completion of the preliminary technical review of the
last five chapters ofthe Provisional Federal Constitution;
and the draft electoral bill. Equally significant are
efforts that include the reiteration of commitments to
dialogue between Somalia and "Somaliland"; the roll-
out of the National Reconciliation Framework to the
federal member states by the Federal Government;
and efforts towards regional and local-level
reconciliation meetings.

With regard to the prevailing security situation,
we note with serious concern that Al-Shabaab has
increased its acts of terror in Somalia, including in
Mogadishu. Of concern is its increased capability to
use improvised explosive devices and vehicle-borne
improvised explosive devices in attacks conducted
by the group. Al-Shabaab continues to undertake
attacks on Government personnel and facilities,
which include the killing of civilians, United Nations
staff and humanitarian workers, AMISOM. forces,
the Somali security forces and international partners.
These continued atrocities on the part of Al-Shabaab
must be condemned and cannot go unpunished. We
also believe in the importance of increasing efforts to
address inter-clan and communal clashes, which have,
regrettably, resulted in the loss of lives.

However, we commend the ongoing success of
the Somali National Army (SNA) on its offensive
operations and stabilization activities, with the support
of AMISOM. and international partners, in Lower
Shabelle as a clear demonstration of its efforts to counter
and degrade Al-Shabaab. This further underscores not
only the significant role that AMISOM. continues to
play in support of the SNA-led operations, but also its
critical importance, together with the United Nations
and international partners, in terms of addressing the
security challenges facing Somalia.

Furthermore, we reiterate that for Somalia to be
able to take ownership of addressing its own security
challenges, the area of capacity-building requires
sustained and coordinated international support. In
this regard, South Africa calls for the continuation of
the implementation of the comprehensive approach
to security, encompassing international support,
coordination and joint planning by AMISOM, the
Federal Government, the federal member states,
UNSOM, UNSOS and regional partners, among others.
This includes a focus on preventing and countering
violent extremism at the lower levels, thus ensuring that
efforts to address Al-Shabaab are not only military but
comprehensive and include the effective rehabilitation
and reintegration of defectors.

Thirdly, the current insecurity in Somalia is further
exacerbated by the continued humanitarian situation.
The ongoing climatic effects of decreased seasonal
rains, drought and flooding have had a negative impact
on food production, which, in turn, has increased food
insecurity and adversely affected the most vulnerable
communities, including children, especially among
internally displaced persons. In addition, many people
are also being internally displaced due to evictions, food
insecurity and other factors. All together, these various
developments have further increased the duration of the
humanitarian situation in Somalia.

For those reasons, we support the appeal by the
Secretary-General for an increase in efforts aimed
at supporting the delivery of life-saving assistance
and protection. Continued support in addressing
the humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
of paramount importance. We therefore urge the
international community to support the funding of the
2019 humanitarian response plan for Somalia in order
for the humanitarian community to deliver necessary
services to civilians in need. We also echo the Secretary-
General in commending the Somali authorities for
demonstrating leadership by prioritizing the scaling
up of its drought response and its collaboration with
aid agencies.

Lastly, South Africa wishes to underline the
imperative of creating suitable conditions for the
2020 and 2021 national elections in Somalia. In that
respect, we agree with the Secretary-General about
the need for Somali stakeholders to reach consensus
on key electoral issues, including the adoption of the
draft electoral law and the need to mobilize financial
support for conducting such electoral activities as voter
registration. Above all, it is of critical importance that
the electoral security coordination mechanisms be
established to ensure proper planning and operations.

The need for assistance and support from the United
Nations through UNSOM, but also in coordination
with the Somali National Army and AMISOM, as well
as all other international partners, is paramount for
delivering secure and successful elections in 2020 and
2021 in Somalia. Creating the suitable conditions for,
and ultimately holding, successful national elections
will be a key milestone towards State-building and
peacebuilding for Somalia, which includes resolving
the reported targeted assassinations of participants in
electoral processes.

In conclusion, it is pleasing to note that UNSOM. has
worked diligently to include the participation of women
and youth in the political processes in Somalia through
the holding of various events aimed at building capacity
and awareness, particularly on constitutional review
and election-related matters. We equally commend
the Federal Government of Somalia for ratifying the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
These developments constitute positive steps towards
an inclusive State-building and peacebuilding process
in Somalia. It is therefore the responsibility of the
international community to continue supporting the
cause of the Somali people towards sustainable peace
and stability. We in South Africa will play our part.

