Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing. I also welcome Mr. Jeremie,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and thank him
for his statement. I also thank Mrs. Citaku for her
presentation.

Allow me to make the following comments. My
delegation notes with satisfaction the reasonably calm
security situation in Kosovo, although the situation in
northern Kosovo remains unstable. Security incidents
continue to cause concern and tensions. My country
therefore calls on all parties to exercise self-restraint
and to avoid any unilateral or provocative action that
could increase tension. At the same time, we believe
that the vigilance of the security forces, work to
achieve reconciliation and the prosecution of those
who commit violent acts play an important role in
spreading a sense of security among all citizens,
especially those of the northern Kosovo.

We welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to facilitate dialogue and reconciliation between the
various communities and encourage it to pursue those
efforts. Lebanon appreciates UNMIK's efforts to
maintain security and stability and to facilitate Kosovo's
participation in various international and regional
forums. However, we share the Secretary-General's
concern over the report issued by the "Office for
Implementation of the Strategy for the North of
Kosovo" and the media campaign against UNMIK. We
call on all parties to abstain from publishing inaccurate
information, which can only have detrimental effects
and create obstacles to UNMIK's work.

We welcome the regular exchange of information
and coordination between the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and UNMIK, pursuant to the
principle of neutrality set out in resolution 1244 (1999).

A study conducted by UNICEF has highlighted
the fact that current return and repatriation practices
lack guarantees for safe and dignified returns. We
therefore stress the importance of the organic link
between national reconciliation and the strengthening
of economic and development activities in the various
communities, and of respect for human rights. Only
this will end discrimination and harassment, thus
creating a socio-economic environment conducive to
the return of the refugees.

Moreover, we express our appreciation for the
progress made by the Reconstruction Implementation
Commission in protecting Serbian Orthodox religious
and cultural heritage sites in Kosovo. We support the
Secretary-General's recommendation that technical
support and funding be provided to the Commission.

We welcome cooperation between Belgrade and
Pristina on the issue of missing persons through the
Working Group on Missing Persons. We hope that this
spirit of cooperation will also extend to other fields.

We also welcome General Assembly resolution
64/298, presented by Serbia to the Assembly and
adopted on 9 September. In our view, the resolution
constitutes an important point of departure for the
launching of a flexible and constructive dialogue
between the two parties as soon as possible. It is
encouraging in this respect that the United Nations and
the European Union have expressed their intention to
facilitate such a dialogue. However, it is extremely
important that all parties of influence also make
continuous efforts to re-establish trust and promote
reconciliation between the communities of Kosovo.
That will create an atmosphere of trust for the adoption
of agreements of mutual benefit to all communities.

We hope that the recent political incidents and the
anticipated early elections will not delay dialogue
between the parties and the elections will be fair and
transparent. In addition, we hope that the dialogue will
help to improve the living conditions of the people and
help to strengthen the basis for peace and
reconciliation in Kosovo, thus contributing to stability
in the region.

