Mr. Mufioz (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me
the opportunity to brief the Council on the work of the
Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee in the last
120 days. I regret that I cannot deliver that information
in Spanish as I would have liked, but the Spanish
translation of the English-language document that we
have been working on in the Committee was not
available in time for me to deliver this briefing in my
mother tongue. In any case, I would be grateful to the
Secretariat if it could make that translation available.

(spoke in English)

I am delivering my 120-day briefing pursuant to
paragraph 12 of resolution 1526 (2004). This is my
final briefing in my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee.

Since my last briefing, the Committee has
focused on several important issues on its agenda. I
want to commend the members of the Committee for
their hard work and pro-active approach. The
Committee has met 13 times, mostly in informal
meetings.

In the second half of September, the Committee
considered in great detail the first report of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
(S/2004/679, annex), in particular the recommendations
contained in that report. The Committee's discussion,
with the active participation of the Monitoring Team,
was important on several accounts. First, it allowed for
a better understanding of various issues highlighted in
the report, such as the technicalities related to the
freezing of assets and legal aspects of the Committee's
list and other lists. Additionally, it enabled the
Committee to establish which recommendations are to
be addressed by it and/or by the Monitoring Team,
allowing for the further improvement of the work of
both bodies. The discussion also referred to those
recommendations that require more work to develop
them into practical guidance and which it would
therefore be advisable to discuss in more depth in
connection with the second report of the Monitoring
Team.

During the reporting period, the Committee
received two specialized briefings. First, on
20 October, Professor Rohan Gunaratna, a renowned
expert on counter-terrorism and the author of a book on
Al Qaeda, provided his insights into how Al Qaeda
operations have evolved over the past few years and on
the potential threat of terrorism in general. On
4 November, Mr. Ronald Noble, Secretary General of
INTERPOL, briefed the Committee on the work of his
agency and outlined the areas in which practical
cooperation between INTERPOL and the Committee
can be enhanced, including through the participation in
Committee meetings of the new Special Representative
of INTERPOL, Mr. Ulrich Kersten, who is based in
New York. Mr. Noble also invited members of the
Monitoring Team to visit INTERPOL's headquarters in
Lyon to discuss more technical issues.

The Committee continued its work to improve the
guidelines for the conduct of its work.

The Committee has also put a great deal of effort
into formulating its written assessment pursuant to
resolution 1455 (2003). That assessment was intended
to be provided by the Committee prior to the adoption
of resolution 1526 (2004) in January 2004 as an input
for further improvements to the sanctions regime.
However, owing to the limited number of
implementation reports, its preparation was postponed
until a later date, with the expectation of an in-depth
analysis from the Monitoring Team. Thanks to the
Monitoring Team's high-quality analysis of all 130
reports, provided in mid-October, the Committee has
been able to arrive at its own conclusions. The
analytical written assessment of States'
implementation, the first of its kind in this or any other
sanctions Committee, will soon be made available to
the entire United Nations membership. I strongly
commend the assessment to the attention of all States.

Further to the issues I have just discussed, the
Committee has been considering requests for additions
and other changes to its list. During the reporting
period, the Committee approved the addition of one
individual and three entities to the list. On
26 November, the Committee approved extensive
technical corrections to its list, as submitted by the
Monitoring Team. The Committee also acted upon four
notifications by States pursuant to resolution 1452
(2002).

The Chairman of the Committee continued to be
in contact with the Chairmen of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), and
with Permanent Representatives of States in New York,
on the issues relevant to the work of the Committee.

Let me refer to the activities of the Monitoring
Team. Since my last briefing to the Security Council,
the Monitoring Team has regularly assisted the
Committee in the monitoring of States' implementation
of the sanctions measures. The Monitoring Team
provided the Committee with a detailed analysis of the
information contained in States' implementation
reports pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003). In its
analysis, the Team focused on the successes and the
challenges that States are facing in implementing the
asset freeze, the travel ban and the arms embargo. In
addition, the Team submitted for the Committee's
approval a large number of technical corrections,
concerning 50 individuals and 10 entities on the list,
which the Team had compiled both through
approaching 80 Member States and by extracting the
relevant information from implementation reports.
Earlier this month, the Committee accepted almost all
of the suggested corrections, with the exception of a
few whose consideration is still pending.

The Monitoring Team has continued to encourage
non-reporting States to submit reports, as requested by
resolution 1455 (2003). As a result of the Team's
efforts, four more States have now fulfilled their
obligations in that regard.

The Monitoring Team has worked closely with
the Committee and has been invited to attend almost all
informal meetings. Members of the Committee
frequently have sought the views or advice of members
of the Team. The Team has also enhanced direct links
with many Member States, regional bodies and other
relevant organs of the United Nations. The Team has
visited several States in South-East Asia, Africa, the
Middle East, Europe and the Americas. In addition, the
Team has provided expert support for my own trips;
just recently, a Team expert accompanied me on my
visits to Libya, Iran and Switzerland. The Team
continued to provide the Committee with informative
visit reports in the period just following those trips.

The Monitoring Team has held regular meetings
with CTC experts and has established a close link with
the emerging Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED). It has also discussed its potential
contribution to the work of the 1540 Committee and
the working group newly established pursuant to
resolution 1566 (2004).

Let me refer now to the cooperation of the
Committee with Member States.

Pursuant to operative paragraph 11 of resolution
1526 (2004), the Committee has sought to engage
Member States in a more active dialogue. In several of
my public statements, I have encouraged States to take
the opportunity to meet with the Committee for more
in-depth discussions of relevant issues. On 5 October
the Committee issued a press release (SC/8208) in
which it encouraged Member States to contact my
Mission in that regard. The Committee has agreed to
meet with representatives of one Member State. I trust
that the meeting will be held early next year and that it
will be the first of a series of meetings with interested
Member States. The Committee has much to learn from
Member States with regard to both their concerns and
their successes.

Another way in which the Committee has
obtained useful information on States' implementation
efforts has been through my visits to selected States.
Since my last report to the Council I have conducted
two trips, which have taken me to the Philippines,
Cambodia, Thailand, Australia, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, the Islamic Republic of Iran and
Switzerland. On the first trip I was accompanied by
Ambassador Lauro Baja of the Philippines, Minister
Counsellor Cheng Jingye of China and Counsellor
Heinrich Haupt of Germany. On the second visit I was
joined by Ambassador Inigo de Palacio of Spain,
Minister Counsellor Traian Filip of Romania and
Mr. Franck Kasbarian from the Monitoring Team. I was
also accompanied on both trips by Mr. Ulrik Ahnfeldt-
Mollerup from the Secretariat and Mrs. Carla Serazzi
from my own Mission.

In all of those countries where we met with
presidents, prime ministers, ministers and other high
officials, I found a significant dedication to the
implementation of sanctions measures, although
unequal levels of effective implementation exist. There
has been a growing realization of the enduring threat
posed by Al Qaeda and the Taliban. Some of the
countries clearly need further assistance from the
international community, and I will strive to ensure
that awareness is raised concerning that fact.

In most countries we discussed the Committee's
List, about whose quality States continue to raise
concerns. I always noted the Committee's
understanding of those concerns and stressed that the
List is only as good as Member States allow it to be,
given that States are to submit any new additions,
changes and relevant identifying information. I have
also stressed the importance of States submitting more
names to the Committee.

States continue arresting individuals linked to Al
Qaeda, submitting names to our List and taking action
to impede the financing of terrorism. For example,
among the countries visited in this period, the
Philippines and Libya have announced that they intend
to submit or are already preparing the submission of a
significant number of names to the Committee's List.
Iran has frozen considerable assets in four separate
accounts of an individual on our List, Mr. Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar, and has apprehended a number of Al
Qaeda operatives. Also, Iranian authorities warned us
that trade operations are being used to finance
terrorism. We were told that an Iraqi had operated a
company in Iran that had sold spoiled vegetables to
clients in another country in the area, who in return had
paid unusually high prices to the suppliers.

Our interlocutors in Switzerland expressed
concern about the due-process standards applied by the
Committee and raised other human rights questions
related to the Consolidated List. Furthermore, they
pointed out that there is a gap that gives possible
targets enough time to remove their funds when a new
sanctions regime is created by the Security Council. In
that regard, they explained to us a very sophisticated
interdiction software used by banks to find and freeze
assets, which could be useful. They also agreed that
Switzerland would become a point country for
cooperation in this area.

Some countries, especially in Africa, the Middle
East and South-East Asia, have expressed frustration
with what they see as Western double standards in the
fight against terrorism, pointing to the protection of
perceived terrorists under the guise of refugee law, the
acceptance of the dissemination of terrorist
propaganda, and sometimes even support for
organizations that those countries consider to be
terrorist groups. Regardless of whether or not those
perceptions are accurate, it is something that the
Committee will have to consider in the future.

We discussed, when it was relevant, both the need
for technical assistance and the possibility of providing
technical assistance. I have always noted that I would
forward all information to the Chairman of the CTC. In
my view, there is a clear need for concerted, concrete
United Nations efforts in that regard, and I hope that

the CTED, once it is fully functioning, will be able to
make an important contribution in this area.

Regional and subregional cooperation aimed at
enhancing capacities in the fight against terrorism was
underlined by many of the States visited. Member
States also provided a valuable assessment of the
deficiencies in various aspects of the sanctions
measures and their practical implementation. These are
all issues that I have brought back to the Committee
and that we use in our work to continuously improve
the sanctions. I am particularly pleased to note that the
selected States have found great utility in the visits and
that, in many cases, the Committee has been invited to
return or to send representatives of the Monitoring
Team for expert-level discussions. I would therefore
strongly urge my successor to continue to visit selected
States as mandated by the Security Council.

I should now like to touch upon the future
activities of the Committee. The following tasks
continue to be high on the Committee's agenda:
encouraging Member States to be proactive in
proposing names for inclusion on the Committee's
Consolidated List for the implementation of measures
specified in resolution 1526 (2004) and to further
improve the quality of the List; monitoring, with the
assistance of the Monitoring Team, sanctions
enforcement activities by States, with a view to
detecting possible problems and suggesting actions to
remedy those problems; and further considering how to
improve delisting procedures and exceptions pursuant
to resolution 1452 (2002). The Committee will further
intensify its dialogue with Member States, including
through regular briefings to delegations by the
Chairman and further trips by the Chairman and the
Monitoring Team to selected States and relevant
international gatherings, with the aim of constantly
evaluating how sanctions measures are being applied
on the ground; and will further increase cooperation
with the CTC and its Executive Directorate, with the
1540 Committee and with all relevant international
agencies and organizations.

The priorities of the Committee remain its List -
which currently contains more than 400 names - and
the identification of possible improvements to the
current sanctions measures, which should be forwarded
to the Council prior to the adoption of a new draft
resolution in mid-2005.

In conclusion, the Committee is clearly aware
that only results-oriented approaches, based on
resolution 1526 (2004), will make its contribution to
the fight against terrorism meaningful and tangible.
The Committee has shifted its focus from
comprehensive reporting of State implementation to
active dialogue with Member States. In that
connection, I would like to remind States of the
opportunity they have to meet with the Committee and
to discuss relevant issues in more detail. Member
States must not feel that there is a group of States that
are designing sanctions and monitoring their
implementation, but rather that all States form an
integral part of counter-terrorist strategies, policies and
implementation efforts. Only thus can we win the most
challenging battle of our time for the benefit of each
State and individual on this planet, and guarantee their
right to exist and live without fear of terrorist acts.
During the meeting of the Security Council on
22 December, I will elaborate further personal thoughts
on this and related matters.
