Mr.Prosor(Israel): Seventyyears ago, representatives
of 50 nations met in San Francisco to draw up the
Charter of the newly formed United Nations. President
Truman addressed the conference, saying,

"With this Charter the world can begin to look
forward to the time when all worthy human beings
may be permitted to live decently as free people."

The signatories believed that every man and woman on
this Earth has dignity and rights. After witnessing the
ravages of two world wars in the span of a generation,
they understood that freedom is never free. It is not
enough to write a charter or give a speech; freedom
must be fought for.

Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations
outlines the institution's four purposes. The first is
to maintain international peace and security and take
effective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to peace.

The greatest threat to global security is posed
by radical Islamist groups like Hamas, Hizbullah,
Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
and Boko Haram. The battle being waged against these
groups is the battle between civility and barbarism,
between pluralistic and totalitarian societies, between
tyranny and freedom. Day by day, extremism is
spreading its ugly tentacles and, in the process,
destabilizing communities and nations. The threat is
obvious and it is growing, and yet the Security Council
has been reluctant to take decisive action. Worse, it has
on occasion surrendered to those nations that harbour,
fund and support terrorist groups.

On 28 January, Hizbullah terrorists fired anti-tank
missiles at an Israel Defense Forces vehicle in northern
Israel, killing two Israeli soldiers and injuring seven
others. Hizbullah immediately claimed responsibility
for the attack. One would think that in light of this
clear admission of guilt, the Security Council would
immediately and unequivocally condemn Hizbullah.
Yet it took an entire week to release a statement that
did not even mention the terrorist group. If we intend
to fight terror, we must not differentiate between tenor
and terror; there is no good terror or bad terror group,
and we must treat them all alike.

Hizbullah has held Lebanon hostage for the better
part of three decades and now seems intent on holding
the Security Council hostage as well. Thanks to the
backroom dealings of its Iranian patron, Hizbullah
has been allowed to continue its reign of terror. Here
in the theatre of the absurd, it would not surprise me
if ISIS was given a starring role on the Human Rights
Council. Let me be clear - this institution cannot
claim to uphold international security while indulging
those nations that are actively undermining peace and
security.

The second purpose of the Charter of the United
Nations is to advance relations among nations based
on respect for the principle of equal rights. If we are
honest with ourselves then we will admit that we
have not done enough to defend basic freedoms. One
example is the Middle East. Across the Middle East,
repressive regimes seek to control what people think,
how they are educated, whom they can love and what
they believe. For 2,000 years, Christian communities
dotted the landscape of the Middle East. Today that
figure has dwindled to less than 10 per cent. We saw an
example of such brutal persecution just last week when
ISIS beheaded 21 Egyptian Coptic Christians in Libya.

But it is not just Christians who are being
persecuted; all minority groups are at risk. As we
speak, Yazidis, Baha'i, Kurds, Christians and Muslims
are being executed and expelled by radical extremists
at a rate of 1,000 people per month. Extremists have
unleashed a plague of persecution, believing that by
silencing individuals, they can silence civilization.
Nobel Prize winner and humanitarian activist Elie
Wiesel has said that

"wherever men and women are persecuted because
of their race, religion, or political views, that place
must - at that moment - become the centre of the
universe".

Millions of men and women look to us to defend their
dignity and their rights and we are simply not doing
enough to help them.

The third purpose of the Charter is to promote and
encourage respect for human rights. The primary body
responsible for upholding this principle is the Human
Rights Council. Members of the Council currently
include Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Algeria and Venezuela. I
imagine there is not a person in this Chamber who would
want to be placed on trial in one of those countries.
And I would think that no one here would be willing to
write an article criticizing one of these Governments
while living under its dominion, certainly not if she
valued her liberty and her life. Yet these and other
human rights offenders are given leadership roles in
this institution. In 2008, for example, Saudi Arabia - a
regime notorious for public executions, lashings and
beheadings - was elected the Special Rapporteur of
the General Assembly's Third Committee, dealing with
human rights.

The fact of the matter is that this institution has
been hijacked. The ruthless autocracies that jail
journalists rush to lecture us on the virtues of a free
press. The repressive dictatorships that persecute
political opponents filibuster on the sanctity of free and
fair elections. And mass-murdering tyrannical regimes
preach to us about human rights. Yet instead ofcriticizing
these regimes, the very nations that undermine
international peace get elected to the United Nations
bodies responsible for maintaining global security. In
2013, the General Assembly elected Iran to the United
Nations committee that deals with disarmament and
international security. This is like inviting North Korea
to write a resolution on cybersecurity.

But the absurdity does not end there. Last year,
Iran was elected to serve as Vice-Chair of the United
Nations Legal Committee - an unusual choice
given that Iranian citizens are denied due process
and fair trials. It is remarkable that Iran is so active
in international affairs given that its citizens are not
afforded opportunities to participate in Iranian national
affairs.

The fourth and final purpose of the Charter is to
be a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations.
You, Sir, convened this debate to reaffirm international
commitment to the principles outlined in the Charter
of the United Nations. The Charter speaks about the
United Nations as a centre for harmonizing the actions
of nations, but the only harmony I hear is the chorus
of condemnations aimed at Israel. This institution will
never live up to the principles in its Charter so long
as it persistently, consistently and insistently focuses
on Israel. Last year, the General Assembly adopted
20 resolutions singling out Israel for condemnation and
only three resolutions to protest the actions of all other
nations combined.

The worst humanitarian crisis of our generation
is taking place in Syria, where 200,000 men, women,
and children have been murdered by a regime that
employs torture, starvation, chemical weapons and
barrel bombs. And yet the General Assembly adopted
just one resolution (resolution 68/182) condemning the
brutal Syrian regime. Since 2006, more than half of all
resolutions adopted by the Human Rights Council in
criticism of a particular country have been directed at
Israel. This is not logical and it is not moral; it is simply
prejudice. When the actions of the United Nations
are placed against the yardstick of its Charter, the
institution simply does not measure up. We are failing
those who need us most.

Last night, Hollywood celebrated the Oscars, and
as millions tuned in, the following thoughts occurred
to me. If the Oscars for maintenance of international
peace and security were given at the United Nations,
I would not be surprised if these candidates were
awarded prizes. In the Best Actor Category - for
acting like a peace-loving country while developing
nuclear capabilities, denying the Holocaust and
threatening the destruction of another Member State,
the Oscar goes to Iran. In the category for Best
Supporting Actor - for its unrelenting support to
the Al-Assad regime in killing hundreds of thousands
civilians, the Oscar goes to Hizbullah. In the category
for Best Visual Effects - for making women disappear
from the public squares, the Oscar goes to - surprise,
surprise -Saudi Arabia. There was no competition.
And finally, for rewriting history, the Oscar for Best
Editing goes to the Palestinian Authority. But the truth
is that the Palestinian Authority has already received
enough prizes from this institution.

Putting the Oscars aside, if we want to pursue peace
and security in the real world, it is time to bring down
the curtain on this theatre of the absurd and return the
original values of the Charter of the United Nations
back to centre stage.

