Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salame' for his briefing and the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Germany for his briefing
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

Let me first reiterate France's full support for
the Special Representative and the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, which are working tirelessly
to find a political solution to the Libyan conflict. In
particular, I echo the Special Representative's call for
a humanitarian truce coinciding with the Eid Al-Adha
holiday and the resumption of political dialogue.

First, I note the stalemate of the situation on the
ground and the risk of escalation, which remind us
of the urgent need for a lasting and unconditional
ceasefire. The latest developments are worrisome. As
the fighting enters its fifth month, it is ramping up and,
as of now, is posing the threat ofa major escalation. As
President Macron recalled, the situation in Libya is a
humanitarian priority.

Since the beginning of April, the fighting has
killed more than 1,000 people and displaced more than
120,000. The 2-3 July bombing of Tajoura detention
centre, which killed more than 50 people and wounded
130, which the Council unanimously condemned,
once again highlighted the particular vulnerability
of migrants and refugees. In such circumstances, it is
urgent that the Libyan authorities end their systematic
detention and comply with international humanitarian

law. It is imperative that civilian infrastructure not be
used for military purposes and that civilians, including
migrants, not be used as human shields, in violation of
the principle of distinction. All of that jeopardizes the
political and diplomatic efforts led by Ghassan Salame
and erodes the prospect of exiting the political crisis.

The only ones who benefit from the continued
fighting are terrorist and criminal groups, as evidenced
by the presence of radical elements in several areas of
fighting, including individuals who have been listed by
the Council. The recent attacks claimed by Da'esh in
the south and the centre of the country are yet another
illustration of that phenomenon. It is imperative that
Libyan actors disassociate themselves in no uncertain
terms from terrorist groups, both in their public
statements and through their actions on the ground. It
is equally important to initiate serious efforts, under
the auspices of the United Nations, with regard to the
economic, financial and monetary governance of Libya.

Finally, violations of the arms embargo to the
benefit of the parties are fuelling the escalation under
way. They must stop. In order to prevent the situation
from further deteriorating, the parties must respond to
the call of Special Representative Salame and accept
a humanitarian truce, with no preconditions or time
limits, to coincide with the Eid Al-Adha holiday on
10 August. Such a truce could pave the way towards
achieving a lasting ceasefire with credible guarantees
and international supervision.

In that context, it is urgent to act to foster the
resumption of political dialogue and to being working
immediately on confidence-building measures. The
parties must agree on the parameters for ending the
crisis. This past February, in Abu Dhabi, they agreed on
the principles of institutional unification, necessarily
leading to the formation of a transitional Government
with a view towards the holding of elections. The Abu
Dhabi parameters remain valid. They must be matched
with economic and financial reforms, the prioritized,
swift implementation of the transparent governance of
the Central Bank of Libya, reform of the management
of oil revenue and the consolidation of financial
institutions to the benefit of all Libyans. France calls on
the Libyan parties to resume discussions on that basis,
under the auspices of the Special Representative.

In conclusion, I recall the central role of the

Secretary-General and his Special Representative in
reaching a settlement to the conflict, with the support
of the Security Council. There is no military solution
to the Libyan crisis. The implementation of a ceasefire
and the relaunching of the political process are the
only way forward. That assessment is shared by the
members of the Council and we must unite our efforts
to achieve those goals. That is why we are in favour of
the Council expressing its support for the efforts of the
Special Representative to see the parties reach a lasting
ceasefire, comply fully with the arms embargo and
relaunch the political process.

