Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): We welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Foreign
Minister of Serbia, and his insightful statement. We
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his comprehensive
briefing in the context of the Secretary-General's
report (S/2010/169) pursuant to resolution 1244
(1999). We also thank Mr. Skender Hyseni for his
remarks.

We commend the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for its
role in helping to maintain peace and stability in the
region. Its efforts to facilitate dialogue among all of the
parties concerned, activities in the rule of law area and
coordination among the various actors enjoy our strong
support. We are encouraged by the collaboration
between UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo in fostering cooperation and peace
in the region, within the status-neutral framework of
the United Nations. We welcome the intervention of
the European Union in setting up a mechanism to
facilitate the preservation of the religious and cultural
heritage of the Balkan region. It is an initiative, given
the traditional respect for these institutions and values,
that will further promote mutual tolerance, harmony
and coexistence among the people.

Despite these positive developments, we note that
some challenges exist. We share the concern noted in
the Secretary-General's report about the possibility of
increased tension in northern Kosovo should the
implementation of the strategy for northern Kosovo by
the authorities in Pristina take place without dialogue
with local communities and all relevant stakeholders. It
is important that sensitive issues related to northern
Kosovo be addressed through peaceful means and close
consultation and coordination between all relevant
actors, taking into account the specific circumstances
and concerns of all communities. Reported incidents of
attack against minority communities only serve to raise
the perception of insecurity in Kosovo. They also
constrain efforts to promote returns of displaced
persons, reconciliation and the longer-term stability
and development of Kosovo and the region. My
country stresses the need to ensure that perpetrators of
crimes are brought to justice, such incidents roundly
condemned, and efforts made to reach out to victims.

On the issue of minority returns, we welcome the
increased number of returnees recorded during the
reporting period. We are concerned, however, that

overall numbers of returns remain low and that, in the
assessment of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the implementation of returns
strategies in 2010 may be hampered by lack of funding
for returns activities, lack of political commitment and
structural problems in local governance, as well as
concerns over the viability of conditions for returns.
We call for concerted efforts by all stakeholders, in
particular UNMIK and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, to ensure that
returns are voluntary and safe.

Nigeria reiterates its full support for dialogue and
a negotiated settlement of the dispute. In concluding,
we commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his team for their unrelenting
efforts in promoting peace and stability in Kosovo and
in the region.

