Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your country's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and by
thanking you for convening this special debate on the
role of the Security Council in humanitarian crises. In
that respect, my delegation would also like to
acknowledge the concept paper prepared for this
discussion by the Permanent Mission of Greece
(8/2005/434, annex).

My delegation would like to state that beyond the
Security Council and its immediate purview of the
maintenance of peace and security is the wider
challenge of confronting the roots of conflict, which
often lie in the area of development, or the lack of it. It
is now common knowledge that development and
security must be pursued together if any progress is to
be made in the multilateral context of the United
Nations. Therefore, the lessons that the Security
Council has learned in managing the post-conflict
environment ought to include the need for the Council
to work coherently with other United Nations organs
and to utilize channels of development to discourage
conflicts.
Having said that, let me also state that issues
related to conflicts, humanitarian crises and post-
conflict situations have been a focus of the Security
Council's attention for many years. The Council has
sometimes responded to such situations by establishing
peacekeeping missions. The variety and complexity of
United Nations peacekeeping responsibilities in the
19905 provided ample opportunities for reflection and
reassessment with regard to various aspects of the
Organization's humanitarian work.

Therefore, it is proper that the Council has
decided at this time to undertake a review of its role
concerning this important issue. My delegation shares
the view that, in addition to development, conflict
prevention depends on the extent to which the issues of
the rule of law, security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
are adequately and properly addressed.

Democracy means nothing if it is not well
grounded on the rule of law. In the post-conflict phase,
it is thus of the utmost importance that promoting the
rule of law be made a matter of priority. That principle
should apply to promoting respect for and establishing
law and order in all its aspects. The lessons learned in
many post-conflict situations in recent times may be

put to good use here.

It is also important, in the rebuilding of justice
and the rule of law in a society in transition, that
adequate recognition be given to differences in national
contexts. In this case, strategic planning should be
based on national or local realities and not impose
foreign models, as was clearly pointed out today by the
Secretary-General in his opening statement.

In security sector reform, particularly in
developing the capability of a national police force,
international efforts must follow the important
underlying fact that a police service supported by the
national or local community is more capable of
upholding law and order, as well as addressing
insecurity that can have a far-reaching impact on
economic, social and political developments. It is in
that context that efforts to sustain peace in post-
conflict situations should be based on a deep sense of
ownership and focus on building the capacity of local
actors. Indeed, it is only investment in local
participation, ideas and energy that can imbue post-
conflict efforts with the capacity to sustain peace not
only through legitimacy, but through the deployment of
"building tools" as well.

With reference to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programmes, my delegation is
of the view that such programmes may well be placed
in the broader context of the development agenda.
Failure to curb the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons will contribute to sustaining criminal
economic networks in post-conflict environments,
thereby significantly minimizing and undermining the
strategies and efforts to sustain peace.

DDR programmes, therefore, should always be a
key component of peace processes. In view of the fact
that former combatants cannot simply be dismissed and
asked to return to normal life, since there is no normal
life for them to return to, a well-structured programme
based on lessons learned should be put into play, with
adjustments for particular situations. In that regard, we
must stress the need for timely, sustained and well-
targeted resources at each stage of the peace process,
including DDR programmes, the rule of law, and
security sector reform. Although high levels of aid do
not guarantee success, if they are inadequate, the effort
might not be worthwhile in the first place.

Let me conclude by saying that Indonesia
believes that, in providing support for the rebuilding of
justice and the rule of law in a transitional society, the
international community has a critical role to play in
supporting conflict prevention as well as in post-
conflict peacebuilding processes. However, such a role
must be pursued in a supportive and facilitating
manner, and not as a substitute for local efforts. Hence,
we must be careful to avoid importing foreign models
that may not be of any help to local situations.

