Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I am ready, first, to give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Georgia since he spoke
first, but I understand that so far he is not ready and
that he does not have that intention yet. Therefore, I
will take advantage of the fact that the President has
kindly given me the floor.
If, here in our Chamber today we were to be
visited, for the first time, by aliens from outer space, I
am sure that after they had listened to our discussion
their hearts would be filled with pride for the members
of the Security Council, for these people who are so
full of principles, at how consistently they champion
the principles of international law.

I must say that I in particular liked the statement
of the Permanent Representative of the United States
reminding the members of the Security Council that
States must refrain in their activity from the use or the
threat of the use of force. I would now like to ask the
representative of the United States whether he has
found the weapons of mass destruction in Iraq yet, or is
he still looking for them? I would like to ask the
representative of the United States whether we haven't
heard threats from Washington against another Member
of the United Nations or to use force against that other
Member and even wipe it off the face of the earth?

Now, several other members of the Council have
referred to the importance of complying with
resolutions of the Security Council in relation to the
principle of territorial integrity. Where, dear
colleagues, were you when we - all of us - were
discussing Kosovo? In November 2007, the Security
Council adopted a resolution that reaffirmed the
principle of the territorial integrity of the states of the
former Yugoslavia. Why then did you not reaffirm that
principle a few months later when the Ahtisaari plan
was presented to the Security Council? What about
respect for resolutions? And what about respect for
resolution 1244 (1999), which clearly does not provide
for the possibility of Kosovo unilaterally proclaiming
its independence, since what happens in Kosovo is
controlled by the United Nations and that situation still
prevails there from the point of view of resolution 1244
(1999) - or for the possibility that the United Nations
would recognize the independence of Kosovo in the
event of a unilateral proclamation? Where then was
and where is your respect for international law in that
case?

Now, the Permanent Representative of Costa Rica
spoke here about the use of force, that the Russian
Federation had used force, well, how were we
supposed to respond to those efforts to wipe Tskhinvali
off the face of the earth? Colleagues will recall that, for
several weeks prior to that turn of events, we urged the
Council to develop a presidential statement on the
non-use of force. Why were we not backed and
supported then? And in the first hours of the conflict,
we tried to draft a decision on a ceasefire. Why were
we not supported?

Now, today, Prime Minister Putin, in an interview
on CNN, said how he, at the opening ceremony of the
Olympic games on the evening of 8 August - that was
the morning of 8 August in Georgia at the height of the

beginning of the hostilities of Georgia against South
Ossetia - appealed to President Bush, asking the
President of the United States to assist in ending the
bloodshed, to which President Bush said, "nobody
wants war". But, it turns out that Mr. Saakashvili did
not agree with him. Mr. Saakashvili simply did not
agree with President Bush.

So what were we supposed to do? Was South
Ossetia supposed to ask NATO to intervene with force?
Well, NATO was busy in Afghanistan and Kosovo and
in Iraq American and NATO troops were busy, those
troops could not be asked to help South Ossetia? So
they asked Russia, because that is Russia's mission to
show concern for the security and safety of the peoples
of the Caucuses.

As for the use of force, of course, it is bad to use
force. But as long as that question has been raised, I
once again would like to remind the Council how
NATO armed forces were used in Kosovo. Incidentally,
Georgia has closed its radio and television channels,
excluding everything except Georgian information, and
is continuing to broadcast anti-Russian propaganda.
Did we bomb the television tower in Tbilisi? No. But
NATO, on one of the first days of the war, went off and
bombed the television tower in Belgrade, because they
did not like the kind of broadcasts that were being
transmitted. They spared neither Serbian nor foreign
journalists. So that is the use of force for you.

Incidentally, the statement of the representative
of Costa Rica is quite understandable because he
admitted that, as I understand it, Costa Rica's position
here fully differs from the position that it took
regarding the recognition of Kosovo. That is a question
of principle.

There is good reason why I am dwelling on this
point: because Abkhazia and South Ossetia here have
considerably more grounds for recognition than
Kosovo, both historically and legally. To start off,
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, that is the Abkhazians
and the South Ossetians, for better or for worse, lived
historically together with the Georgians within the
framework of some fairly large entities, either the
Russian Empire or the Soviet Union.

Mr. Alasania spoke about the regime of the Soviet
Union and called it colonial. I am not going to go into
definitions here, but Georgia certainly joined the
Russian Empire in order not to be destroyed by other
neighbours. That has been the historic destiny of the
peoples of the Caucuses, including the Georgian people
at a certain stage.

As for the grounds for recognition of the
independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, I would
simply like to remind colleagues of the following. I
asked my legal affairs advisers in the Mission for
information, and they gave me the following: after the
creation of the independent Soviet Socialist Republic
of Abkhazia in December 1921, and recognition of its
independence by the Revolutionary Committee of the
Soviet Socialist Republic of Georgia, Abkhazia and
Georgia concluded a union agreement as an alliance
between two equal entities. Thus, State and legal
relations between them were established on the basis of
a treaty.

In 1931, the Abkhaz Soviet Socialist Republic
was transformed into an autonomous republic and
included within the Georgian Soviet Socialist
Republic. I should like to remind the Council that we
are talking about 1931 in the Soviet Union, when Josef
Stalin was in the Kremlin. There are many other
interesting aspects of the union between Abkhazia and
Georgia. There was recently a rather good article on
the subject in The Economist that referred inter alia to
the fact that another well-known person in our history,
Lavrentiy Beria, had at that time begun to move
Georgians from other regions into Abkhazia, in an
attempt to try to change the ethnic composition of that
territory. That is just one incident for the Council to
consider.

Many legal acts of the Georgia Soviet Socialist
Republic were repealed in 1989 and 1990, when
Georgia began the process of seeking independence
and seceding from the Soviet Union, including those
that joined Abkhazia and Georgia into a single State. In
August 1990, Abkhazia responded by adopting a
declaration on State sovereignty. In March 1991, acting
in accordance with the laws of the Soviet Union as an
autonomous Soviet republic under the Union's laws
concerning the procedure for a republic's secession,
Abkhazia participated in the referendum on the issue of
preserving the Soviet Union. The majority of the
Abkhaz population was in favour of retaining the
Soviet Union and remaining a republic within the
Union. When it achieved its independence, in 1991,
Georgia proclaimed itself the successor State to the
1921 Democratic Republic of Georgia on the basis of a
referendum in which Abkhazia did not participate,
because it did not consider itself a part of Georgia.

There were therefore two States on the territory of the
Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic that were no longer
connected to one another: Georgia, which declared its
secession from the Soviet Union as an independent
State, and Abkhazia, which continued to be an integral
part of the Soviet Union. Those are some details of
Abkhazia's history. It is quite understandable that our
colleagues are interested in the legal aspects of this
matter.

With regard to South Ossetia, its inclusion in the
Soviet Union, in the early 1920s, was the result of acts
of violence by Georgia. South Ossetia's status as an
autonomous republic of the Georgian Soviet Socialist
Republic was imposed upon it against the will of its
people. It was imposed unilaterally by a legislative act
and decree of the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic.
Essentially the same thing occurred as regards the law
on secession from the Soviet Union. I should like to
remind the Council that, in seceding from the Soviet
Union, Georgia declared itself the successor State to
the Democratic Republic of Georgia, which existed
from 1918 to 1921. At the same time, South Ossetia
was formally included within Georgia in 1922. There
are many similar events such as that in the relations
between Georgia and Abkhazia.

I should like to recall that Kosovo is the historic
heart of Serbia. Neither Abkhazia nor South Ossetia
plays a similar same role. It was for good reason that
Western politicians recently invented the term "core
Georgia". It is quite understandable why, for everyone
comprehends perfectly well that there is Georgia,
within its present boundaries following the declaration
of independence by South Ossetia, and then there is
Abkhazia, a country with its own history, part of which
I have just recounted for the Council by way of a short
legal analysis of what took place.

Let me say just a few more words. The Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom spoke of how
well things were developing and about the negotiations
taking place. Then Abkhazia and South Ossetia
unilaterally declared independence and Russia
recognized it, thereby undermining the wonderful
diplomatic efforts under way. First of all, I would like
to reaffirm that we of course continue to respect the six
principles worked out and announced by President
Sarkozy and President Medvedev. When the principles
were read out in the Kremlin on 12 August, the sixth
principle read: "the beginning of an international
discussion on the future status of South Ossetia and

Abkhazia and ways of ensuring lasting security." The
principles, read out in perfect Russian by President
Medvedev, were then read out in perfect French by the
President of France. Then you went and forgot about
the references to future status issues. There is your
diplomatic progress! That clearly happened under
pressure from the United States. That is no secret to
anyone. The representative of the United Kingdom then
went on to speak of the wonderful discussions here in
the Security Council. The drafts he has been submitting
again hammer on the principle of territorial integrity,
even more than in the earlier resolutions adopted. But
the events, Georgia's aggression, have created a totally
different situation from the point of view of the peoples
of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.

Ambassador Wolff asked about why Abkhazia
made its declaration when the aggression had been
against South Ossetia. Documents show that, after
South Ossetia, there were Georgian plans for
aggression against Abkhazia. Of course, the Abkhaz
are not crazy, and did not want to sit around waiting
until Georgia had finished with South Ossetia to come
after them, given that Mr. Saakashvili had decided to
resort to military adventure to settle his problems
regarding the status of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.

In such a situation there were no prospects for
reaching agreement and for continuing any discussion
in the context of the six principles initially announced
by the Presidents of France and Russia. Of course, the
will expressed by the peoples of South Ossetia and
Abkhazia, following the violence against South
Ossetia, made it impossible for the Russian Federation
not to take the situation into account. That led to our
recognition of their independence.

In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm that, based
on our ongoing commitment to the six Medvedev-
Sarkozy principles, we are prepared to continue to
work constructively on a possible consensus resolution
of the Security Council. However, we believe that there
is already a perfectly appropriate basis for that in the
Russian draft resolution on the six principles. We
honestly do not understand why our colleagues are not
ready to support the Russian draft resolution. We won't
put it to a vote yet. We are in no rush and are willing to
wait until our colleagues understand that the best
course of action is to support the six Medvedev-
Sarkozy principles.

