Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke inArabic): At the outset,
I should like to welcome you, Sir, and to thank China
for convening this important meeting on maintaining
international peace and security and the commitment to
the purposes and principles ofthe Charter of the United
Nations . I also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing on the issue.

Since the adoption of the Charter nearly 70 years
ago, the United Nations has played a major role in
steering multilateral diplomacy and shaping results in
various aspects of inter-State relations, not to mention
its role in focusing the debate on major issues related
to human development. One could easily say that, to
a large extent and in spite of numerous challenges and
mixed results along the years, the United Nations has
succeeded in living up to the principles and purposes
for which it was created, as embodied in the Charter.
The world would not be the same without the United
Nations.

The real challenge, however, is now ahead of us,
for the threats facing us are ever growing and ever
changing in nature. They necessitate new answers. The
world of today is not what it was after the Second World
War. It is still plagued by the scourges of wars and
their aftermath, and by internal armed conflict; by the
existence of 50 million refugees and displaced persons;
by the fact that 20 per cent of the Earth's population
living in poverty; and by lack of proper health care,
education and sanitation for large segments of the
world's population. The list is long and the picture is
grim. We could add the re-emergence of a new form
of terrorism that is based on warped ideologies and the
brainwashing of persons to commit the most heinous
crimes, while resorting to illegal and organized crime
of all kinds.

Is this the world the founders imagined when the
seeds of the United Nations were planted 70 years ago?
Violations of international law, including normative
rules, are committed on a daily basis. Mass atrocities
and grave violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights are committed every day. The
question we need to ask is: How can the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations still
be pertinent to today's' challenges, and should they
continue to be the bases for preserving our peace and
security and our common human values?

The answer is that if we deviate from the core
principles and goals of the Charter, the world will be
more prone to conflict and war than it is now, and we
will risk losing the achievements of humankind at all
levels. This is hard to imagine but very true. Our ability
to fight and contain threats to peace and stability will
also be compromised. We should keep this in mind
when we debate the value of the United Nations and its
principles and purposes. It is important to stress that the
interpretation and implementation of those principles
and purposes should take into account the current
trends in international relations and the developing
nature of threats and changes faced by the international
community.

Sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity
and non-interference should always be respected,
and the United Nations and its Members and organs
should work to maintain their integrity. In the same
vein, the rights, dignity and prosperity of the human
individual should be our goal, too. The Charter of the
United Nations indeed starts with "We the peoples of
the United Nations", and its Preamble makes it clear
that one object and purpose of the Charter is ensuring
respect for fundamental human rights, the dignity and
worth of the human person, and the equality of men and
woman and of nations. The rights of States and persons
should not be mutually exclusive, and the United
Nations should strive to respect that principle.

However, it is important to state that the organs of
the United Nations have the duty to react when there
are grave violations of human rights and humanitarian
law. Sovereignty and non-interference should not shield
States or their officials who commit atrocities against
their own and other peoples from action on the part of
the Organization based on the Charter's provisions.
That is where the Security Council has to play a pivotal
role, and where it has failed to do so at times. The
Council has in many situations not taken the much-
needed action whereby millions of lives could have been
saved - whether it was the slow and timid response to
the genocide in Rwanda and the atrocities in the Balkans
or the inaction in the face of the savagery in Syria or,
not least, the tolerance towards the continuous crimes
being committed against the people of Palestine.

Democracy in international decision-making
relating to peace and security is crucial, and I
thank China for bringing that up in its concept note
(S/2015/87, annex). In the Security Council we need
to try to ensure that the common interests of the
international community prevail over the individual
interests of its members. The current Council structure
has to be adapted in order to ensure that the democratic
vision and the functions of the Council are fulfilled in
accordance with the letter and the spirit of the Charter.
If we in the Council continue our current methods of
dealing with crises, especially those that involve mass
atrocities, we risk losing our exclusive and leading role
in the maintenance of international peace and security.

Furthermore, Chapter VII of the Charter has
been resorted to quite often in the past 20 years,
especially to impose sanctions. The method by which
such sanctions are adopted is the least transparent and
democratic - quite often set in place in less than a
week or two and without proper consultation with all
the relevant actors and without regard for their long-
term consequences. We now face a situation in which
respect for sanctions regimes is being undermined due
to their voluminous nature, as States are either unable
and unwilling to implement them or part thereof. That
is just one aspect of the imbalance in the imposition
of enforcement measures, but a crucial one, especially
in the light of the emerging asymmetrical threats the
world faces from global terrorism and non-State actors.
An effective response means a carefully studied process
where all stakeholders are involved before measures are
taken, including under Chapter VII. It is also important
that stakeholders study the root causes of the conflict
and the best way to contain or prevent it, and not deal
with all conflicts with one mould and with the same
tools.

Respect for international law and the rule of
law remains a crucial element in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Accountability needs
to be reinforced, and the rule of law in international
relations need to be treated as constant and not as
relative. Unfortunately, States are led by their own, not
common, interests. That will not change. But we can
change the prevailing belief that the application of the
law should be based on economic or military power.
The United Nations and its organs therefore have to
work towards accountability for international law
violations, increasing the visibility for such violations
and promoting a culture of checks and balances.

In the same vein, the United Nations should work
actively with States to promote international law, and
not just by hosting ceremonial treaty events, acting
as depositories of treaties and endlessly debating
legal issues in the Sixth Committee without taking
any action. The Security Council also has a role to
play in promoting the law. It should start with itself,
by highlighting that any action it takes is based on
international law and not just its determination that a
situation may endanger or threaten peace and security. It
also has to promote the peaceful settlement of disputes,
especially through judicial and arbitration processes.
Chapter VI has been rarely used in the past decades,
and a change in that approach, along with increased
cooperation with judicial and investigative bodies, will
send a message that the Council indeed considers the
rule of law as paramount.

