Major General Hafiz (spoke in French): I am
the Force Commander of the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI). It is my honour and
privilege to briefly address the issue of the protection
of civilians in Cote d'Ivoire. As the Council is aware,
under our mission's mandate we have the role and task
of protecting civilians who are in imminent danger of
violence in areas under our deployment.

Our view is that this task is crucial and
significant. We also believe that it is a difficult task to
carry out because, to do so, we need resources and
means. Our troop strength is 7,000 soldiers in a country
that is quite large.

Secondly, in C6te d'Ivoire, threats are sometimes
made against civilians by State authorities charged
with maintaining order in the country during anti-
Government demonstrations. The Council is aware that
it is politically difficult to act against authorities
charged with maintaining order who threaten civilians.
That having been said, we are fully aware of our
mission to protect civilians in imminent danger of
violence. To that end, we count on our presence in
major cities and in high-risk areas that may be hotspots
in times of crisis, protest or violence.

We have deployed troops to play a deterrent role.
We undertake regular patrols in the field that allow us
to monitor the situation and provide intelligence that is
useful for carrying out our protection of civilians tasks.
In each sector, we maintain an early warning force that
enables us to respond rapidly in case of a deteriorating
or exacerbated situation. I would underscore that this
task is incumbent on all components of the mission:
military, police, civilian affairs, the human rights
section and all others.
In this regard, we enjoy full cooperation with the
other components of our mission. I would like to add
that UNOCI is now in the process of developing and
drafting a strategy or plan for discharging our task to
protect civilians in imminent danger of violence. I
believe that, having developed this plan, we will be in
a strong position to protect civilians in imminent

danger.

