Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): We are grateful
to Jean-Marie Guehenno for a trenchant presentation,
with which the Council will find me substantially
agreeing.

The Irish Presidency of the European Union will
be making a statement later in this debate with which
the United Kingdom fully associates itself, but I would
nevertheless like to make a number of points.

As we have just heard, we have just witnessed the
most serious outbreak of inter-ethnic violence in
Kosovo since 1999. It has, as Mr. Guehenno told us,
severely damaged Kosovo's reputation, and it shows
there is a long way to go to build tolerance. With the
initial crisis response over, analysis of the situation
points to the cause being major problems not only with
underlying ethnic tension, but also in the international
community's relationship with Kosovo.

It is clear that we need to learn the lessons of 17
to 20 March. We should not shirk from asking
ourselves the hard questions, nor from owning up to
mistakes. The only way to prevent that violence
happening again is for the international community to
undertake a robust lessons-learned exercise, accept the
responsibility and act on the recommendations. United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) need to continue their own speedy
assessment of what went wrong. But we should not
jump to conclusions or rush to change the underlying
policy of the standards review mechanism that this
Council endorsed last December.

While the violence of last month was, as
Mr. Guehenno has just said, a huge setback, the United
Kingdom believes that the international community's
goal of a multi-ethnic, democratic Kosovo is still
possible. We congratulate KFOR and UNMIK for
restoring calm, and we appreciate the efforts made by
Kosovo Albanian leaders to promote tolerance,
especially the open letter of 2 April. We welcome their
commitments to rebuilding a multi-ethnic Kosovo, and
we look forward to seeing those commitment fulfilled.

The recent violence has set the standards process
back and demonstrates the need for renewed
engagement on the part of the international community,
but it has not killed the prospects. In tackling the
underlying issues to secure real progress in Kosovo,
there are several key challenges for UNMIK, for KFOR
and the wider international community. We see the
need for the following steps, among others.

First is the need to suppress and deter violence.
NATO and UNMIK police need to ensure that the Serb
community feels safe to return to their homes, and they
need to consider what measures need can be taken to
ensure continuing security. A key element, we believe,
is the need to tackle extremists with political links.

Secondly, as Mr. Guehenno has reminded us, we
need a better public information strategy, led by the
United Nations, to publicize the standards review
mechanism and to stop rumours before they get out of
hand. We need to help create a responsible media.
Extremists should not be allowed to think that violence
will force the international community's hand or bring
forward a discussion of Kosovo's status.

Thirdly, we need to reassure the Kosovo Serbs in
order to ensure that progress made since 1999 is not
reversed. The international community needs to take
quick decisions on humanitarian aid and reconstruction
for those Kosovo Serbs who have been displaced or
had their houses destroyed. This is critical for the
region's perception of whether the international
community is really committed to multi-ethnicity or
not. The local Kosovo government have indicated their
intention to fund this work, and that is welcome. But
the United Nations needs to make sure that the
resources, both financial and labour, are there, and to
speed up the process.

At the same time, measures need to be put in
place to ensure that the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan, issued on 31 March, is reinforced
to respect minority rights and their role in Kosovo's
future and its institutions. We should also be thinking
about effective local government, effectively devolving

power to local institutions and giving the Kosovo Serbs
a greater stake in running their own affairs, as well as a
vision of a future they want to be part of.

The important thing, the United Kingdom
believes, is to demonstrate that we are committed to the
principle of devolution, which will need to be worked
out with the parties on the ground. We need to address
ourselves carefully to Belgrade. Their statement did
contribute to the underlying tension within the
Albanian community in Kosovo, who still fear that the
Serb army will return, despite the international
presence there. Also, as Mr. Guehenno has reminded
us, the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina must
resume as soon as possible.

UNMIK needs to build partnerships with the local
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government leaders.
There must be a dialogue on how the Provisional
Institutions can be made more effective and can work
better with UNMIK. We also need to enhance local
responsibility while not relinquishing reserved powers
from Council resolution l244 (1999). It is clear that
local leaders need to take more responsibility, while
not being rewarded for violence.

If Kosovo is to become a real democracy, its
leaders need to learn how to govern. We should
consider giving them a greater role in issues such as
energy, the economy and justice. In return, Kosovo
politicians need to make it clear that they buy into the
process. Kosovo Albanians must recognize that further
violence and unrest will set back the review process.
The Provisional Institutions are going to need to
demonstrate considerable progress if they are to
achieve a positive assessment at the mid-2005 review.
We believe it is the responsibility of all parties in the
region, including the Provisional Institutions and
UNMIK, to work towards a multi-ethnic Kosovo. The
United Kingdom believes that no party in Kosovo or
the region should be allowed to profit or to advance a
political agenda through violent measures.

We also need to address ourselves to the
economic state of affairs in Kosovo. The majority of
demonstrators were youngsters under 20 years old. Our
mission in Pristina spoke to some young Albanians
who said that their prime motivation for violence was
having no future in Kosovo due to the lack of jobs and
the economic situation. These issues, in particular the
ongoing problems with privatization, need to be
addressed urgently. The international financial
institutions should also be fully engaged. At the same
time, UNMIK needs to build confidence. Early
movement against those identified by the international
task force on corruption would send strong signals of
intent.

We should ask ourselves: what do we here in the
Council need to do? My delegation believes that there
ought to be an early presidential statement, and that it
ought to say that the Kosovo Standards Implementation
Plan is a step forward and should call on all parties to
actively implement the standards. Anything less would
be a failure.

In conclusion, we believe that the standards
review policy framework remains the best approach to
building a multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo. We
should not respond to violence by retreating from this.
A premature debate on status would only reward
extremists and could make matters worse in the region.
The recent violence demonstrates how important it is
for all parties to work towards real and lasting
implementation of the standards, especially on the rule
of law and rights of minorities, among others.
Therefore, we very much welcome the publication of
the Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan. It is a key
step forward.

