Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to begin by thanking the Deputy Prime
Minister of Qatar for having convened this meeting on
an issue that is crucial to international peace and
security, that is, lasting peace in the Middle East. I
thank the Secretary-General for his report and for his
statement, to which we listened very carefully. I would
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
tireless efforts he has deployed over the past 10 years
in the service of peace in the Middle East.

France welcomes the recently concluded ceasefire
between Palestinians and Israelis in the Gaza Strip. The
respective commitments of President Mahmoud Abbas
and of Prime Minister Ehud Olmert are positive and
encouraging signs, following several months of
violence which took the lives of hundreds of civilians.
We call on the parties strictly to abide by their
commitments and encourage them promptly to extend
the ceasefire to the West Bank.
That positive decision must be followed by other
confidence-building measures. France thus calls for the
unconditional and immediate release of Corporal Shalit
and of the Palestinian elected officials and political
figures imprisoned in Israel.

The implementation of the Sharm el-Sheikh
arrangements and the full respect of the Agreement on
Movement and Access would be two other measures
that could restore confidence and promote in particular
the recovery of the Palestinian economy. Israel's
remittance of the tax revenue due to the Palestinian
Authority from the beginning of the year would also be
likely to help bring rapid relief to the disastrous
humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories.

Cessation of Violence, in order to be effective and
lasting, must be accompanied by a real political plan.
Both parties have responsibilities in this respect. The
Palestinians must not deviate from the path marked out
for more than 15 years in the context of the peace
process. France has constantly supported the efforts of
President Abbas for national unity, and from this
Viewpoint the recent inter-Palestinian clashes are very
disturbing.

France calls on all of the parties to exercise
restraint and to act responsibly. We invite all of the
Palestinian factions, and Hamas in particular, to
cooperate with the Palestinian President in the
formation of a new Government whose political
platform would reflect the Quartet's principles. Such a
Government would be a legitimate partner of the
international community, from which it would receive
the necessary support for the implementation of
economic, political and security reforms.

Israel, for its part, has a duty to refrain from any
unilateral action that would undermine the prospects
for creating a politically, economically and
geographically Viable Palestinian State. It must, in
accordance with the opinion of the International Court
of Justice, put an end to settlement activities and to the
construction of the wall within the West Bank.

France will continue to work with determination
for a comprehensive, just and lasting solution, based on
the Security Council resolutions, the terms of reference
of the Madrid Conference, the land-for-peace principle
and on the Arab Peace Initiative.

With the fragile hope that was created by the
ceasefire, we remain convinced that an international
conference, carefully prepared in coordination with all
of the parties, should be organized in the near future.
The Quartet seems to us to be the appropriate forum
for discussing and establishing the conditions for the
success of such a conference. France recalls its wish
that a meeting of the Quartet at the level of principals
be held swiftly to this end.

