Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for their comprehensive overview of the
political and humanitarian situation in Yemen.

As we have heard from today's briefers, the
situation in Yemen is extremely worrying, especially
on the humanitarian front. Despite the efforts both
through the United Nations and bilaterally by Member
States, the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
has stalled. In the light of that, we view the signing in
Riyadh on 5 November of an agreement between the
internationally recognized Yemeni Government and
the Southern Transitional Council as an important step
towards uniting Yemeni society and a positive example
of how to arrive at desperately needed mutually
acceptable solutions and compromises, given the current
realities on the ground. We would particularly like to
highlight the mediation role played by Saudi Arabia,
which has contributed significantly to the achievement
of these agreements, and which also took on the role
of monitoring their practical implementation. We also
note the United Arab Emirates' constructive approach
to the process.

We hope that the Yemeni parties' ability to reach
agreement and find common denominators will help
them to reach a political settlement to this protracted
political and military conflict as soon as possible. In
that regard, we support Mr. Griffiths in his mediation
efforts to convince the parties to the conflict of the
futility of any military solution and of the importance
of achieving a comprehensive ceasefire and developing
confidence-building measures. Since the very
beginning of the conflict Russia has advocated solely
for a political and diplomatic solution through inclusive
dialogue among all Yemeni forces, without exception.
We are continuing our assistance, including through our
contacts with all of the country's political stakeholders
and interested parties, encouraging them to adopt a
constructive approach and reject military solutions.

It is still possible to make progress in Al-Hudaydah
and with the comprehensive Yemeni settlement
that the Special Envoy has been working on. The
international community must continue its collective
efforts to shift the conflict onto a political track and
provide the necessary aid to the millions of Yemenis
in dire need of various kinds of assistance, who are
starving or unable to access essential health services
and medicines. We urge all the parties to work for a
comprehensive de-escalation, which will make it
possible to address Yemen's humanitarian catastrophe,
whose scale Ms. Mueller talked about today, in
earnest. The provision of humanitarian assistance to
Yemen should be one of our priorities. I want to stress
that humanitarian assistance to Yemen from abroad
must be distributed on a non-discriminatory basis
among the entire population throughout the country,
regardless of who controls which territory. We stand
behind unconditional compliance with the provisions
of international humanitarian law and ensuring
unimpeded access for humanitarian aid to all parts of
the country.

We have been compelled to conclude that the
armed confrontation in Yemen contributes to further
strengthening the positions of terrorist groups there.
Based on our experience in Syria, we know that the
fight against militants has to happen now. It cannot be
put off till later. The sooner all the parties in Yemen
unite their efforts to counter the threat of terrorism, the
less likely it is that the radicals will be able to maintain
their positions.

In conclusion, I would like to remind the Council
of resolution 598 (1987), which directed the Secretary-
General, in concert with the States of the region, to
develop an architecture for security and trust in the
region. In that context, Russia's well-known concept
of collective security in the Gulf region, which is
specifically aimed at resolving conflict situations and
developing control and confidence-building measures,
is becoming increasingly relevant. We once again call
on all interested parties to study that document and join
the collective quest for mutually acceptable solutions
to the problems in the region. There is an urgent need
for joint efforts to improve the atmosphere, which
will enable the Special Envoy to focus on the work of
settling conflicts.

