Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves
with this statement.

The main challenge facing the Somali
Government and the international community is to
maintain the political momentum that started a few
months ago. That momentum is now being sabotaged
by hard-line insurgents, who deliberately seek to
undermine a political solution by targeting the
Transitional Federal Institutions and the Djibouti peace
process. The European Union strongly condemns the
recent killings of the Minister of Security, the police
chief in Mogadishu, a member of the parliament and
the attacks against civilians in south and central
Somalia.

The European Union calls for an immediate
cessation of hostilities to avoid further civilian
casualties and deplores the humanitarian consequences
of recent attacks. Some 200,000 people have been
forced to leave Mogadishu in recent weeks, adding to
the 1 million previously displaced. We urge all parties
to abide by international humanitarian law, respect
human rights and protect the civilian population.

The European Union welcomes the efforts of the
African Union to bring urgent attention to the situation
in Somalia and to consider options for reversing the
trends of recent months. We take due note of the
message of the African Union in Sirte in this regard.

09-3985]
The European Union strongly calls on all States to
respect the United Nations arms embargo.

Stabilization of the security environment is vital
for building State institutions, for providing necessary
humanitarian assistance and for resuming a path to
development and political reconciliation. Once the
security situation improves in Mogadishu and beyond,
the Transitional Federal Government must resume its
efforts to complete the Transitional Federal Charter of
the Somali Republic. We stress our support for the
Transitional Federal Government under the leadership
of President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed and welcome
his efforts to consolidate the political process through a
broad and inclusive dialogue.

The European Union expresses its appreciation to
the African Union and to the countries contributing
troops to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) for their efforts aimed at stabilizing the
situation in Mogadishu. The capabilities of AMISOM
need further strengthening. Thus far, the European
Union has committed a total of €40 million, in addition
to bilateral contributions from its member States.
Additional support is under consideration.

The international conference on security in
Somalia, held in Brussels on 22 and 23 April,
expressed unanimous support for AMISOM. and the
efforts of the Transitional Federal Government to build
inclusive and accountable national capacity in the
security sector. The considerable pledges made by the
European Union at the Brussels conference underline
the importance we attach to this endeavour.

There is now an urgent need to follow up. The
pledges made by the international community must be
implemented swiftly. The security sector should be
committed to the rule of law, respect for human rights
and the principle of good governance.

Enhancing the capacity of the Somali security
and police forces is vital to the stability of Somalia and
to the State-building effort as such. Training is an
essential element. The European Union is studying the
option of providing assistance to this end, in addition
to various bilateral activities and initiatives.

We also recall our contributions to the
international fight against piracy off the coasts of
Somalia through Operation Atalanta. Legal measures
must also be taken to prevent impunity for pirates in
Somalia and elsewhere in the region.
The Djibouti process remains our best hope for
peace in Somalia. Intensifled and urgent efforts are
now needed to save the process from dissolving. We
urge all parties in Somalia to join this effort. We also
reaffirm our support for the International Contact
Group, under the leadership of Special Representative
Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,

In parallel with addressing the current crisis, we
must seek enhanced international coordination and a
more comprehensive long-term strategy for supporting
Somalia. Such an approach should link security and
development in a coherent State-building effort. It
should be based on Somali ownership and take into
account the needs of the entire Somali territory.

For its part, the European Union will consider
options for enhanced engagement - including
training, capacity-building and regional cooperation -
ahead of the EU ministerial meeting later this month.
The European Union stands ready to continue to
support Somalia and its people.

