Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): At the outset,
I wish to congratulate you, Madam President, and
the Argentine delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to extend my sincere thanks to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his Views regarding the
situation at hand. I also wish to thank Ms. Navi Pillay,
High Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; and Mr. Philip Spoerri,
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, for their
statements and insights.

Since our debate in February (see S/PV.6917) the
situation regarding the protection of civilians in armed
conflict has shown no signs of improvement. In fact,
it has worsened. The death toll of civilians in various
armed conflicts around the world continues to rise
at a rate that leaves Malaysia deeply concerned. The
Secretary-General's report (S/2012/376) testifies to
that. At the same time, the report reminds us of the need
for us to work together to improve the status quo. For
that reason, we welcome this debate, which could allow
all of us to have a greater understanding of the various
aspects of protecting civilians in armed conflict and to
take the next steps forward.

Civilians in armed conflict should be accorded
the necessary protection from being targeted
indiscriminately. In that regard, all parties to an
armed conflict should do their level best to distinguish
civilians from combatants. While my delegation realizes
that a distinction is not always easily made, an effort
must be made to stop the unnecessary deaths among
civilians. We understand that States bear the primary
responsibility to protect civilians. Nevertheless, other
parties, such as non-State armed groups, must also be
obligated to ensure the safety of civilians, in accordance
with international humanitarian and human rights laws.

In his report, the Secretary-General also highlights
the need for all parties to ensure that greater access to
humanitarian relief reach the vulnerable people who
are caught in conflict. My delegation certainly shares
that view. We also call on parties in conflict to accord
the necessary protection to humanitarian workers in
areas of armed conflict.

Malaysia acknowledges that accountability is an
integral part of ensuring compliance by the parties
to a conflict. On Impunity in that regard cannot and
must not be tolerated. Those who target civilians and
population centres must be made to realize that they
have violated international law and, as such, must be
held responsible and accountable for their actions. They
must be brought to justice.

While we welcome political developments taking
place in the Middle East peace process, the condition
of civilians in the occupied Palestinian territory leaves
much to be desired. Innocent Palestinians continue to
suffer under the clutches of Israeli occupation. As the
occupying Power, Israel has demonstrated its ignorance
of the various articles of the Geneva Conventions and
international law.

In its recent visit to the Middle East, the United
Nations Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights ofthe Palestinian
People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories
underscored that Israel had continued to abuse detained
Palestinian children. Israel has also continued to
demolish Palestinian homes, in blatant violation of
the Fourth Geneva Convention on the protection of
civilians, including the protection of civilian objects.
Needless to say, the condition of the Palestinian people
in the occupied Territory continues to remain in a sorry
state. Worse still is the situation in the Gaza Strip. The
Israeli blockade of Gaza has continued to strangle the
very livelihoods of the people. If we are serious about
protecting civilians, the international community
should act to bring an end to that illegal occupation.

Malaysia is also appalled at the number of civilian
casualties as a result of the Syrian conflict. There
must be an immediate end to the senseless killings
and appalling human rights violations, especially
against civilians. We are deeply concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation, including the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need.

My delegation also calls on other parties to the
conflict to restrict themselves from employing heavy
weapons and explosive munitions that have been
known to inflict untold misery, deaths and injuries to
civilians. As with the authorities, the parties should
also attend to the needs of civilians and allow access to
vital humanitarian aid. My delegation believes that the
opportunity for a political solution led by the Syrian
people still exists, and remains our only option for
putting an end to the conflict.

The issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict
is a multifaceted challenge. While States remain obliged
to protect civilians from harm and the atrocities of
conflict, other stakeholders, too, must do their utmost to
ensure compliance with and adherence to international
humanitarian and human-rights law. Malaysia upholds
the importance of resolutions 1738 (2006), 1894 (2009)
and 1910 (2010) for ensuring that civilians are protected
during armed conflicts. The Council can rest assured
that we will continue to do our part in that regard.

