Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would like
to join earlier speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, expressing appreciation to your
predecessor and thanking you for having convened this
meeting. I should also like to associate my delegation
with the statement made by the representative of
Malaysia, reflecting the views of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

I would also like to thank the United Nations
weapons inspectors, skilfully led by Mr. Hans Blix and
Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, for their professionalism and
the comprehensive reports that they have thus far
presented to the Security Council.

The unanimous decision taken by the Security
Council and the deployment of international weapons
inspectors in Iraq demonstrated that the international
community, represented by this Council, was able to
act together in the interests of attaining a common goal.
The big question mark hanging over us now relates to
why the course the Security Council so wisely
embarked upon should be so prematurely aborted. At a
time when the chief inspectors have recommended that
they be given a relatively short time to complete the
work mandated by the Council, the persistent question
of the entire international community is why there
should be a rush to war.

It is true that the disarmament of Iraq should not
have dragged on for 12 years. It is also true that the
Iraqi Government should have fulfilled its obligations
much earlier. The fragmentary cooperation on the part
of Iraq is a main cause of - or at least a main pretext
for - the current crisis. As the victim of one of the
two wars of aggression, the major victim of the
harbouring of terrorism and the only State victim of
these weapons of mass destruction, we certainly
understand the frustration of the international
community. By the same token, as a country that in the
span of two decades has suffered directly as a result of
one war and faced the enormous consequences of
another, we know that yet another war in the Persian
Gulf region is not something that should be easily and
hurriedly resorted to. Two wrongs will not make a
right. When it comes to a devastating war in which
thousands upon thousands of innocent Iraqi civilians
will undoubtedly perish, it would be morally and
politically unacceptable if considerations such as hot
weather, moonless nights, troop fatigue and the like
were to take precedence.

I do not think that I need to recall how high the
stakes are. We all have an idea of the unparalleled
disaster that a possible war could bring about. The
humanitarian crisis in Iraq and in neighbouring
countries may take on catastrophic dimensions. The
threat of Iraq's disintegration and of instability in the
region is significant. The fact that extremism stands to
benefit the most from a war is undeniable. There are
worrying signs that the right of the Iraqi people to self-
determination may be among the first casualties of a
possible war. Neither the Iraqi people nor the
international community can accept any encroachment
on the sovereignty and independence of a Member
State of the United Nations, no matter how short some
may claim that encroachment to be at the outset.

Moreover, the stakes have already gone far
beyond Iraq. The rush to war has already placed the
current functioning international system on the line. It
is quite irresponsible to rejoice over the fantasy of a
post-United Nations world, as a hawkish columnist did
yesterday. We fully support the warning issued by the
Secretary-General yesterday, and again today in his
thoughtful article in the Wall Street Journal. My
Government is equally gravely concerned over the
outright attempts under way to undermine the United
Nations system and the achievements that humankind
has incrementally accomplished over a very long
period of time to institutionalize the rule of law at the
international level.

Against the backdrop of any realistic scenario, all
of which would amount to no less than a real
nightmare, any chance, as slim as it may appear, should
be seized. War is such a dangerously imperceptive
solution, particularly when innovative proposals and
ideas to strengthen inspections, to set clear targets, to
remove regional and international anxieties about Iraqi
behaviour and to guarantee the right of the Iraqi people
to self-determination, while sparing the region from
another war and maintaining Iraq's sovereignty and
territorial integrity, are already on the table.

In that context, it is first and foremost incumbent
upon the Iraqi Government to take irreversible steps to
reassure its neighbours and the international
community that it genuinely wishes to live in peace and
to fully implement all its obligations under various
Security Council resolutions, starting with continuing
and expanding active cooperation with weapons
inspectors.

While members of the international community,
including my Government, are unanimous about the
need to fully implement the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, the rush to war is clearly
undermining the momentum built up to bring this crisis
to a successful conclusion. The division and tension
that rush creates is alienating world public opinion and
the great majority of Governments, thus creating
serious doubts about the agenda behind it. The
different, and sometimes conflicting, reasons invoked
to justify a premature recourse to military action cannot
but significantly strengthen doubts. And that is a new
layer of doubts that are added to the previous layers
that resulted from selectivity in enforcing United
Nations resolutions, particularly on Palestine, and
treaties on non-proliferation, more specifically as
regards Israel. Allowing the Security Council to have
the final word in bringing the current crisis to a
successful conclusion, in conformity with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, would
certainly be a significant step in the right direction.

