The Secretary-General: I should like to thank
you, Madam President, for your participation in, and
organization of, today's important debate. You have
shown great commitment to this issue, including as
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict.

Before I proceed with my remarks, I should like
to say how relieved and encouraged I am by what you
have just said with regard to the spread of swine flu. As
this swine flu has spread to many parts of the world,
including the United States, it has become another
global challenge, which requires global coordination
and support.

As the Secretary-General of the United Nations, I
wish to inform all of you that all United Nations
agencies are now mobilizing their resources to play a
leading role, led by Dr. Margaret Chan of the World
Health Organization (WHO). I have also expressed my
position as the Secretary-General. We are now meeting
with core groups under the leadership of the Deputy
Secretary-General in close coordination with the World
Health Organization.

Member States have the full support and full
commitment of the United Nations and I sincerely hope
that with full global participation and support we will
be able to overcome and combat the swine flu, which is
now a very important challenge for us. In addition to
the global financial crisis, climate change, the energy
crisis and the food crisis; we are now experiencing this
very serious pandemic. It requires the cooperation of
the entire international community and I count on the
leadership and commitment of not only Council
member States, but the whole international community.

Let me return to today's topic.

It is said that truth is the first casualty of war.
When it comes to the youngest victims, what they lose
first is their childhood. Fighting shatters more than
infrastructure; it destroys the precious principles
enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
As bombs devastate schools, hospitals and families,
children lose their right to education, health care and
love. Far too many even lose their right to life.
09-31649

I have witnessed scenes of unbearable suffering.
Never have I been so outraged as when I recently
spoke with girls who had been sexually victimized
during the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Painful as it is to describe those atrocities,
silence serves only to shield the perpetrators and
perpetuate their crimes. The testimony of the
victims- their dignity even after such appalling
violations - made me more determined than ever to
raise my voice to decry their suffering and to demand
action.

Today's meeting again affirms that the plight of
children caught in conflict zones is a threat to
international peace and security. Since 1998, the
Council has adopted six resolutions aimed at stopping
the recruitment of child soldiers, the killing, maiming
and rape of children, abductions, attacks on schools
and hospitals and obstacles to humanitarian access.

The Council has done more than adopt
resolutions. It has established a working group on the
topic, as well as a monitoring mechanism that reports
to that group on grave violations against children in
situations of concern. For my part, I have asked my
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict to take those efforts even further.

Later in this meeting, you will hear from Grace
Akallo, a former child soldier. If, after all she has
endured, she can come before this Council as an
advocate for peace, Council members must respond to
her courage and resilience with action. With that in
mind, I want to focus the rest of my remarks on what I
believe the Council should do next. My appeal is also
directed at parties to conflicts and the broader
international community. My latest report on the
question of children and armed conflict is now before
you (S/2009/158). Its annexes name 56 parties,
including States and non-State actors, which recruit
child soldiers and commit other grave violations. Of
these, 19 are persistent violators, who have been listed
for more than four years.

I urge the Council to consider action to strike a
blow against impunity and to stop those violators from
continuing to victimize children. The protection
framework needs to be strengthened. I recommend that
the Council, at a minimum, expand the criteria for the
annexes of my report to include parties that commit
rape and other grave sexual violence against children
in armed conflict.
3

Last year, the Council adopted a milestone
resolution, Security Council resolution 1820 (2008),
which focused specifically on sexual and gender-based
violence. That was a crucial step. But it will have true
meaning only when its provisions are translated into
action. I urge the Council to expand the trigger of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism to include sexual
violence and, if possible, intentional killing and
maiming of children. That is a crucial first step towards
accountability for those terrible crimes.

We must also do everything possible to ensure
that no matter how severely conflicts may rage, schools
are always protected. We must support the efforts of
our humanitarian partners to keep schools running in
times of crisis and to safeguard the right to education. I
call on all parties to conflicts to keep schools as safe
zones for both boys and girls.

All countries and all groups must put the
protection of children in situations of armed conflict
above politics. I urge Member States to allow contact
between the United Nations and non-State actors with a
view to ensuring the protection of vulnerable children.
We need to work with such parties in order to prepare
action plans to halt the recruitment and use of children.
We need to engage them so that they undertake specific
commitments to address all grave violations committed
against children.

I also urge all States that have not ratified the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child to do so without delay. We have an
impressive 193 parties to the Convention, but only 127
of them have ratified the Protocol. That instrument
should be universal.

Donors also have a special role to play. The Paris
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups advocate a
comprehensive approach to reintegrating children into
their communities. Donor contributions can make this
happen.

I appeal strongly to parties to conflict to comply
with international humanitarian law for the protection
of children and all civilians. And finally, I stress the
role of the Council in holding violators accountable.
We must send a strong signal to the world that those
committing appalling crimes against children in
conflict situations will be brought to justice.
