Mrs. Jarbussynova (Kazakhstan): First of all, I
would like to express our appreciation to you, Sir, for
convening this open meeting of the Security Council to
consider the situation in Tajikistan.

The delegation of Kazakhstan would also like to
express its gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
report on the efforts of the United Nations in the
settlement of the conflict in that country. We agree with
one of the main conclusions of the report that the early
engagement of the United Nations in the conflict;
sustained political support of the Security Council and
interested Member States in the region; cooperation with
other international organizations, including the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe; and
the clear will of the people and the President of Tajikistan
have put an end to hostilities and brought about the
political solution of this crisis.

The recent elections to Parliament, held for the first
time in Tajikistan on a multi-party basis, with the

 

participation of a greater number of citizens and a
pluralistic character, testified to the consolidation of Tajik
society. We share the views, expressed by Member States
during the meeting of the Security Council in March, that
the elections played a significant role in advancing the
democratic development of Tajikistan and building a civil
society in that country. In our View, the newly elected
bicameral Parliament, which has already convened its first
session, will be one of the main instruments in moving the
country forward towards progress, democracy and
prosperity.

The report of the Secretary-General presents a bright
and impressive picture of the important developments which
preceded the establishment of peace in Tajikistan,
emphasizing efforts to reach a ceasefire agreement and to
solve existing problems through the political dialogue
established with the help from the States of the region.

One ought to pay tribute to the staff of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT),
who, in difficult situations and sometimes sacrificing their
lives, ensured the success of the Mission. A significant
contribution to and support for the peace process were
offered by the Contact Group of Guarantor States and
International Organizations and the collective peacekeeping
and border forces of the Commonwealth of Independent
States.

Stability in Tajikistan is of great importance not only
to the Tajik people, but also to the peoples of the whole
region. As a member of the Contact Group, Kazakhstan has
made every effort to promote a peaceful settlement in
Tajikistan. The border force unit of Kazakhstan has been
guarding the frontiers of the Commonwealth in Tajikistan.

The Central Asian States are deeply concern by the
unstable situation in the region, notably in neighbouring
Afghanistan, as mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General. Therefore, issues of regional security
were among the main topics of the First Eurasian Economic
Summit, recently held under the auspices of the World
Economic Forum in Almaty.

The delegation of Kazakhstan is confident that the
efforts to strengthen security undertaken by the countries of
the region in various formats - including the Conference
for Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia,
the "Shanghai Five" and the agreement on joint action
against terrorism, political and religious extremism,
transnational organized crime and other threats to stability
and security, signed in Tashkent this April by the four
Central Asian leaders - will promote security and curb
the escalation of tension.

Tajikistan is entering a new phase of nation-building.
In order to build on the success achieved during the peace
process in Tajikistan, the United Nations and the
international community have to provide further assistance
to the country. We wholeheartedly support the intention
of the Secretary-General to establish a post-conflict
peace-building office to address the difficult economic
and social problems faced by Tajikistan today. In our
View, projects for Tajikistan within the framework of the
United Nations Special Programme for the Economies of
Central Asia, recently inaugurated at the Eurasian Summit
in Almaty, could play an important role in the economic
rehabilitation and development of the country.

We appeal to all Member States to continue to
render their support to Tajikistan in its reconstruction in
the social and economic spheres and in building a stable
and prosperous society. Kazakhstan is ready actively to
participate in these endeavours.

