Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on you assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and for arranging this
very important meeting. I also wish to commend
Ambassador Wang Yingfan of the People's Republic of
China for the excellent manner in which he conducted
the work of the Council in July.

Yesterday, the Permanent Observer of Palestine
briefed the Council about the tragic events in the
occupied Palestinian territory and pointed to the fact
that the Council continues to ignore the crisis while it
is engaged in discussing topics such as the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and the prevention of
armed conflict. My delegation could not agree more
with such a conclusion. It is, indeed, unfortunate that
the Security Council has to date been paralysed and has
failed to do anything about the tragic situation
unfolding in the occupied Palestinian territory. The
Council has clearly forsaken its responsibilities, as
outlined in Articles 24 and 37 of the Charter of the
United Nations, to maintain international peace and
security. It has furthermore failed to enforce its own
resolutions aimed at resolving the situation in the
Middle East.

What started out as an irresponsible
provocation- the visit to Al-Haram Al-Sharif last
year - has, sadly, already resulted in hundreds of
deaths and injuries, and the peace process has suffered
perhaps irreparable harm.

Despite this situation, the international
community is allowing the carnage to continue in the
occupied Palestinian territory. The Israel Defence
Force continues to use excessive force against
Palestinian civilians, resulting in hundreds of deaths
and injuries, untold suffering and widespread
destruction. The Israeli Government continues
furthermore to practice a policy of extrajudicial
killings, which is unacceptable and violates
international law. This practice must be stopped and
measures must be put in place to ensure accountability
for those killings already committed and to deter
similar acts in the future. In the light of this, it was
even more shocking yesterday to hear some Security
Council members preaching a hands-off approach,
while some delegations adopted a neutral position in a
completely one-sided conflict. This is totally unfair and
unacceptable, to say the least.

The economic suffocation of Palestinians
continues through the illegal blockade of towns, which
not only deprives them of their freedom of movement
but also makes it impossible for them to earn their
livelihood in a normal manner. These acts constitute
gross violations of the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949. The violations should stop
and Israel, the occupying Power, should scrupulously
abide by its legal obligations and responsibilities under
the Convention. In this connection, we support the call
for the convening of a conference of the High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention
in order to enforce the Convention in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem. Such an
action would help to address the situation on the
ground.

Arguments and counter-arguments are being
made about violence and resistance by the Palestinians.
However, the basic fact remains that Palestine is a
nation under foreign occupation - a nation living
under dire humanitarian conditions - and the Security
Council, which is responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, is paralysed and
unwilling to do anything about it. No one can therefore
expect the Palestinians to sit idly by and wait until they
are completely dominated or wiped off the face of the
earth. The crux of the matter is that the occupation
must stop.

There can be lasting peace in the Middle East
only when the just aspirations of the Palestinian
people, including their right to self-determination and
the establishment of an independent State of their own,
are restored. Their rights can never be sacrificed
because of the occupying Power's single-minded
insistence on security.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
continues to degenerate daily, which could lead to a
point of no return. The recent occupation by Israel of
Orient House and other Palestinian institutions
constitutes serious violations by the Israeli Government
of earlier agreements between itself and the Palestinian
National Authority. This is a cause for serious concern.
Unless these actions are reversed, they may have dire
consequences that can push the whole region into a
cycle of violence, destruction and bloodshed.

It is therefore of the utmost importance for the
Security Council to act swiftly and decisively in terms
of its responsibility under the United Nations Charter
and to establish a United Nations observer force for the
protection of Palestinian civilians. As a starting point,
the Security Council should preserve its credibility by,
at least, adopting the draft resolution currently before
it. Although from our point of view the draft is weak, it
could, with the necessary political will - I repeat: with
the necessary political will - attract consensus from
all Council members and provide a road map for the
resumption of negotiations.

Furthermore, the parties should show political
will and courage to de-escalate the situation and ensure
that negotiations are resumed, with the implementation
of the Mitchell report as a starting point. In this
connection, my delegation welcomes the important role
being played by the Secretary-General, and we urge
him to continue with these efforts. Outside the United
Nations, States with influence over the parties should,
instead of inaction, live up to their responsibilities by
actively promoting the peace process and moving the
parties to the negotiating table.

In conclusion, the basis of negotiations and of a
just and lasting peace remains Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The peace
process should be put back on track and the
implementation of these resolutions should thus be
ensured, while the existing agreements between the
parties should be honoured.

