Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Maman Sidikou,
Permanent Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), for their extensive and detailed briefings
on the activities of the Group and the general situation
in the region. We also thank Ambassador Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, and Ambassador Joao Vale de
Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations.

We align ourselves with the statement made earlier
on behalf of the African Union.
My country's Government is following the situation
in the Sahel region closely. We are concerned about
the continuing deterioration of the security situation
in the region, particularly as a result of the escalatimg
terrorist attacks in northern and central Mali, as well as
in the border regions of Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger.
We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
firm condemnation of terrorist attacks on the civilian
population, the defence and security forces of the
countries of the region and the international forces
present in Mali, particularly those of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and France's Operation Barkhane.

As the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union expressed in its statement of 23 March, we
believe that the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel is currently the best long-term alternative where
the security of the region is concerned. Equatorial
Guinea pays tribute to the leaders of the member
States of the Group - Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania,
the Niger and Chad - for their determination and
sacrifices in promoting peace, security and stability
in the Sahel through an increasingly effective fight
against terrorism, violent extremism and transnational
organized crime. However, as the Secretary-General
highlighted in his report (S/2018/432) of 8 May, the
implementation of resolution 2391 (2017) means that
the full operationalization of the Force and securing
international financing are currently the main problems
and challenges facing us. Progress in making the Joint
Force a fully operational structure and securing its
international funding has so far been slow and difficult.

It is therefore vital to underline the importance
of sustainable and safe support for the efforts of the
countries of the region. In that regard, we express our
gratitude to bilateral and multilateral partners for their
multifaceted assistance to the countries of the Sahel-
Saharan region, and we welcome the announcements of
the contributions made at the international high-level
conference on the Sahel held in Brussels on 23 February
with the aim of securing permanent financing and
sustainable resources to assist in operationalizing the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force. It is crucial that all States and
organizations fulfil that commitment as soon as possible
in order to help the Joint Force fulfil its mandate. In that
context, it is also essential that Africans themselves
spearhead efforts to combat terrorism and violent
extremism. The Rwandan Government's financial
contribution in support of its sister countries of the G-5
Sahel is a step in the right direction. We reaffirm the
importance of the Nouakchott Process for promoting
peace and security in the region and intensifying its
activities to unify all stabilization and development
efforts in the Sahel.

Despite the clear will and commitment of partners

and the international community to help the region, we
believe that the factors that foster Islamist extremism
in the Sahel must be considered. The impact ofterrorist
activities, including those perpetrated by groups that
benefit from transnational organized crime, cannot
be resolved by security-focused interventions alone.
My Government believes that the solution to violent
extremism in the Sahel is a comprehensive approach.
The growing insecurity in the region demands that we
do more than contain violence. We must build a resilient
society and institutions that safeguard human security.
We also need a broad strategy that attacks the threat's
capacity to regenerate itself and that is not limited to
merely defending local borders. Military forces can
defeat terrorist forces, but it is social and development
policies that will prevent their re-emergence through
broader strategies.

Finally, legitimate, socially oriented action by
the G-5 Sahel is crucial to gaining local and regional
legitimacy. That is why it must protect humanitarian law,
respond with justice and undertake to protect violated
human rights and international humanitarian law.

