Mr. Mohammad Kama] (Malaysia): My
delegation wishes to express its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his succinct yet comprehensive
report on the situation in Angola. We would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Gambari, the
Secretary-General's Adviser for Special Assignments
in Africa, for introducing the report and for his
additional remarks.

We also wish to welcome the presence at this
meeting of Mr. Albino Malungo, Minister for Social
Assistance of the Republic of Angola, and to thank him
for his statement.

My delegation is dismayed at the continuing
fighting in Angola and the prolongation of the
devastating 24-year-old civil war there, without
prospects for an early resolution of the conflict. We
continue to believe that, in spite of the recent
successful military campaign against UNITA, there can
be no military solution to the conflict. Unfortunately,
the war persists because UNITA has made it hard for
the Government to believe that it is a trustworthy
negotiating partner. Yet, a lasting solution is most
unlikely to be achieved without the participation of
UNITA in the peace process. It is imperative, therefore,
that there should be renewed efforts in the search for a
political settlement.

The Council has repeatedly pronounced that
UNITA bears the primary responsibility for the
continuation of civil war in Angola, which has left
more than 1 million dead, many more maimed and a
quarter of the entire population displaced. UNITA's
ability to continue its military campaign is due to its
lucrative illegal diamond trade. It was for the purpose
of removing UNITA's means to wage war that the
Angola sanctions Committee was established under the
energetic leadership of Ambassador Fowler of Canada.
It is imperative that the sanctions Committee continue
with its work with undiminished vigour, even with the
imminent departure of its current dynamic Chairman, if
the Council is to succeed in degrading UNITA's
capacity to pursue its objectives through military
means. As one of the Vice-Chairmen of that
Committee, Malaysia wishes to take this opportunity to
pay the highest tribute to Chairman Fowler, to whom
the Council owes a deep debt of gratitude for his
leadership of the Committee and his enormous
contributions to its work.

We are deeply concerned at the precarious
humanitarian situation in Angola. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs indicated in its
mid-term review for Angola that an estimated 2 million
people continue to rely on food aid and that as many as
2.75 million may need some kind of humanitarian
assistance in the months ahead. Hospitals in the main
towns are devoid of equipment and medicine. The
health of children in particular has been hurt by the
lack of food and health services. The situation was
made worse by an outbreak of polio last year, which
affected more than 1,000 children. Infant mortality
rates in Angola are among the highest in the world. It is
estimated that close to 1.5 million children live in a
state of absolute poverty and that more than 100,000
have lost touch with their parents.

Meanwhile, little information is available on the
condition of the population outside of Government-
controlled areas. Clearly, the situation remains
desperate. With an estimated 1.4 million landmines per
person in the whole country and some 86,000 disabled
landmine victims, the situation makes it impossible for
the internally displaced persons to return to their
homes and to till their fields. The most affected are
those who fled their homes and farms to seek refuge
and sustenance in urban areas. Almost as seriously
affected are those who abandoned their homes during
earlier conflicts, as well as the original residents of the
urban areas. These shifts have changed the demography
of the country from one that was predominantly rural-
based to one in which around 60 per cent of the
population now lives in overcrowded urban centres. As
a result, there has been increasing physical and
psychological pressures on these urban dwellers, who
must scramble for the same meagre resources, much of
which come from an equally overstretched
international assistance community.

My delegation reiterates its concern at the lack of
access by international humanitarian workers to
populations that are at risk, especially in guerrilla-
controlled areas, due to rebel activities in several
provinces. The location and timing of guerrilla attacks,
which often include looting, physical assaults and
destruction of crops and homes, are unpredictable. In
fact, almost all areas along the eastern and southern
borders remain out of bounds to humanitarian agencies.
With very limited road access, there is increased
reliance on air transportation which, in turn, increases
the delivery costs for humanitarian assistance.

Nevertheless, we are gratified to note that the
extension of State administration in several provinces
has given aid agencies access to thousands of people in
need of help who were previously beyond reach.

We are also concerned at the plight of children
caught in the conflict, many of whom are directly
involved as combatants and many others who have
been traumatized in other ways, such as through
displacement, death of family members and separation
from their families, and physical injuries.

My delegation is particularly alarmed at the
disclosure made in May by the World Food Programme
(WFP) that it might face a possible breakdown in the
food pipeline from the end of September, unless new
contributions were received. We note that, in an effort
to minimize hardship during the lean months of
September and October, WFP has reduced by 20 per
cent the number of people receiving direct food aid
during June and July. On the other hand, we would like
to commend OCHA, in partnership with the
Government of Angola, for its nationwide campaign to
distribute agricultural inputs, due to start in September
and October as part of the Government's efforts to
promote agricultural self-sufficiency.
The problem of refugees and internally displaced
persons, numbering several million as a result of the
conflict in Angola, remains intractable. Even more
disturbing is the fact that almost four million Angolans
are affected by the war. We must, therefore, heed the
recent appeal made by the High Commissioner for
Refugees for generous international assistance and
respond favourably to the United Nations Consolidated
Inter-Agency Appeal for Angola. We should also take
into account what was said by the High Commissioner,
Mrs. Sadako Ogata, regarding the difficulty in raising
cash to aid displaced people within their own countries,
compared to other refugee groups.

Mrs. Ogata's appeal for $8.4 million to assist
some 300,000 people who have been forced to flee
their homes in three provinces in Angola, where 1.5
million people have been displaced since 1998,
deserves our fullest support. We therefore commend
the United States and others for the pledges they
recently made. Making a real difference for internally
displaced persons will require a very substantial and
sustained commitment of resources.

In conclusion, we wish to underscore the need to
address Africa's conflicts in a comprehensive manner,
given the linkages among many of the crises on that
continent. We cannot fail to see the negative spillover
effects of the civil war in Angola to the neighbouring
countries, including, very recently, to Namibia,
resulting in civilian loss of life. Most of these deaths
have been blamed on UNITA.

