Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to wish Poland every success
during its Council presidency for the month of August.
We would also like to commend Peru for its exceptional
presidency during the month of July.

We would like to thank the briefers for the valuable
briefings that they have given. Their interventions will
undoubtedly enrich our discussion today.

I will focus my intervention on an important matter:
the implementation of Security Council resolutions
with a view to putting an end to violations perpetrated
against children in armed conflict. I would also like to
stress the importance of the role of the United Nations
and regional organizations, as well as mechanisms and
initiatives aimed at protecting the child.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509)
cites some positive developments, which we welcome,
especially the success of Governments and the United
Nations in releasing and rehabilitating over 13,000
children former child soldiers throughout the world.
That notwithstanding, this year the Secretary-General's
report portrays a horrific image of the continued
escalation of the six grave violations against children
in armed conflict the overall number of which has
reached 24,000. There have been a record number of
such violations since the monitoring and reporting
mechanism was established, including the astronomical
figures of killings and maiming and alarming cases
of sexual violence against children. To put an end
to these violations we must first work to guarantee
the implementation of Security Council resolutions,
including those pertaining to children in armed
conflict and to the protection of civilians, the most
recent of which is resolution 2475 (2019) on persons
with disabilities in times of conflict.

The Security Council has succeeded in putting in
place a strong normative framework on the protection
of children, starting with resolution 1261 (1999);
followed by resolution 1882 (2009), which was adopted
10 years ago; and arriving at resolution 2427 (2018),
which was adopted last year. Those resolutions do not
just guarantee the protection of children from grave
violations; they also recognize the need to guarantee
free access of humanitarian aid to children affected
by conflict.

Putting an end to conflict and achieving lasting
peace is the only sure way to end these violations. More
than 20,000 children have fallen victim to the Syrian
crisis that began in 2011. Here, I recall the unarmed
Palestinian children who are suffering because ofIsraeli
violations. Israel, the occupying authority, has been
perpetrating violations against Palestinian children
for many decades. I should also mention the innocent
children of Yemen who are being recruited, abused and
killed due to non-compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, conventions and international law,
and to the attack perpetrated by the Houthi rebels.

My delegation also stresses the importance of
augmenting resources and capacities to protect children
and reintegrate them within society. Countries and
Governments have the primary responsibility to protect
their citizens, including the most vulnerable, such as
children in general and children with disabilities in
particular. Kuwait supports the vital role played by
the United Nations in that regard. We also express our
appreciation for the outreach conducted by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict with national Governments with
a View to drawing up action plans to protect children,
in addition to the outreach she carries out with the
various parties to conflict to put an end to violations.
I reaffirm the need to provide the necessary technical
and human resources to enable peacekeeping operations
to implement their mandates and protect children in
conflicts, including by deploying child protection
advisers to United Nations peacekeeping missions,
as needed.

Finally, we reiterate Kuwait's commitment to
upholding the rights of children, especially children in
armed conflict. We support all initiatives that would
enhance compliance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the achievement of international peace
and security. We have taken upon ourselves the task of
saving future generations from the scourge of war, and
we have granted the Security Council special privileges
in order to achieve this noble goal. Therefore, we as
Member States must uphold that responsibility. We
must take it upon ourselves to implement Security
Council resolutions in order to achieve the purpose for
which the Council was formed.

Today is the anniversary of the despicable Iraqi
invasion of the State of Kuwait, which killed many
of Kuwait's sons and daughters. With the grace of
Allah Almighty and because of the Security Council's
commitment to the implementation of its resolutions,
the first of which was resolution 660 (1990), which was
adopted on this day in 1990, my country was liberated
with the support of sisterly and friendly countries, at
the forefront of which were the countries of the allied
coalition armed forces, which took the side ofjustice,
righteousness and international legitimacy. I renew
our thanks and appreciation from this very Chamber,
the image of which is carved into the consciousness of
every Kuwaiti citizen.
