Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation joins
others in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Haile Menkerios, and
President Mkapa, Chair of the Secretary-General's
Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan, for their
respective valuable briefings to the Council.

South Africa welcomes the convening of this
important meeting, and we wish to focus our
intervention on the following three pertinent issues: the
referendum process and post-referendum issues, the
need for continued political leadership and
engagement, and the need to address the situation in
Darfur.

South Africa followed the referendum process
very closely, with the participation of 35 South
Africans in the 110-member African Union (AU)
observer mission. We pay tribute to the sterling work
done by the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission
and the Southern Sudan Referendum Bureau in
executing what many have described as a historic and
momentous achievement in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

We note that, between 9 and 15 January, the
citizens of Southern Sudan, located in the South and
the North and spread across the globe in eight
countries, exercised their right to vote and to determine
their future during the referendum on self-determination.
The registration of more than 3.9 million voters and a
voter turnout of more than 80 per cent are testament to
the resolve and determination of the Southern
Sudanese to exercise their right to vote and of their
faith in the referendum process.

We commend the role of the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission, which, in four months,
achieved such astonishing success, and of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and the international
community, which provided support for the process.
My delegation joins previous speakers in saluting the
millions of people who participated in the voting
process for achieving this important milestone.

Instructive in that regard are the preliminary
statements of the African Union observer mission on
the Southern Sudan referendum, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, and the Chair of the
Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan, who is here today, that the referendum process
was free, fair and credible and that it was conducted in
accordance with the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
and the Referendum Act.

We believe that it is vital that the peace and calm
that characterized the referendum process be
maintained as we await the outcome of the referendum.
The observance of the rule of law is critical; in that
regard, all aspects of the referendum must be
conducted in compliance with the legislative
framework set out in the Referendum Act, and all
timelines respected.

On the need for continued political leadership and
cooperation, South Africa commends the personal
leadership and courage shown by President Al-Bashir
and First Vice-President Salva Kiir Mayardit, in
particular on facilitating a conducive and peaceful
environment in which citizens were able to participate
freely and without fear in casting their ballot. My
delegation also welcomes the commitment of the
parties to respecting the outcome of the results.

We are impressed by the call made by First
Vice-President Salva Kiir for forgiveness and
reconciliation, and for his security forces to protect the
citizens of the North and their property in the South.
That is demonstrative of the political will and desire to
secure a peaceful future for all the people of the Sudan
and echoes similar sentiments for coexistence and
cooperation previously expressed by President
Al-Bashir. My delegation believes that the desire for
cooperation and to secure peaceful post-referendum
relations augurs well for peace and stability between
the North and the South.

We call on all the parties in the Sudan to continue
and maintain their close cooperation, whatever the
outcome of the referendum may be. However, the
successful holding of the referendum is not an end in
itself, but represents a critical step in an onward
journey to sustainable peace, stability and
development. The international community should
therefore continue to focus on the many challenges still
confronting the Sudan.

In that regard, we are convinced that the work of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel on
the Sudan, chaired by former President Mbeki, continues
to play an important facilitation role in finding mutually
agreed outcomes to the post-referendum issues, such as

external debt, citizenship and border security
arrangements. We encourage the parties to continue their
cooperation with the Panel, and to invoke the same
political will and level of commitment in guiding them
towards agreement on the remaining issues.

As the violent and deadly events in Abyei last
week clearly demonstrated, sustainable peace will
require the continued commitment of the parties, as
well as full implementation of the existing agreements.
My delegation welcomes the agreement reached
between the communities that brought an end to the
hostilities and violence. We regret the loss of life
suffered during the clashes. Those events again
underscore the urgency and importance of concluding
the political negotiation on Abyei, as facilitated by the
AU Panel. My delegation remains convinced that such
challenges are not insurmountable. It remains confident
that such issues can be resolved with the continued
support of the international community, as well as the
necessary political will of the parties.

With regard to Darfur, the deteriorating security
situation resulting from the clashes between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan Liberation
Army (SLA)-Minni Minawi and the Justice and
Equality Movement has led to the displacement of
more than 40,000 people. We call on all the parties to
cease hostilities and for the SLA-Minni Minawi to
recommit to a comprehensive ceasefire agreement.

My delegation is deeply concerned about the lack
of progress in the Doha negotiations, and we urge
parties to redouble their efforts to find a peaceful and
comprehensive solution to the conflict in Darfur. We
encourage the Government of the Sudan, the Justice
and Equality Movement and the Liberation and Justice
Movement to give consideration to the proposals
presented by the mediation as a basis for seeking
compromise and agreement to conclude these peace
processes. We also encourage the launching of the
inclusive political process, in the form of a Darfur-
Darfur conference and with the objective of reaching a
global political agreement, as soon as conditions allow.

Durable peace and development are brought
about by cooperation rather than confrontation and by
ballots rather than bullets. It is important that the
parties in Darfur be inspired by the progress made in
the North-South conflict and collectively seek a
peaceful and negotiated solution to the conflict in
Darfur. The international community should stand
ready to assist the people of the Sudan in finding a
lasting solution to that conflict.

In conclusion, I wish to commend the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan; Special Representative
Menkerios; the Secretary-General's Panel on the
Referenda in the Sudan, led by former President
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa; the African Union High-Level
Panel on Darfur, chaired by former President
Mr. Thabo Mbeki; and the Joint African Union-United
Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur, Mr. Djibrill
Bassole, for their continued and tireless commitment to
bringing peace and stability to the Sudan.

