Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
welcome the opportunity provided me to express the
point of view of Canada on the draft resolution
presented by the United Kingdom.

For years now, critics have stressed that the
sanctions regime against Iraq was indifferent to the
sufferings of the Iraqi people. We admit that the
sanctions regime has had weak points, but this draft
resolution, if adopted, could eliminate most of these
weaknesses once and for all.

(spoke in English)

This draft resolution, if adopted, would enable the
Government of Iraq to respond more comprehensively
than heretofore to the needs of its citizens.
Unfortunately, however, there has been no sign
whatsoever that the suffering of the people of Iraq has
troubled the leadership of that country. Saddam
Hussein has not availed himself of the many
possibilities already available to him if he wished to
help his people, nor has there been a scintilla of
evidence that he is now reconciled to living at peace
with his neighbours.

For this reason, we believe that constraints on
Iraq's freedom remain necessary. So long as Iraq
refuses to accept the obligations and responsibilities
laid out in successive Security Council resolutions,
restrictions on its military capabilities serve all our
interests.

On the humanitarian front, the approach
embodied by the United Kingdom's draft resolution
moves us closer to the objectives of targeted sanctions,
which we believe should be the norm for all future
Security Council sanctions efforts. In fact, we are
disappointed that the strong recommendations
developed by the Security Council group on sanctions
have still not seen the light of day and we would urge
the Council to adopt them as soon as possible. In any
case, all those who agree with the need for the Council
to be more precise in the employment of sanctions
should embrace the approach embodied in this draft
resolution, particularly since it so clearly and directly
addresses the humanitarian plight of the Iraqi people.

It is a sad paradox that, if the opponents to this
approach succeed in sidetracking it, the result will be a
status quo ante that they themselves have long claimed
to be unacceptable. We understand the concerns
expressed by Iraq's neighbours regarding this draft
resolution, particularly in light of the Iraqi threat to
retaliate against any State that cooperates with the
implementation of this approach 4 that is to say,
cooperates with an approach taken by the Security
Council. We welcome efforts by Council members to
develop mechanisms to address these concerns.

The divisions in the Security Council, evident in
the vote on resolution 1284 (1999) and since, have
encouraged Iraq's intransigence over the past 18
months. They have fostered the mistaken belief that
sanctions would go away. This has not served the
interests of the international community; it has not
served the interests of the region; and it has most
manifestly not served the interests of the Iraqi people.
A united and resolute stand by the Council and the
countries of the region now would send a clear
message to Iraq that compliance remains the only
solution. Full compliance will lead to an end to the
sanctions, but both compliance and control have to
remain our objective.

It is for these reasons that we were particularly
discouraged by the interventions we heard on Tuesday
from certain Council members. I need hardly remind
members of the Council that Article 24 of the Charter
specifies that Security Council members are to act on
behalf of the entire United Nations membership. Thus,
the threat to veto this draft resolution on the basis of
acknowledged national, economic or political
considerations not only damages the Council's
credibility, but also demonstrates once again the need
to curtail this instrument. It is not being employed
responsibly this time.

We appeal to all Council members to act
corporately in the common interest. That is their duty
under the Charter; this is our expectation of them as
our representatives. We urge all members of the
Council to support the United Kingdom's draft
resolution.

