My delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings on the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the positive political developments in both the Sudan and South Sudan. We remain hopeful that this momentum will translate into greater cooperation and a renewed commitment between the two countries to find a just political resolution to the final status of Abyei. We acknowledge the progress and challenges highlighted in the Secretary- General's recent report (S/2020/308). In particular, we note the fragile security situation in Abyei, including the ongoing intercommunal violence - as evidenced in the Nainai-Kolom attacks on 19 and 22 January. We condemn those attacks and lament the heightened tensions between the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya communities. We welcome UNISFA's efforts to investigate those violent incidents and encourage the authorities to proceed with the joint investigation as agreed during the 19 February Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting in Juba. Equally, we urge the Abyei communities to exercise the utmost restraint, and we call on the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to cooperate fully with UNISFA. UNISFA's tireless efforts to ensure peace and stability in the region, including to maintain Abyei as a weapons-free zone, are laudable. We commend UNISFA for its regular constructive engagements with the administrative and traditional leaders, as well as with the joint community peace committee. We also welcome the advances within the framework of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, and we urge the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee to convene regular meetings. The difficulties in Abyei will not be resolved unless the key drivers of intercommunal conflicts are robustly tackled. We therefore urge the parties to fulfil their obligations as stipulated in the 2011 agreement between the Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for the administration and security of the Abyei Area and the 2012 cooperation agreement between the Republic of the Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan. We remain concerned about the dire humanitarian situation in Abyei, which is expected to be exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic. Likewise, the dreadful environmental conditions in the region, which are compounded by the adverse effects of climate change, continue to negatively alter the security, economic and social landscape. Amid these immense challenges, we emphasize the need for unhindered humanitarian service delivery to those who require urgent assistance. My delegation encourages the inclusion of women in the decision-making process in Abyei. We welcome the work of UNISFA in support of the women and peace and security mandate. We also note marginal progress on the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and some progress on the benchmarks specified by resolution 2497 (2019). We call on all parties to adhere to the stipulations outlined in the outcome documents of the ordinary sessions of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism held in Juba on 13 October 2019 and 19 February 2020. UNISFA remains an interim security force, and therefore it is critical to resolve the status of Abyei. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines stands in solidarity with the people of Abyei and reaffirms its commitment to UNISFA. We also thank Ethiopia for its invaluable contribution through its peacekeepers, and we reiterate our support for the critical mediating role played by the African Union.
