Mr. Ka (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on the
accession of your country, Singapore, to the presidency
of the Security Council for this month, which
fortuitously marks the onset of your membership in the
Council, of the new century and of the new
millennium. These coincidences augur well for the
Security Council and I wish to seize the opportunity of
this first open meeting of the year to wish you and the
other members of the Council, particularly the new
ones, every success in discharging your difficult and
sensitive mission in the service of world peace.

My delegation also wishes to welcome your very
timely initiative of devoting this meeting to an
exchange of views on the need to strengthen
cooperation between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries in the
context of joining relevant forces to improve the
effectiveness and credibility of peacekeeping
operations. Such trilateral cooperation has become
virtually mandatory today because peacekeeping
doctrine has undergone a spectacular evolution in
recent years.

A decade ago, the role of United Nations forces
in peacekeeping was often confined to separating
parties to a conflict in order to monitor and ensure
respect for the implementation of a ceasefire or peace
agreement between warring States. Such operations
were relatively easier to manage because they required
much less in terms of material and financial means and
human resources .

Nowadays, and most particularly in the past 10
years, the concept of peacekeeping has evolved
considerably in confronting a new generation of
conflicts and situations that were previously unknown.
These multidimensional operations have progressively
become the norm. Unfortunately, the United Nations is
entering unfamiliar territory in complex situations in
which there is not even a clearly defined political and
institutional framework, such as in Kosovo or East
Timor. This requires the United Nations to be able to
strengthen its capacity to carry out such new missions
appropriately, with the support of well-prepared troops
credibly equipped to confront often formidable
situations.

A developing country such as mine, which has
been involved since 1960 in all theatres of operation, is
certainly in a good position to appreciate the initiative
you have taken, Sir, in a practical quest for the greater
effectiveness and credibility of future peacekeeping
operations. This is indeed one of the many challenges
facing our Organization today.

In document S/2001/2l, the delegation of
Singapore pertinently draws attention to and
summarizes the provisions of the decisions taken by
the Security Council on 13 November 2000 and by the
General Assembly on 8 December 2000 endorsing the
recommendations of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations on strengthening consultations between
troop-contributing countries, the Security Council and
the Secretariat. My delegation considers these
recommendations, in particular the proposal to
establish a Security Council working group on
peacekeeping, to be great steps in the right direction.
We recognize, however, that, like all human
endeavours, they must continue to be supported and
accompanied by our common efforts.

Should we not orient ourselves more firmly
towards institutionalizing the process of consultations
by involving the troop contributors more closely in the
consultations from beginning to end, from the
preparatory stages to the implementation and
conclusion of peacekeeping operations? Such an
approach would create a climate of trust and enable
certain hesitant countries, once fully briefed, to commit
themselves more fully to these operations. To that end,
I would suggest the practical implementation of the
following recommendations.

Meetings between the members of the Security
Council, the Secretariat, the troop-contributing
countries and civilian police elements are certainly
useful, but should also involve countries that make a
substantial contribution to peacekeeping operations,
inter alia, by contributing to special trust funds or by
providing important logistical equipment or other
resources. Consultations should be held regularly with
all these actors at every phase of decision-making on
the establishment, conduct, assessment and liquidation
of peacekeeping operations. Other, regional actors that
often play a supporting role in peacekeeping operations
should, in our opinion, also feel involved in the
drafting of operation mandates.

As I have said, cooperation between the Security
Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries should be based on measures to establish
trust that allow troop contributors to participate in the
drafting of the mandates, which, as the Brahimi report
notes, should be clear, credible and achievable.

It would also be advisable to redress the
disparities in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations between the nationals of northern countries,
which are over-represented, and those of the South,
which are troop contributors but are sparsely
represented. A better balance in its personnel would
make possible a more objective assessment of the
concerns of the countries of the South regarding the
management of peacekeeping operations.

In our view, the Secretariat should also develop a
dossier for each peace mission that contains the names
and contact information for the personnel of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other
agencies and bodies of the United Nations involved in
the mission.

The "group of friends" concept, which was
established for such missions as those in Guinea-Bissau
and the Central African Republic, could make a
significant contribution to strengthening tripartite
cooperation between the Security Council, troop
contributors and the Secretariat. I therefore very much
support the suggestions of the Ambassador of France in
this regard.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that in
seeking to strengthen the capacity of the United
Nations to carry out future peacekeeping missions
appropriately, my delegation supports the proposal of
the United Kingdom to set up a technical committee to
examine certain aspects of the Brahimi report, whose
pertinent recommendations we all welcome.

