Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf ofthe European Union (EU). The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta, and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association country Iceland, align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes the report of the
United Nations Panel of Experts on Sierra Leone, and
we thank Ambassador Chowdhury and all five
members of the Panel for the valuable work they have
done. This is a comprehensive report by independent
experts, which sheds light on the covert network of
support to the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). We
take particular note of the conclusion that systematic
and deliberate violations of Security Council
resolutions, especially by the leadership of Liberia,
continue to fuel this long and bitter conflict which has
brought misery to the people of Sierra Leone. Now is
the time for the international community to show
clearly by its actions that such activities will no longer
be tolerated.

The links between conflict diamonds and the
arms trade are at the core of the tragedy in Sierra
Leone. The RUF continues to rely on illegal trade in
diamonds to finance its campaign of violence, and the
population continues to suffer.

The European Union is particularly concerned
about the role played by the Liberian leadership, under
President Charles Taylor, in fuelling the violence in
Sierra Leone. The report provides conclusive evidence
that President Taylor is a key provider of arms and
related material to the RUF. Investigations also show
that RUF activities are financed through diamonds
mined in Sierra Leone and that the Liberian air registry
is being used for illicit trafficking in arms. The EU
demands that Liberia and all other parties involved in
the violation of sanctions cease such activities
immediately.

The Panel of Experts recommends a number of
robust and wide-ranging measures to address the
problems they have identified. Some of these measures
fall beyond the scope of the Security Council itself and
require implementation in other forums. For instance,
the report once again demonstrates the importance of
action on the proliferation of small arms, on both the
supply and the demand sides. The EU welcomes, and
has expressed its readiness to support, current efforts,
such as the Moratorium of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), to prevent the
illicit trade in small arms in West Africa. The EU also
supports efforts by individual countries, both in the
region and elsewhere, to tighten their air traffic
regulations and strengthen their customs controls.

The EU supports the recommendations of the
Panel of Experts for early action to curb the flow of
conflict diamonds from the region. We would support
coordinated action in order to establish national
certification schemes in the region, as well as measures
to strengthen control in countries identified as transit
States for conflict diamonds. We also underline the
importance of the recommendations of the Panel of
Experts that a global certification scheme be developed
as soon as possible. In this context, the EU emphasizes
its strong support for last year's General Assembly
resolution 55/56, on conflict diamonds.

The Panel of Experts was mandated to look
primarily at the situation in Sierra Leone. Over time it
has become apparent that President Taylor's
destabilizing agenda is spreading also to Guinea and
having dramatic effects on the security and
humanitarian situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons in that country. We applaud
ECOWAS efforts to try to deal with the situation in
Guinea, and we believe that a regional dimension of
this crisis further underlines the need for action by the
Security Council.

The European Union shares the strong concern of
the Panel of Experts that sanctions on diamonds and
weapons are being broken with impunity. We therefore
believe that effective pressure to persuade President
Taylor and his associates to comply with the sanctions
and to put an end to their support for the rebel
movement in neighbouring countries should be a key
element in the Security Council's and the international
community's response to the West African crisis. Such
measures should be targeted at the Liberian
leadership - yes - while limiting the impact on the
Liberian people themselves.

We express our strong support for the intention of
the Security Council to take action in order to put
pressure on President Taylor and follow up on the
recommendations of the Panel of Experts. In this
context, the EU also supports an extension of the
mandate ofthe Panel of Experts.

