The Secretary-General: I would like to
commend Nigeria for initiating this timely discussion.

Since Under-Secretary-General Pascoe briefed
the Council last August, the threat of piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea has continued to grow. New cases of piracy
and armed robbery aboard vessels along the West
African coast are being regularly reported, with
significant potential consequences for economic
development and security. The threat is compounded
because most Gulf States have limited capacity to
ensure safe maritime trade, the freedom of navigation,
2
the protection of marine resources and the safety and
security of lives and property.

I discussed this issue with many leaders from the
region and beyond during their visits to United Nations
Headquarters last month. In their statements to the
General Assembly, a number of heads of State
highlighted the need for a concerted regional and
international response. I therefore commend the States
in the Gulf of Guinea and their partners for working
together to tackle this security threat. Recently, Benin
and Nigeria launched joint patrols to secure the waters
off Benin. Similarly, Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea,
Gabon and Sao Tome and Principe have launched a
joint strategy to secure the vital interests of members
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS).

I am also encouraged by the initiatives taken by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central
African States to coordinate regional responses. I
understand that ECOWAS plans to convene a summit
of the Gulf of Guinea States and that ECCAS plans to
hold an international conference. I urge the two
regional organizations to work together to develop a
comprehensive, integrated strategy, in close
cooperation with the Commission of the Gulf of
Guinea and the Maritime Organization of West and
Central Africa. I also encourage them to build on the
existing memorandum of understanding on maritime
law enforcement developed by the Maritime
Organization of West and Central Africa and the
International Maritime Organization with the support
of United Nations agencies. That memorandum has
already been signed by 15 States from the region.

As the Council was informed in August, I have
decided to deploy an assessment mission to the region
in November, following a request by President Boni
Yayi of Benin. Earlier this month, my Special
Representative for West Africa, Mr. Said Djinnit, met
with Beninese authorities, who stressed that the
country's economy could be severely affected if piracy
were not addressed adequately and quickly. The
forthcoming United Nations assessment mission will
examine the scope of the threat and the capacity of
Benin and of the West African subregion as a whole to
ensure maritime safety and security in the Gulf of
Guinea. It will also make recommendations on
antipiracy, including in the broader context of
organized crime and drug trafficking.
11-55462

The mission Will include representatives of the
Departments of Political Affairs and Peacekeeping
Operations, the United Nations Office for West Africa,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Maritime Organization. It will work in
close consultation with national authorities, the
European Union and other international partners. I will
arrange to present the mission's report to the Council
once I receive it.

Piracy transcends national boundaries and
economic interests. It has a negative impact on West
Africa's trade with the rest of the world, especially
with its principal trading partners in the Americas, Asia
and Europe. The recent deployment of naval vessels to
support antipiracy operations in the Gulf of Guinea
attests to the readiness of the region's States and their
partners to address this threat. I call upon other
Member States to join these efforts.

As we have learned from our experience in
Somalia, we must approach the issue in a holistic
manner, focusing simultaneously on security, the rule
of law and development. Responses that fall short of
these requirements Will only exacerbate the problem.
Let us therefore work together to forge a balanced and
coherent strategy that addresses the roots of the
problem and deterrence on land and at sea.

