Mr. Henze (Germany): Let me, at the outset, express
our full support for the statement made by my British
colleague on behalf of the European Union.

My country attributes the greatest importance to the
promotion and protection of all human rights. But it is
particularly intolerable and unacceptable for all of us that
children, who are one of the most vulnerable groups in our
societies, have, during recent decades, increasingly become
Victims and targets in armed conflicts and have even been
misused as soldiers. Their rights especially deserve our full
attention and political commitment.

While condemning all kinds of human rights
violations, violence deliberately inflicted on children in
modern warfare is particularly appalling. We have
committed ourselves to participate most actively in
activities and initiatives undertaken at all levels and in all
fields that are suitable for protecting children from being
victimized in the theatres of
conflict around the world and for rehabilitating those
children who have already suffered physically, mentally and
emotionally from the cruelties of war.

My country therefore warmly welcomes the initiative
taken by the Security Council to bring the subject of
children in armed conflict to its agenda. Our debate will
undoubtedly raise awareness among all States and the
public about this important subject, and the position taken
by the Council should give a clear indication to all
perpetrators that the United Nations and its Member States
will not passively stand by and watch while children are
intentionally targeted, brutalized and used as instruments by
belligerents.

Germany commends the Secretary-General for having
appointed a Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, and especially for the choice of the personality to
discharge this mandate. During his first year in office, Mr.
Olara Otunnu already has proved to be a true advocate of
all children victimized by the scourge of war. To a great
extent the rise in public awareness of the situation of
children in conflict zones seems due to his commitment and
political outreach. The results of his visits to countries
affected by violent disputes clearly show that his
interventions in favour of suffering children can make a
difference. I wish to thank Mr. Otunnu on behalf of my
country for his commitment and to express Germany's
continuing support, morally as well as financially, for his
mandate.

In view of children's vulnerability in situations of
armed conflict or natural disaster, they are one of the
prime target groups of my Government's humanitarian
relief abroad. Thus, in 1997 under our refugee aid
programmes, we provided special emergency relief for
children in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

Another focus of our project support is the
demobilization of ex-combatants, especially juveniles and
children. In the last several years, Germany has funded
income- and employment-generating activities for
ex-combatants in Angola, Ethiopia, Uganda and
Cambodia with more than DM. 24 million. A further DM
9 have been earmarked in 1997 for the same purpose.

In the current negotiations on an optional protocol to
the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
relating to children in armed conflict, my country
advocates the stipulation of 18 years as the minimum age
for direct participation in armed conflict. When depositing
its instruments ratifying the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, the German Government declared that it would
not avail itself of the opportunity provided by the
Convention to set the age limit at 15 years, as allowed by
paragraph 2 of article 38 of the Convention.

In the opinion of my Government, it would be
desirable to enforce a minimum age of 18 years for
indirect participation in armed conflict as well. In further
negotiations, Germany will advocate, in close
coordination with its partners in the European Union and
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the
highest possible standard of protection for children and
juveniles involved in armed hostilities. We urge States
Parties to the Convention to contribute to ensuring the
successful adoption of the optional protocol and, even
prior to its adoption, to apply paragraph 2 of article 38 in
such a way that the age limit is increased to 18 years.

Every year, some 20,000 civilians, including
thousands of children, fall victim to the indiscriminate use
of landmines, and anti-personnel mines in particular.
Germany has therefore long demanded a worldwide ban
on anti-personnel mines and urged a speedy conclusion of
a binding international convention to that effect.

The Ottawa Convention on the Prohibition of the
Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-
Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction of December
1997 is an important international achievement. In the
interest of tens of thousands of Victims, among them
thousands of children, my Government appeals to all

 

those States which have so far opposed a total ban on
anti-personnel mines to give up their resistance, sign the
Ottawa ban treaty, and support its early entry into force.

Impunity is one of the main causes of the abuse of
children in armed conflict. We are convinced that misusing
children for active participation in armed hostilities
constitutes a crime. At the Diplomatic Conference for the
early establishment of a permanent international criminal
court, which is currently being held in Rome, Germany
therefore strongly supports the inclusion of that most
serious offence in the statute of the international criminal
court.

In summary, Germany wants to be second to none in
combating violence against children in armed conflict, a
particularly detestable form of abomination.

