Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to congratulate the
Security Council on holding this open debate on the
serious situation in the Middle East.

The Government of the Republic of Ecuador,
deeply concerned over the escalating violence in the
Middle East, supports the international community's
appeal for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
occupied territories and the immediate cessation of acts
of violence on both sides, which, as we know, have
caused so many innocent victims, in particular among
the civilian population.

Ecuador, convinced that the only way of solving
disputes is through peaceful negotiation, expresses its
full support for recently adopted Security Council
resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002).

The Government of Ecuador considers that these
resolutions provide the legal and political elements that
can bring about the resumption of peace negotiations
along the lines provided for in the Tenet plan and the
Mitchell recommendations.

In this context, the Government of Ecuador
reiterates the appeal for peace made by President
Gustavo Noboa in his notes of 5 December 2001
addressed to the Prime Minister of Israel, Ariel Sharon,
and to the President of the Palestinian Authority,
Yasser Arafat. In his messages, President Noboa
invoked the need to find a peaceful, lasting and
equitable solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

Ecuador supports the initiatives of the United
Nations, the European Union, the Russian Federation
and the United States towards a negotiated settlement
of the conflict. Ecuador especially welcomes the
United States Government's dispatch to the region of a
delegation at the highest level, led by Secretary of
State Colin Powell.

Ecuador recognizes Israel's right to live within
secure and recognized borders, according to
international law, as well as the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to establish their own State, in
accordance with United Nations resolutions.

As a multicultural and multi-ethnic country,
Ecuador calls on Israel and Palestine to renounce
violence in favour of relations of tolerance and respect
for ethnic, cultural and religious diversity. Ecuador
expresses special concern at the military operations
being carried out at holy sites.

As we did previously in Geneva, on the occasion
of the presentation of the report of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, I wish to affirm
emphatically Ecuador's rejection of violations of
human rights in the region.

Finally, I wish to express Ecuador's endorsement
of statements on this issue by the Rio Group and the
Non-Aligned Movement.
