Mr. Grandi: The grave abuses perpetrated against
migrants and refugees along the central Mediterranean
routes can no longer be ignored. I am glad that the
Security Council has decided to turn its attention to
this compelling matter.

More than 116,000 people have crossed the sea to
Italy alone in 2017. We should not forget that many of
those arriving, or who end up stranded or dying along
the way, are refugees who are fleeing conflict and
persecution - which is of direct concern to the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR).

As I said in my statement to the Security Council
just a few weeks ago (see S/PV.8083), the international
community's inability to prevent and resolve conflict
is at the root of their plight. Compelled to flee,
but without legal pathways to safety, refugees are
exposed to appalling harm, together with migrants,
including torture, rape, sexual exploitation, slavery
and other forms of forced labour, which proliferate
where governance is weak and transnational criminal
networks take root. That requires a comprehensive
approach encompassing countries of origin, transit
and destination.

Strengthening refugee protection and offering
solutions along the routes, including in Chad and the
Niger, is key. UNHCR is stepping up its work, but
dramatic funding gaps persist, especially in sub-Saharan
Africa. In Libya, some 17,000 refugees and migrants
are in detention; many more are held by smugglers and
traffickers, who are protected by well-known militias.
Tackling these is linked to progress on political
solutions and functioning governance structures.

Meanwhile, UNHCR is playing its part, together
with the International Organization for Migration.
Progress is discernible, though still modest. Security
remains volatile and access to key locations is still not
possible, yet, working closely with the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and with the support of some
donors - to whom I am grateful - we are making
progress towards expanding our scope of action. We are
helping the authorities to address the needs of displaced
Libyans and others affected by conflict, which is an
important priority. We have also secured the release of
almost 1,000 asylum-seekers and refugees this year,
and reception and protection mechanisms are being
incrementally strengthened. Plans to establish a transit
centre in Tripoli are progressing positively.

Rescue at sea, in line with international maritime
law and human rights standards, remains imperative.
Support for Libyan border-management authorities,
including the coast guard, must be accompanied by
building adequate reception and asylum systems. I
commend the Governments of Libya and the Niger
for enabling a first transit evacuation by UNHCR
of 25 refugees, who will be resettled in France.
Additional evacuation platforms, resettlement places
and other safe and legal pathways are needed along
the entire route. I have called for 40,000 additional
resettlement places in the 15 countries affected by
these movements. To date, we have indications ofjust
10,500 places - an encouraging but still insufficient
number. Council members will recall that UNHCR
has also made specific recommendations for tackling
trafficking, including by freezing assets, instituting
travel bans, disrupting the supply of revenue and
materials, and ensuring robust prosecutions.

Too often, measures pursued in relation to the
Mediterranean routes have centred on how to control,
deter and exclude. This can have a dehumanizing
effect and, more importantly, alone it does not help
refugees and migrants to avoid exploitative, deeply
harmful situations. A comprehensive set of political,
security, humanitarian, human rights and development
investments is needed. The Security Council's attention
is welcome because its leadership is critical to ensuring
that this happens.

