Mr. Bouabid (spoke in French): The
International Organization of la Francophonie is
concerned about the current situation in the Central
African Republic, which is a State member of our
organization. Reconstruction and peace-building efforts
in that country, in support of which, in May 2000, the
United Nations organized a special meeting on the
Central African Republic and its foreign partners for
security and development, are currently being
jeopardized by serious tensions resulting from
disturbing economic and social circumstances and the
fragile political situation.

The economic and social crisis in the country is
characterized mainly by fuel-supply problems resulting
from the situation prevailing in the region, in particular
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and by the recurrent problem of salary arrears, with the
strikes and social unrest that that unleashes. Because
the political situation is also tense-mainly because
there is no dialogue between the authorities and the
opposition-the social crisis in the Central African
Republic could endanger reconciliation efforts in the
country.

The International Organization of la
Francophonie has always demonstrated its solidarity
with the Central African Republic. In the wake of the
mutinies in 1996 and 1997, African States members of
la Francophonie undertook mediation efforts leading to
the signing of the Bangui Agreements and sent an
inter-African force to the area - the Inter-African
Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui
Agreements (MISAB). The Mission was made up of
troops from six francophone African countries, and it
later became the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCA), with the participation
of the same countries.

On many occasions, the Security Council
expressed its appreciation to MISAB and MINURCA
and congratulated them on the work they did and on
their invaluable contribution to calming the situation in
the country. However, during this, the most delicate
phase through which the country has passed since
MINURCA left, the results of the international
community's efforts to date - which remain fragile -
will be wasted if they are not properly consolidated.
That is why the International Organization of la
Francophonie would like sincerely to thank you, Sir,
for focusing the attention of the international
community on this problem during your presidency and
for inscribing the item on the agenda ofthe Council.

I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General for his report and welcome the
Minister for Civic Responsibility in charge of Relations
with the Parliament of the Central African Republic.
We also welcome Ambassador Sy, the Representative
of the Secretary-General, and thank him for the efforts
that he has continued to make as head of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in the Central
African Republic (BONUCA) and for his cooperation
with the International Organization ofla Francophonie.

I should also like to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General for sending a Special Envoy,
Mr. Amara Essy, former President of the General
Assembly and former Minister for Foreign Affairs of
C6te d'Ivoire, to the region to assess the impact of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
the Central African Republic and the Republic of the
Congo. We hope, with a view to a settlement of the
conflict, that Minister Essy's recommendations will
help to make us more aware of the need for urgent
action by the international community to offset the
impact of the conflict on neighbouring countries,
particularly the Central African Republic, a landlocked
country whose economic potential cannot be developed
without at least a semblance of peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and security along the length of
the Ubangi River, which is essential for imports to and
exports from the Central African Republic.

We encourage the international community to do
whatever it can to help the Central African Republic, as
well as the Republic of the Congo, to deal with the
problem caused by the large number of refugees fleeing
conflict zones in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We also call for urgent and effective action to
ensure security in shipping lanes, particularly in the
Ubangi River, in order to prevent the current crisis
from worsening further and the central African
economy being for a long time to come.

The Bretton Woods institutions also have a major
role to play. The recent steps taken by the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) are in the
right direction. We welcome the Secretary-General's
initiative to approach those institutions to make them
aware of the particularly fragile situation in the Central
African Republic. We encourage him to continue what
he is doing and to draw the attention ofthe World Bank
and the IMF to the need to take into account the
situation of countries emerging from a conflict and to
make conditions for granting financial assistance to
these countries flexible.
The International Organization of la
Francophonie has supported the return to stability and
the revival of the democratization process in the
Central African Republic, inter alia, by providing
assistance and sending observers to the 1998 legislative
elections and the 1999 presidential elections and by
sending a goodwill mission in March 1999 and a needs
assessment mission in May 2000. It intends to follow
up and strengthen the implementation of concrete
measures to enable the Central African Republic to
benefit fully from programmes that La Francophonie
carries out through its intergovernmental agency and its
other operators.

These measures, which seek to support
Government efforts and programmes linked to
governance, the strengthening of democratic
institutions, combating poverty, economic and social
reintegration of youth or even new information and
communication technologies, were announced at the
special meeting in May 2000 at New York. They must
be implemented, in cooperation with the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in the Central
African Republic (BONUCA) in Bangui and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), within the
framework of the agreements reached by la
Francophonie with the United Nations and UNDP.

For example, la Francophonie participated in the
holding of a national seminar for Central African
parliamentarians, from 9 to 11 October 2000, on the
role of Parliament with regard to the promotion and
protection of human rights, which was organized by
BONUCA, in partnership with the National Assembly,
the Ministry for Relations with the Parliament and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.

In recent weeks, the Secretary-General of our
organization, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, asked
Mr. Alioune Sene, the former Ambassador of Senegal
to Geneva, to carry out a mission in the Central African
Republic to study ways of strengthening francophone
cooperation in that country and to identify possible
assistance to complement efforts under way to facilitate
a dialogue between the Central African political forces.
Ambassador Sene's mission to the Central African
Republic took place from 15 to 22 January 2001 and
was received by President Patasse. Its mandate also
included an updated assessment of concrete steps of
cooperation in close liaison with the other partners
involved, that could strengthen the capacities of all
actors and players in democratic life and the peace
process in the Central African Republic. On the basis
of its numerous contacts, the mission identified a
number of steps that could be quickly implemented.

This would relate particularly to contributing, in
cooperation with BONUCA and UNDP, to a
comprehensive assessment initiative on the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements and the
National Reconciliation Pact in order to renew dialogue
among all the actors, public and private. It would also
concern making available Francophone expertise for
drafting texts that advocate a calmer political life, as
provided for in the Agreements and, finally, significant
support for the functioning and revitalization of control
of monitoring, regulation and mediation institutions,
which are of major importance at this stage.

In conclusion, I wish to stress the importance of
the role of the Central Africans themselves to ensure
their country's return to lasting peace, security and
stability. The responsibility for that is primarily
incumbent on the Government, the political leaders and
the Central African people, not the international
community. Their resolve, commitment and actions to
achieve the objectives, through dialogue, can only
further encourage the international community to help
them.

The Central African Republic has played an
active role in preparing and developing the
international symposium on the exercise of democracy,
rights and freedom within the francophone sphere, held
at Bamako from 1 to 3 November 2000. The authorities
of that country are parties to the principles set forth
there and commitments entered into under the Bamako
Declaration, which particularly sets down the principle
that democracy requires dialogue at all levels, among
citizens, social partners and political parties, as well as
between the State and civil society.

What the Central African Republic needs most
today is a calmer political life. Among the
commitments undertaken in the Bamako Declaration
for a calmer political life is that of having all political
parties-from the opposition as well as from the
majority-participate in the national, regional and
local political life, in order to settle conflicts ofinterest
peacefully, as well as to prevent-and, if the need
arises, to settle peacefully-disputes and tensions
between political and social groups by exploring all
appropriate mechanisms and means.

I would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm to
the Central African authorities and people the
International Organization of 1a Francophonie's
commitment to lend all its support to national and
international efforts for a calmer political life in the
Central African Republic.

