Mr. Wang (China)(interpretation from Chinese): The
Chinese delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council. We are in favour of the
Secretary-General' 5 recommendation to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) for three months. We also are in favour of an
even more positive United Nations role in Liberia in
support of the peace process, and support the unremitting
efforts made by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) to resolve the question of Liberia.

We are encouraged by the major progress recently
achieved in the Liberian peace process. The disarmament
and demobilization of ex-combatants of the various Liberian
factions are key elements in the peace process, and an
important prerequisite for the smooth holding of general
elections in Liberia. We appreciate the recent political good
faith and positive actions on the part of the various factions
in Liberia.

As the Permanent Representative of Liberia stated, the
ultimate settlement of the question of Liberia rests solely
with the Liberian people themselves. This calls for a strong
sense of political responsibility on the part of the leaders of
Liberia's various factions in conformity with the interests
of their country and their people.

The peace process in Liberia has entered its last
important phase. We hope that the various Liberian
parties will continue their efforts and expedite the
completion of all the tasks in the military areas as
stipulated in the Abuja Agreement and that they will hold
sincere consultations and solve the differences still
remaining in the preparatory work for the elections, so
that these elections can be held as scheduled on 30 May
1997.

The general elections to be held in Liberia will be an
important milestone in the Liberian peace process, as well
as in the history of Liberia. The international community,
including the United Nations, is duty-bound to actively
support this election. We are in favour of shifting the
focus of UNOMIL to electoral assistance. We therefore
appeal to all sides to assist the elections in Liberian with
human, material and financial resources.

No step or accomplishment achieved in the Liberian
peace process would have been possible without the
strenuous efforts made by ECOWAS. Over the years,
ECOWAS countries have overcome their own financial
difficulties and, in spite of adversity and setbacks, have
made active good-offices and mediation efforts. They
have sent peacekeeping troops to Liberia and have helped
that country to move from war to peace.

China has always firmly supported the efforts made
by ECOWAS in accordance with the United Nations
Charter for the solution of questions in the region. We
believe that the international community should provide
political and financial help to ECOWAS and the
ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). Especially
now that the peace process in Liberia is at a critical
juncture, ECOMOG's ability to assist should be
strengthened so that it can carry out its peacekeeping
mandate smoothly and help all parties in Liberia to
complete the peace process.

Liberia, which has experienced seven years of civil
war, will soon achieve peace. This will be a happy event
for the people of Liberia, as well as for all the people of
Africa. China extends its sincere good wishes to the
Liberian people. Together with the rest of the
international community, we will continue to make our
contribution so that Liberia can achieve peace and
stability and enter a new era of rehabilitation and
development as soon as possible.

