Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): First of all, I would
like to welcome you, Minister Cowen, to New York.
Since this is the last day of the Irish presidency, we
would like to congratulate you and your team. It has
been a difficult month, and your team has done a
sterling job.

We would also like to welcome our friends, Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello and, of course, Chief Minister Mr.
Mari Alkatiri; once again, I would like to congratulate Mr.
Alkatiri on the successful holding of elections. We also
welcome our colleagues from the World Bank and the
United Nations Development Programme.

Before I go into the substance of my remarks
today on a subject of great importance to us, I want to
make three brief procedural points arising from the
discussions that we had on the draft presidential
statement. These are important procedural points,
because they may come into play when, in elaborating
the draft resolution, we decide the future of East Timor.

The first procedural question is this: when we, the
members, produce decisions of the Council, should we
factor in only our national interests, or also the
concerns of the international community? Our own
View is that - and this is an important point - each
one of us wears two hats: our national hat, and our hat
as a representative of the international community.
This, by the way, is enshrined in Article 24, paragraph
1, of the Charter, which states that

"Members confer on the Security Council
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and agree that in
carrying out its duties under this responsibility
the Security Council acts on their behalf."

We think that we should bear that in mind when we
discuss the situation in East Timor.

The second question is this: when we produce
decisions, how do we factor in the views of other
Member States? We had a very fruitful discussion with
the troop-contributing countries. This afternoon, we
will be hearing the views of other Member States. How
do we bring those Views into play when we make
concrete decisions on East Timor? That is a real
question that we need to answer.

The third procedural question is this: when
making decisions, how do we remember past decisions
and commitments, and how do we bring them into play?
For example, earlier today, you, Mr. President, read out a
presidential statement on women and peace and security,
which I think mentioned East Timor. How do we take that
presidential statement and apply it to East Timor?

I raised those procedural questions because they
will come up in the future.

Today, in response to your appeal, Mr. President,
to be brief and to highlight the key points, I will not
read out the text that we have distributed. But, given the
importance of East Timor to Singapore and to our region,
I hope that you will allow me to make seven points.

First, I would like to say that, of course, we fully
support the Secretary-General's report. We normally
say that of all the Secretary-General's reports, but it is
important to bear in mind that this time the
Secretary-General has produced a very careful and
well-balanced report pointing out how to take the large
operation that we have in East Timor today and scale it
down significantly in such a manner that it ensures a
successful transition. Figures are provided in the report,
and the Secretary-General also gives an indication of how
the United Nations presence will be scaled down as the
East Timor Defence Force and the East Timor Police
Service are built up. I am glad that today we will be
endorsing the Secretary-General's report.

The second key point - I am glad that this was
emphasized by Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello - is that we
have undertaken a big job in East Timor, and we must
finish it. I believe that that is what Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello said. But the question is: what is the job? In that
respect, I suppose that it would be normal for most
people to think that when East Timor becomes
independent, the job will be done and the United
Nations will have completed its mission. But clearly
the requirements of the job have been spelt out in
paragraph 2 of resolution 1272 (1999), which I will
read out, because I believe that it is important. It states:

"Decides also that the mandate of UNTAET
shall consist of the following elements:

(a) To provide security and maintain law
and order throughout the territory of East Timor;

(b) To establish an effective administration;

(0) To assist in the development of civil
and social services;

(d) To ensure the coordination and
delivery of humanitarian assistance, rehabilitation
and development assistance;

(e) To support capacity-building for self-
government;

(f) To assist in the establishment of
conditions for sustainable development".

Those are simple requirements. Have we fulfilled
them yet? Will we have done so in time for
independence? The answer is, "No".

Interestingly enough, in connection with our
discussion of exit strategies, a note (S/2001/905) was
issued by the President of the Council on 25
September, which, in paragraph 6, stated:

"The Security Council agrees that a major
criterion for the Council's decision on the scaling
down or withdrawal of a peacekeeping operation
is the successful completion of its mandate".

That was stated in a note issued by the President of the
Security Council. Now we have a real case to which we
must apply the commitment that we made. We have
given ourselves a mandate, and we must therefore
complete the job. I hope that all members will agree
with that.

The third key point is that, if we look at the
recent history of the United Nations, there have,
unfortunately, not been too many success stories. But
East Timor provides real potential for a real success
story. For that to come about, however, we will have to
learn the lesson of why we have not had success stories
in the past. To take two recent examples, to which I
refer in my written statement - those of the Central
African Republic and Guinea-Bissau - sadly, we
walked away before the job was done. All we are
saying is that we should not let that happen to East
Timor.

Success never comes easily, however. If it were a
natural phenomenon, we would see it every day. But
we do not see success every day. Success comes
through hard thinking, shrewd judgements, hard work,
dedication and commitment. The image we have
suggested using to help us to understand this is that of
a duck moving smoothly across a lake. All we see is
the smooth movement on the surface; we do not see the
legs paddling away ferociously below. But it is the
ferocious paddling below the surface that delivers the
smooth movement across the lake. It is the Security
Council's job to provide the ferociously moving legs
that will make East Timor a success story. We think it
can be done if we make the right decisions now and in
the coming months.

The fourth point is that the key to success in East
Timor is assured funding. In this context, assured
funding means assessed contributions. We believe that
these are required in order to protect the investments
made and the success achieved to date. But a much
more important point is this: if things go wrong in East
Timor, how much more will it cost us to go back in and
rebuild the success that we have today? I think that if,
even with limited contributions, we can sustain the
success story, we should do so, in order to avoid being
penny wise and pound foolish.

The fifth key point is that we have a
responsibility to the people of East Timor. Indeed, in
paragraph 87 of his report (S/2001/983), the Secretary-
General states:

"Initially, the responsibility to establish a
viable state in East Timor clearly belongs to its
people. The East Timorese have amply
demonstrated the depth of their commitment to
this task through sacrifice, imagination and
determination. I urge the Security Council to
ensure that these foundations are not undermined
and to consolidate the remarkable contribution it
has already made to this historic undertaking."

I suggest we heed the words of the Secretary-General
and remember our responsibility to the East Timorese
people.

Our sixth key point is this: let us think of the
implications for other United Nations endeavours of
failure in East Timor. We all know - it is no secret -
that the United Nations is now contemplating an
extremely difficult 4 indeed, possibly perilous -
United Nations mission in another corner of Asia,
called Afghanistan. A significant United Nations
success story in East Timor will increase the prestige
and standing of the United Nations. This, in turn, will
boost the credibility of the United Nations as it takes
on other difficult and continuing challenges, not just in
Afghanistan, but in Africa and the Balkans. Clearly, we
now know that, in the light of the events of 11
September and the global campaign against terrorism,
it is important that we deliver such success stories from
the United Nations.

Our seventh key point - and this is, for
Singapore, a very important point - is that this issue
has a strategic dimension for us. East Timor's future
and that of the region are inextricably linked. An
unstable East Timor will unsettle the entire region,
which has been undergoing various wrenching
transformations. This will complicate the region's
efforts to overcome the political and economic
problems it faces.

How the United Nations handles East Timor after
independence will therefore have wide-ranging
strategic consequences for our region as a whole. For
us, East Timor is not an abstract matter; it is not just
another agenda item. It is of vital and immediate
strategic importance to Singapore and to other
countries in our region.

To be sure, other members of the Council may
take a more detached view of East Timor. It is in the
nature of multilateral diplomacy that not every issue is
of equal or immediate significance to every member of
the Council. How the Council responds to this issue,
however, will inevitably colour how our region will
view other initiatives that may appear as detached from
our immediate concerns as East Timor may seem to
some Council members.

Finally, I am glad that we will endorse the report
and recommendations of the Secretary-General. The
reason this endorsement is important at this stage is
that it will send an important signal of confidence to
the people of East Timor, who must be wondering as
they move towards independence how much support
the international community will give them. With this
presidential statement we will be sending them a very
positive signal. Our only hope is that we will remember
this presidential statement when we return here in early
January to discuss the concrete structure of United
Nations assistance to East Timor.

