As this year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), Argentina wishes to reiterate its firm commitment to the implementation of the women, peace and security agenda. Today more than ever, we see the relevance of that agenda and its validity on the ground. In the current context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and in line with the statement made by the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, Jean-Pierre Lacroix, in his briefing of 22 June (see S/2020/572), Argentina would like to express its support for the United Nations focus on measures to protect personnel in the field, mitigate the impact and spread of COVID-19 and collaborate with national and local authorities, especially on efforts to empower women. Argentina believes that human rights have become an innovative catalyst for both peacekeeping operations and special political missions. Many of the current field missions have integrated human rights components into their mandates, which facilitates a wide range of actions and activities for a mission to strengthen its strategic position and credibility. United Nations peace operations, as one of the international community's key instruments for the maintenance of international peace and security, play a critical role in preventing human rights violations. That is because, on the basis of their mandates and rules of engagement, they monitor and report human rights violations and, if necessary, intervene in some cases, thus contributing to the successful promotion of peace processes. Argentina considers fundamental the work of the human rights divisions of peace operations on monitoring, investigating, verifying and reporting violence, human rights abuses and violations of international humanitarian law, including violence and abuses against children and women. The missions thus support the task of improving civil society capacity to monitor and report on human rights, in dialogue with the host States. Peacekeeping operations must pursue their commitment to the protection of civilians by promoting full respect for international law, in particular humanitarian and human rights law. When faced with human rights violations, missions must decide, in accordance with their mandates, how to react and intervene, what tools to use and whether follow-up is necessary. It is therefore of vital importance that troop-contributing countries adequately train the personnel being deployed to deal with such situations, in particular taking into account a gender perspective. There is a direct link between the public image of the United Nations before the world and the results achieved by peace operations in terms of the protection of civilians and the defence of human rights. Argentina would like to reiterate its firm commitment to the Secretary- General's policy of zero tolerance towards sexual abuse and exploitation in peace operations. Peacekeeping personnel must adhere to the highest standards of conduct and behave in a professional manner at all times in carrying out the mandate issued by the Security Council. Furthermore, Argentina categorically condemns acts of sexual violence in armed conflict, supports efforts to prevent such acts and promotes accountability and the punishment of those responsible. It also concurs with the Secretary-General's recommendations aimed at promoting access to justice for victims, the adoption of a holistic, victim-centred concept of justice and preventive actions under disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes in peacekeeping operations, among others. We consider it essential to protect, include, assist and reintegrate all victims of such violations, in collaboration with women's organizations and other civil society organizations, through the provision of multisectoral and multidisciplinary gender-sensitive assistance and support services and reparation measures. Such assistance should address the needs and protect the dignity and human rights of the victims through measures aimed at eliminating the multiple forms of discrimination, marginalization and stigmatization they often suffer during socioeconomic and cultural reintegration into their families and communities of origin. Argentina also considers that including a gender perspective in human rights work of peace missions is fundamental in order to address the full spectrum of human rights abuses. Thus, we must ensure that experts in gender, gender-based violence and sexual violence are included in those missions. The role of women in protection advisory bodies, monitoring, analysis and reporting on conflict-related sexual violence is also critical. Including gender units in human rights teams is positive for women's rights and the women, peace and security agenda. Increasing demands are being made on the personnel of United Nations peace operations. The challenges are ever greater and more complex, particularly in the area of promoting and protecting human rights, on which we must work actively. In that regard, Member States and the Secretariat must find ways to maintain the highest level of training for the implementation of increasingly diverse mandates, identify capacity gaps and work together to create peace operations that are fit for purpose. Argentina considers it a priority to continue these discussions and periodic meetings of Council members with troop- and police-contributing countries. We encourage the Council to continue working to achieve a constructive, transparent and inclusive dialogue among States and other stakeholders so as to continue to bring our best efforts to the societies and nations where the Organization is deployed.
