The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Nigeria.

My first words in my national capacity must be to
thank all five of our briefers, the largest number we have
had in a long time. I would like to thank Dr. Margaret
Chan for taking time out of her home leave to participate
in today's meeting, and Dr. David Nabarro, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, for his compassion,
passion and pursuit of Ebola. I thank Ambassador Tete
Antonio for his dedication to the African cause and
Mr. Per Thoresson for the work of his delegation in the
Peacebuilding Commission. And I thank Dr. Mosoka
Fallah very much for laying his life on the line and for
his spirit of sacrifice. I believe that together they have
all brought invaluable perspectives to the discussion
we are having today. Their in-depth comprehension of
the subject and this important issue underscores the
essence of our briefing today, and indeed reinforces the
urgency of concerted and relentless efforts in the fight
against the Ebola virus disease.

We all recall that the outbreak of Ebola in countries
in West Africa was not merely a national or regional
humanitarian crisis but a truly global one of almost
unprecedented proportions. It was a clear demonstration
of a health threat that had an alarming ability to ignore
national borders and spread rapidly to potentially any
country on this planet. The epidemic revealed gaps and
weaknesses in health sectors and proved a strain on
Government revenues, especially in the affected areas.
It is for that reason that we welcome the solidarity,
commitment and determination demonstrated by
people, Governments, institutions, non-governmental
organizations, civil society and private-sector entities
across the world. We recognize the contributions of all
those who have confronted and still continue to tackle
the outbreak with a collective resolve to achieve zero
infections and ensure that that is sustained at zero all
over the world.

On 29 May, the world welcomed the news that
Liberia had been declared Ebola-free. The celebration
turned out to be short-lived with the emergence of a
new case, and indeed of other new confirmed cases in
Sierra Leone, an indication of an ever-present threat
and a reminder to all that we must remain vigilant
until the Ebola virus is totally eradicated. I believe that
Nigeria, having encountered and vigorously overcome
the Ebola virus disease, can share lessons from its
experiences in the fight, which included high levels of
vigilance and contact-tracing, the rapid introduction of
the requisite control measures, strong Government and
community commitment, prompt intervention on the
part of the World Health Organization in collaboration
with the Government, and the unalloyed commitment
of dedicated health workers. We also embarked on
a robust compaign to create public awareness of the
disease, and successfully avoided the dissemination of
false information, rumours and undue panic among the
citizenry. At one point, in fact, it was taboo to shake
hands.

At the international level, there can be no doubt that
the adoption of the landmark resolution 2177 (2014), led
by the United States, strengthened the international
community in its willingness to act in a coordinated and
concerted manner to eradicate the disease. In our View,
what is now required is the institution of substantial
preventive and early-response mechanisms that focus
on capacity-building and the strengthening of health
delivery systems. On our part, we have contributed
$5.5 million to the solidarity fund instituted by the
Economic Community of West African States to tackle
the Ebola virus outbreak in the subregion. We think
that this and similar contributions could be effectively
utilized to put in place preventive measures as part
of a framework to reduce the response period to the
epidemic.

We must also underscore the need to forge strong
and sustainable regional and international partnerships,
as the African Union (AU) has demonstrated and as
we heard so eloquently from Ambassador Anto'nio.
Its sterling leadership in the fight against the Ebola
epidemic, mainly through the African Union support
to Ebola Outbreak in West Africa, is noteworthy.
Nigeria commends the AU for mobilizing the private
sector, which has contributed up to $32.6 million to the
Ebola Fund, as announced by the Chairperson of the
AU at the Ebola international conference on 10 July.
We also commend the Secretary-General for convening
the conference, which attracted huge participation
and tremendous expressions of financial and material
support for the affected countries.

We believe that Africa must take the lead in
addressing its own challenges. That is why we
appreciate the efforts that culminated in the recent
convening of the International Conference on Africa's
Fight against Ebola, held in Malabo only three weeks
ago. The Conference was successful in highlighting the
imperative to bridge the capacity gaps, especially in
the areas of human resources and the training of health
professionals in the affected countries.

We strongly support regional approaches to
tackling the Ebola virus and other pandemics. That is
why, in our view, the recently established Mano River
Union Consolidated Ebola Recovery Trust Fund is a
welcome initiative for allocation and disbursement
arrangements, in consultation with partners. The
commitment of African regional subregional
organizations clearly demonstrates that regional
arrangements have a crucial and pivotal role to play
in combating the ongoing threat of the Ebola virus
disease and, indeed, any future pandemic. The crisis
has necessitated that regional actors in Africa work in
concert with the rest of the international community
and relevant stakeholders, especially the World Health
Organization, to systematically tackle the epidemic.
When regional organizations assume leadership in
response to health emergencies, they engender a sense
of inclusiveness and are more likely to gain the trust of
local populations.

The United Nations Development Programme
report released earlier this year, to which the
representative of China referred earlier and which is
entitled "Recovering from the Ebola crisis", attests to
that, as it notes that "a regional perspective could have
greatly enhanced the effectiveness of the response" to
Ebola. The report recommends measures, such as joint
investigation missions, the sharing of best practices
between bordering districts and establishing a biosafety
protection level for laboratories. Nigeria is not only in
support of those recommendations, but also calls on
all Member States and partners to commence their
implementation as soon as possible. The achievement
of these goals will ensure that Ebola and all similar
epidemics will be controlled and contained in a more
timely and effective manner.

The recent vaccination trial currently being
undertaken in some affected countries is also worthy
of mention in this conversation. The results published
online recently in the Britishjournal The Lancet suggest
that the vaccine may be highly effective beginning 10
days after inoculation. Even as these studies continue,
there is an urgent need to make the vaccine more widely
available to the many people who are still exposed and
still susceptible to the infection. I believe that this is the
time for definitive and rapid collective action.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Sierra
Leone.

