Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia): Let me join
previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
organizing today's open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and for giving us this
opportunity to address the Security Council.

Georgia fully aligns itself with the statement of
the European Union.

More than a decade has passed since the Council
began deliberating this important subject. Throughout
the past 11 years, the Council has adopted six
resolutions and eight presidential statements on the
protection of civilians, but unfortunately these
measures are not sufficient. Civilians continue to be
severely impacted by armed conflicts around the world.
The deliberations of the Security Council clearly
indicate the need to further strengthen the protection of
civilians through compliance with the norms of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Every situation where civilians suffer from violence
caused by armed conflict requires more attention from
the international community.

I would like to take this opportunity to inform the
Security Council that Georgia recently became a party
to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict. By doing so, Georgia reaffirmed its
strong commitment to consolidated international
efforts aimed at protecting the rights of children
affected by armed conflicts worldwide.

Every time the opportunity arises to discuss this
important matter in open debate here in this Chamber,
my delegation provides the Council with detailed
information on the situation concerning civilians living
under foreign occupation in two regions of my country,
Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region.

Since our last address, nothing has changed on
the ground. Ethnicity-based and other gross and
massive violations of human rights law and
humanitarian law happen on a daily basis. The
population continues to suffer from insecurity and
discrimination; living under the threat of expulsion,
forced conscription and passportization; losing their
ethnic identity; and being denied their right to property
and education in their mother tongue, not to mention
the impact of conflict and violence, especially on the
younger generation. Moreover, the authorities in
effective control have taken measures to deprive these
individuals of their right to free movement across the
administrative borderline, which has turned into an
occupation line. We believe that such violence must be
seen as a fundamental violation of the right of every
individual to life and development, and universally
condemned.

Resolution 1894 (2009), adopted a year ago,
reaffirmed the need to focus on the issue of
humanitarian access. The very same message has been
reiterated in the Secretary-General's most recent report
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579), in which the Secretary-General suggests
that humanitarian access is the fundamental
prerequisite for humanitarian action. A similar message
has been delivered by Mr. Walter Kalin, Representative
of the Secretary-General on the Human Rights of
Internally Displaced Persons, in his reports on Georgia
and its occupied regions.

I would like once again to draw the Council's
attention to the problem of humanitarian access to the
Tskhinvali region of Georgia, where the occupying
Power continues to block humanitarian aid and
international humanitarian actors and demands that the
region be entered exclusively from its own territory.
This policy represents yet another clear infringement of
the principles of international humanitarian law, as well
as of paragraph 3 of the European Union-brokered

ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008 and paragraph 4
of General Assembly resolution 64/296 on the status of
internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region, Georgia,
of 7 September 2010. This resolution represents a
powerful manifestation of the will of the international
community to stand up for the rights of all who
continue suffer the consequences of armed conflict.

Here, I would like to stress that Georgia
continues to support the efforts of the United Nations
and its agencies to alleviate the suffering of civilians
on the ground. Let me assure the Council that my
country stands ready to work with the international
community in addressing current challenges and
ensuring genuine progress in this field.

