Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers
for their clear and detailed accounts. They have set out
why there has been such a rapid increase in humanitarian
needs in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As Under-Secretary-General Lowcock reported,
the number of people in need of aid in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has doubled in the past year.
Today 13.1 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance - the same number as in Syria. The United
Nations has declared the worst level of humanitarian
crisis - level 3 - in certain provinces, putting the
Democratic Republic of the Congo alongside only
Yemen, Syria and Iraq. Yet it is often absent from our
screens and daily briefings. We must not let it fall
further down our agenda.
We are extremely concerned about the impact of
the crisis on the most vulnerable, especially women and
girls, the disabled and children. The United Nations
Joint Human Rights Office reported that there was a
53 per cent increase in the number of victims of sexual
violence in 2017.

I thank the representative of the Encadrement des
Femmes Indigenes et des Menages Vulnerables for her
powerful testimony. Hope is a woman from Masisi, in
the east of the country, where 90 per cent of women
have been raped. Four men in military uniforms raped
her as she collected firewood for her family. The attack
left her pregnant and HIV-positive. She has since fled
to a temporary camp in Goma and can no longer feed
her eight children. They rely on humanitarian aid,
like 8 million other Congolese children. Two million
children currently face starvation.

Hope is one of 4.5 million internally displaced
people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo - the
highest number in Africa. More than 2 million people
have been displaced in the past year alone. Just in
the past year, the number of people displaced in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo matched the total
number of internally displaced persons in South Sudan.
There are an additional 740,000 refugees from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in neighbouring
countries as a result of ongoing hostilities.

International support is vital to address the crisis,
and the United Kingdom will continue to play a key
role. We have committed to spending $285 million on
humanitarian aid between 2017 and 2020. That support
will provide more than 3 million people with life-saving
assistance, including food, clean drinking water and
essential health care. To improve the challenging and
limited access for humanitarian actors, the support of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is crucial. While we welcome the commitments made
to facilitate the work of humanitarian organizations
and reduce tariffs for humanitarian imports, including
medicines and food, this Council and the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must see concrete
and sustained action.

In particular, we urge the Government to take
the following three steps. First, it should improve the
administrative and financial registration procedures
required for international non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) to operate lawfully in the
country, through consultations with NGOs themselves.
Secondly, it should reduce the bureaucracy for
humanitarian workers to obtain Visas and for essential
relief items to be cleared at customs. Finally, it needs to
ensure that security across the country is maintained so
that humanitarian organizations have sufficient access
to those most in need.

The upcoming donor conference on 13 April is
an opportunity for the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to demonstrate the progress
they have made on commitments to facilitate the
improvement of the humanitarian situation. It is also an
opportunity for the international community to pledge
our support to the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and to show them that the world remembers
Africa's forgotten crisis.

Let me be clear - humanitarian aid will provide
only temporary relief in this crisis. The key root cause
is political instability, which drives the deteriorating
security and humanitarian situations. Too often peaceful
protesters are met with violence for speaking out about
their political rights, in violation of their human rights.
A number of people have been killed in church-led
protests this year, which we must all condemn. Free, fair
and transparent elections must be held on 23 December.
With an estimated 46 million voters spread across the
world's eleventh largest country, that is no easy task.
For the elections to be successful, the right conditions
need to be created now.

The international community must remain
focused and united in our support for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We must remain
united in our expectations of its Government and in
our insistence on accountability and progress. We in
the Security Council need to work with the region and
subregion to do so.

Finally, it is with great sadness that we remember
the horrific, tragic murders of United Nations experts
Zaida Catalan and Michael Sharp, killed just over one
year ago in the Kasai region. The Council must continue
to push for accountability for their deaths. We call on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure that the
investigation is thorough and transparent and that all
those responsible are held to account. We should have a
full update on the progress on that investigation soon.

