Mr. Cook (United Kingdom): President Mugabe
began the discussion by referring to the renaissance
throughout Africa, and it is right that at the outset we
should recognize the improvements in that continent.
Democracy is spreading, good government is taking strong
roots in many countries, and the peaceful dismantling of
apartheid in South Africa is one of the world's great
success stories of the decade.

However, progress in some countries should not hide
from us the real problems which remain. Africa is the only
continent where there has been no increase in per capita
income over recent decades. We in Britain are proud of our
reputation as free traders, but, in truth, Africa is the
continent which has benefited the least from the opening up
of the global economy. Indeed, some analysts claim that
sub-Saharan Africa will be a net loser under the recent
Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT).

It need not surprise us that the continent with the least
economic progress has produced also the greatest conflicts.
Where people are poor and becoming poorer in real terms,
inevitably tension thrives. We all share the same shock at
the appalling atrocities that are occurring nightly in Algeria.
We all roundly condemn such terrorism and call for
improvement in the security of the lives of the ordinary
people. But we also need to acknowledge that the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) package in Algeria over
this decade has had the effect of reducing the standard of
living of many of its people.

The war on terrorism must be fought on three fronts:
better security, political mediation and also economic
development. And there are three important ways in which
the international community can be of help to Africa.

First, the eradication of poverty. Africa needs our aid.
The new Labour Government in Britain is committed to
reversing the decline in British aid. Our Chancellor
announced last week in Mauritius a new initiative on debt
relief which will benefit 300 million of the poorest people,
a high proportion of whom live in Africa. Economic
development is the theme of next month's Commonwealth
Heads of Government meeting in Britain. We must all, as
bilateral donors, as Members of the United Nations and as
members of the international financial institutes, use all the
instruments at our disposal to promote development in
Africa.

The second way we can help is with conflict
prevention and peacekeeping. Britain is pleased by the
new determination of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) to tackle Africa's problems in conjunction with
the United Nations. The tragic recent history of the Great
Lakes shows how important and also how difficult this is.
We cannot be complacent about the United Nations own
record. Historians will ask why it was that we did not
separate refugees from armed militias and allowed refugee
camps to become bases for military adventures. The only
answer we can give is that we will never again stand back
in the face of genocide.

Nor should we ever condone mass murder. Let us be
clear about the intent of those who placed the bomb on
the Pan Am flight which exploded over Lockerbie. Their
intention was to wipe out every passenger on that plane.
All of us around this table travel frequently by air. We
above all people have an interest in stopping aeroplanes'
being used as a vehicle for terrorism. The charge sheet
against the two Libyan nationals who have been indicted
is a full one which compellingly sets out the evidence that
they must answer and can answer only if they appear on
trial.

I welcome the statement by President Mugabe that
he wishes that trial to take place under Scots law. The
only place they can face trial under Scots law is in
Scotland. There is no legal authority for a Scots court to
meet outside Scotland; there is no legal authority in the
law of the Netherlands for a court of another jurisdiction
to sit in The Hague. We are then conscious of the
international interest in this case. That is why we have
recently invited Libya, the Organization of African Unity,
and any other country around this table that so wishes to
send international monitors to attend any trial in Scotland.

Justice, we know, must be seen to be done, but
justice must also be carried out. A fair trial which
protects the innocent but provides for justice against the
guilty is an important basis for universal human rights.

That brings me to the third area in which the
international community can be of assistance to Africa,
namely, human rights. The compelling lesson from the
recent history of Africa is that honest, open and
democratic government is crucial to success. Nigeria and
the former Zaire are countries rich in resources. The main
reasons why their people live in poverty are poor

 

government and self-interest on the parts of those who have
ruled them over past years. I welcome, then, the growing
pressure from within Africa and African organizations for
support for universal rights. The Harare Declaration, which
obliges the Commonwealth to take human rights criteria
into account, is an African declaration. We must all work
to ensure that such declarations, including those of the
United Nations, the OAU and the Commonwealth, are
observed and practised.

Finally, can I say that there are challenges ahead, and
there are problems for the present. But with a genuine
partnership, with the commitment of African Governments
and with the international community playing the part I
have described, then the future can be bright for Africa. It
should be a major objective of the Security Council to
enable the African lion to follow the Asian tiger into a
modern world of prosperity and peace.

