Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this emergency meeting, and Mr. Mladenov
for his comprehensive and concerning briefing.

Peru is appalled at the situation in Gaza, where at
least 60 Palestinians died only yesterday, in addition
to the dozens of people killed and thousands of
others wounded in recent days and weeks. We note
with particular sorrow that many of the Victims were
minors. These unacceptable actions run counter to
minimum standards of coexistence, international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights, and
they increase instability in the Middle East.

Peru believes that the acts of violence that took
place yesterday and in recent weeks, because of their
scope and repercussions in terms of human lives,
should be the subject of an exhaustive, transparent
and independent investigation that will make it
possible to assign responsibility. It will be necessary
to specifically determine the degree of compliance by
the Israeli authorities and troops with the principles of
proportionality, precaution and legality, given that they
maintain that they are acting in legitimate self-defence.
It will also have to be determined if the Palestinians
committed acts of violence and incitement beyond the
exercise of their rights and the freedoms of association
and expression, putting the lives of children and young
people at risk.

We agree with Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
on the need for Israel to calibrate the use of force and
minimize the use of live ammunition. Lethal force should
be used only as a last resort, under the imminent threat
of death or severe injury. Likewise, also in line with
what was stated by the Secretary-General, we believe
that Hamas and the leaders of the Gaza demonstrations
should keep the demonstrators away from the Israeli

fence and refrain from all Violent actions, provocations
and attempts to breach the fence. We stress once again
that in the context of any assessment of the violence
in Gaza, due attention must be paid to its root causes,
particularly the tragic humanitarian situation of its
population. Failing that, the consistent scarcity of goods
and basic services, as well as the shutting in of millions
of Palestinians, will continue to create an ideal scenario
for those who promote violence and extremism.

Peru believes that the deplorable events that
bring us together are yet further proof of the deep
and progressive deterioration of the political and
humanitarian conditions underlying the Palestinian
question as well as the lack of prospects for a definitive
solution. We note with concern that in this fragile
environment, unilateral decisions and actions taken
with respect to the city of Jerusalem could lead to an
even greater escalation of violence. We should recall
that the final status of Jerusalem must be negotiated
directly between the parties.

We call once again on political, religious and social
authorities and leaders, on both the Palestinian and
Israeli sides, to act with moderation and promote the
resumption of a high-level dialogue that will enable
their respective peoples and the Middle East as a whole
to move towards a sustainable peace. We reiterate our
call on the parties to resume direct negotiations, with
a view to reaching a definitive solution to the conflict
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
with two States living in peace, side by side, within
mutually and internationally recognized borders.

In conclusion, it is urgent that the Council act
with unity on this issue, not only with respect to
the resolutions adopted and the responsibility for
international peace and security assigned to it by the
Charter, but also because of the moral obligation to
defend life above all else.

