Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We consider the presence at today's Security
Council meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. She Okitundu, and of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, to be
very important and useful.

The Russian delegation is grateful to the
Secretary-General for his thorough report on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and for its
introduction by Mr. Guehenno. We share the cautious
optimism with which the report assesses developments
in that country. It is important that there be a general
observance of the ceasefire. There has been
incontrovertible progress in the disengagement of
forces in the conflict. Part of the Ugandan and
Zimbabwean contingents are leaving the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Preparations are well under
way for the establishment of the inter-Congolese
dialogue.

At the same time, we would feel it to be
premature to speak of the irreversibility of the peace
process. A great deal remains to be done to that end, in
particular by the parties to the conflict, which bear the
main responsibility for its settlement. On that basis, we
support the recommendation in the Secretary-General's
report to extend the present mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for 12 months, until 15 June
2002, while maintaining the current level of the
maximum agreed strength of the Mission's military
component. This would allow adequate preparation for
the onset of phase III of the peacekeeping operation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In our view, important steps in that direction
should include the completion of the process of the
disengagement of the parties to the conflict and the
demilitarization of Kisangani, in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 1304 (2000). It is also essential
to accelerate the work of the Political Committee of
participants in the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and of
the Joint Military Commission on the preparation of
detailed plans for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of the members of armed groups and for
the withdrawal of foreign troops from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

In our view, the logic behind the development of
the peace process requires the intensification of the
dialogue between the States involved in the conflict,
first and foremost through bilateral contacts between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbours. This is precisely where we see a window
of opportunity to resolve many key issues of the
settlement, notably those related to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of the so-called
negative forces.

It is essential to prevent the infiltration of armed
groups from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
into the territories of neighbouring States, which would
only broaden the conflict. In that context, I must note
our great concern over the involvement of the Front de
liberation du Congo in the recent fighting in the
Central African Republic. We feel that this emerging
trend calls for the closest attention and we would be
grateful to the Secretary-General for specific
recommendations on how to counter it.

The efforts of the parties to the conflict towards
reconciliation will be met with support from the United
Nations and its Mission to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We welcome the Secretary-General's
intention at this early stage to step up the Mission's
activity in the civilian, political, human rights,
humanitarian and socio-economic spheres. Efforts
aimed at the economic recovery of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should be a basic component of
the general strategy for the settlement of the conflict.

In that context, I should like especially to note the
importance of the project to reopen river navigation
between regions of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that are under the control of the conflicting
parties, the significance of which for the overall
settlement cannot be overemphasized. A useful role in
planning future tasks will have to be played by the
civilian police contingent, which has now appeared for
the first time in MONUC. However, it is important that
all Secretariat measures to develop the mission in
accordance with the defined concept should clearly
correspond to the mandate agreed by the Council and
should be thoroughly planned and based on the
necessary logistical resources.

