Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, let
me warmly welcome Mr. Haris Silajdzie, Chairman of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank
him for his important contribution.

I should also like to welcome the High
Representative, my friend and countryman
Mr. Valentin Inzko. We would like to thank him for the
report he submitted to the Council (see S/2010/235).
We fully share his assessment of recent developments
and the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would
like to reaffirm our full and continued support for him
and his Office, as well as for the efforts that he has
been undertaking to fully implement the Dayton
Accords and to facilitate reform. High Representative
Inzko recalled the contribution my country was able to
make on this Council in 1992. Eighteen years later, as
partners and neighbours of Bosnia and Herzegovina, at
this very Council table we look back to that
contribution with great satisfaction.

We would like to align ourselves with the
statement to be delivered by the delegation of the
European Union (EU), but I should also like to make
the following additional points.

We congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina on its
progress on the path towards Euro-Atlantic integration.
In its assessment, the European Commission has
attested that Bosnia and Herzegovina meets most of the
benchmarks set out in the visa road map. We are also
encouraged by the fact that, in Tallinn on 22 and
23 April, NATO foreign ministers offered Bosnia and
Herzegovina a Membership Action Plan, and we hope
that the condition to find an appropriate solution
regarding immovable defence property will be fulfilled
in due course.

We are pleased by the genuine commitment
shown in recent weeks and months to achieving
regional reconciliation. Both the adoption by the
Serbian Parliament of a resolution on 31 March
condemning the massacres in Srebrenica and offering
apologies to the families and relatives of the victims
and the visits of the Presidents of Serbia and Croatia
have clearly added to the stability of the entire Western
Balkans region. We believe that Chairman Silajdzie's
own forthcoming visit to Belgrade will provide another
opportunity to substantially improve regional
cooperation.

Unfortunately, progress on other important and
long-overdue reforms has been slow and has in many
cases stalled completely. We are very concerned by the
fact that this lack of progress is mostly due to
deliberate obstruction directed against the functioning
of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Fulfilment of
the five objectives and two conditions for the closure
of the Office of the High Representative, the
implementation of the recent rulings of the European
Court of Human Rights and the adoption of a census
law applicable to the entire State are prerequisites for
the proper functioning of the State. We also hope to see
progress on constitutional reforms after the elections
on 3 October. These reforms will increase efficiency,
help Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement the reforms
necessary for accession to the European Union and
thereby contribute to stability and economic growth, to
the benefit of the entire population of the country.

We appeal to all political parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to refrain from the use of divisive and
nationalistic rhetoric in the upcoming presidential and
parliamentary elections. We are particularly concerned
by the increase in the number of legal and political
actions that have been directed against State
institutions, competencies and laws, as well as
challenges to the authority of the High Representative,
including the adoption of a law by the National
Assembly of Republika Srpska on the potential holding
of a referendum. In this respect, it is particularly
worrying that political leaders of Republika Srpska
have repeatedly questioned the sovereignty and
sustainability of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is not
acceptable.

Against the background of the global financial
crisis, the upcoming elections will be a crucial
opportunity to provide the population with serious
choices pertaining to necessary economic and social
reforms. We agree with the assessment of the High
Representative that the European Union-led
peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina still
plays a key role in contributing to a safe and secure

environment that helps the Office of the High
Representative and other international actors to
implement their mandates. This assessment is also
reflected in the conclusions of the European Union
Foreign Affairs Council on 25 January and by
resolution 1895 (2009). Austria will maintain its
commitment as one of the core troop contributors to
that operation.

Finally, let me reiterate our firm conviction that
the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entire
region lies within the European Union. That is by far
the best way to create a broad zone of stability in the
Balkans. This message was again confirmed at a high-
level expert seminar that the Austrian Foreign Minister
Michael Spindelegger hosted in Vienna on 12 May.
Experts from the Western Balkans and the European
Union addressed the current political, economic and
social challenges of the Western Balkans with a view to
EU integration. We hope that these discussions and the
resulting recommendations will contribute in a positive
fashion to the debate on the future enlargement of the
European Union that will be an important part of the
upcoming EU-Western Balkans summit in Sarajevo on
2 June.

