Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan is pleased that the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2353 (2017). I would like to thank Mr. Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his informative briefing, as well as for his active
engagement and efforts to bring peace and stability to
South Sudan.

Regrettably, Japan must once again express its
deep concern about the situation in South Sudan.
Many innocent people, including women and children,
continue to suffer from the ongoing violence across
the country, despite strong calls from the Council, the
region and the international community to immediately
cease hostilities. For instance, in April, tens of
thousands of people were displaced in Upper Nile
owing to the fighting and the Government's offensive
on the west bank of the River Nile. Around one-third
of the entire population is now internally displaced or
living as refugees in neighbouring countries, while
two-thirds of the population are in need of food and
other humanitarian assistance.

Japan is deeply concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation and reiterates its call for the
parties to immediately cease hostilities and for President
Kiir and the Government of South Sudan to fully
uphold their primary responsibility to protect civilians.
In that regard, Japan welcomes the commencement
of the national dialogue process, as well as the recent
declaration of a unilateral ceasefire by President Kiir.
The ceasefire must be observed in every corner of
the country and we urge opposition forces to do the
same. The national dialogue will be productive only
if it is genuinely inclusive, which requires the steering
committee to listen impartially to all parties.

Japan appreciates the engagement of President
Konare, African Union High Representative for South
Sudan, in consultation with the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, the United Nations and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and
asks for his further efforts in this critical phase.

Last week, Japan dispatched to South Sudan
Ambassador Yoshifumi Okamura, a former colleague
based in Tokyo, who is mandated to work on African
affairs. He called on President Kiir and other leaders
to follow through on their commitments concerning
the cessation of hostilities, unimpeded humanitarian
access, the rapid and smooth deployment of the
Regional Protection Force and the national dialogue. He
also met with leaders in African countries, including
President Museveni of Uganda, President Conde of
Guinea, Chairperson of the African Union, and Foreign
Minister Workneh Gebeyehu of Ethiopia to encourage
their further engagement.

Japan welcomes the Secretary-General's recent
meetings with relevant regional leaders on the
margins of the London Somalia Conference. Regional
organizations and leaders play a crucial role in
improving the dire situation and invigorating the
political process. We encourage them to continue to
work with the Secretary-General on points of leverage
with the South Sudanese leadership.

Finally, amid those challenges, the first wave of
the Regional Protection Force finally arrived in South
Sudan in April, eight months after its authorization
by the Council. The Regional Protection Force's full
deployment must be completed expeditiously so that
it can implement its mandated tasks. We hope that
that will improve the situation on the ground, not
only in Juba but throughout the country. We urge the
Government of South Sudan and the troop-contributing
countries to further cooperate to that end.

In that regard, Japan strongly condemns the attacks
on the temporary base of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) in Leer on 3 May. All
parties must fully cooperate with UNMISS, including
by observing the relevant resolutions and the status of
forces agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of the Republic of South Sudan concerning
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.

