Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): My first words must be to
thank you, Sir, and to express my appreciation for your
introduction of the draft annual report.

I want to state that members of the Council had
the opportunity to review and reach agreement on the
draft report prior to this meeting. We look forward to
its adoption by the Council.

As President of the Security Council for the
month of July 2010, Nigeria was responsible for the
preparation of the introduction of the annual report of
the Council to the General Assembly. During the
drafting process, we relied principally on the monthly
assessments and the views expressed by all Council
members. To ensure that it was accurate and adequately
reflected the Council's work, activities and outcomes,
it was revised several times following comments and,
sometimes, language provided by Council members.
The report covers all the meetings of the Council
in their various formats, the field missions undertaken
by the Council during the period, and the thematic
discussions covering a wide range of issues.

Following the precedent set by Viet Nam in 2008
and Uganda in 2009, an informal meeting with Member
States to exchange views on the annual report took place
on 21 October. As expected, Uganda, in its capacity as
President of the Council in July 2009, and the United
Kingdom, in its capacity as incoming President of the
Council in November 2010, when the report is expected
to go to the General Assembly, co-chaired the meeting.
It was a very successful meeting, I must say. Not only
was it useful for fostering closer working relationships
between the Council and non-Council members, but it
also served to demonstrate the Council's openness and
responsiveness on the question of its working methods.
I must say that it was a very hospitable audience.
Indeed, the meeting enhanced the transparency of the
Council in the eyes of non-Council members, and we
hope that this laudable trend will be sustained in the
future.

Finally, I would like to express my delegation's
appreciation and gratitude to all Council members, as
well as former members, for their contribution, input
and cooperation. Last but not least, we thank and
commend the Secretariat for its invaluable support and
assistance, without which we would not have had the
report in its present form.

