Mr. Deng (South Sudan): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on Australia's assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of November,
and by assuring you of my delegation's support and
cooperation during your tenure. We welcome the
Council's renewal of the the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), and would
like to express our profound appreciation to the troop-
and police-contributing countries for their enormous
contribution to the peacekeeping force, despite the
unfavourable conditions in which they operate. Allow
me also to express my gratitude to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his most recent report on South Sudan
(S/2014/821), and his constructive engagement with
developments in our country.

The current conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan can be resolved only by the people of South
Sudan, albeit with the assistance of the international
community. As stated by the Secretary-General,

"the primary responsibility for resolving the
problems of South Sudan rests squarely with its
leaders. The international community can support
these efforts, but it cannot deliver a solution from
outside" (S/2014/821, para. 75).

It is from this premise that the Government has sincerely
committed itself to the peace process with the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition
since the outbreak of violence in December 2013.
Despite repeated ceasefire violations and retaliations,
the Government remains optimistic that an amicable
peace agreement is possible and indeed imperative.

The frustration of the international Community
with the pace oftalks in Addis Ababa is understandable,
but a sustainable solution to the current crisis in South
Sudan cannot be achieved by the imposition of sanctions,
which is now being talked about and is alluded to in
the report. It is a well-known fact that sanctions hardly
ever achieve their intended objective. Instead, they tend
only to harden positions towards confrontation rather
than cooperation. We believe that the international
community can play a positive role by engaging both
parties constructively to expedite the conclusion of an
agreement, as was the case with the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement of 2005, which brought an end to
the long civil war in the Sudan. As President Kiir has
noted, the slow pace in the talks is, at least in part,
attributable to the frequent adjournments of the talks
by the mediators of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development. In fact, the present adjournment is
said to be giving the opposition rebel commanders the
opportunity to sort out their differences.

On the humanitarian front, the situation in the
war-affected areas remains grave. The Government
is thankful that a catastrophic famine appears to
have been averted. This is largely due to the steadfast
efforts of our international partners, non-governmental
organizations and the friends of South Sudan. We are
most grateful to them all.

The situation of the internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in the United Nations camps across the country
remains of great concern. The current report documents
incidents of violence in the UNMISS camps that are
perpetrated against other IDPs, humanitarians and
UNMISS personnel, caused by unruly youth under
the influence of substances. It is our sincere belief
that the UNMISS camps should be only temporary
arrangements or a transition to durable solutions. They
cannot be an alternative to addressing the root causes
of internal displacement and finding durable solutions.
We hope that the ongoing discussions and consultations
between the Inspector General of Police and
humanitarian partners, as well as with the community
leaders in the protection sites, aimed at improving the
security environment in selected neighbourhoods in
Juba to facilitate voluntary returns of IDPs, will soon
bear fruit.

The reported incidents of rampant violations of
human and humanitarian rights, including rape and
other acts of sexual violence, allegedly committed by
the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA), confront
us with a dilemma. On the one hand, as I have often
stated, we do not want to be in denial or to appear to
condone such outrageous criminal violations. On the
other hand, many of the incidents described in the
report appear to be just allegations. As in most cases,
allegations of such repulsive behaviour are likely to
provoke defensiveness. It is therefore important that
such allegations be substantiated so that the perpetrators
can be apprehended and brought to justice.

The Government is genuinely intolerant of these
alleged practices, which are a gross violation of our
own cultural values. This is evident in the fact that
during the visit of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence to South Sudan
in October, the President signed with her a joint
communique on addressing conflict-related sexual
violence. As explained in the report, this agreement
contains a set of practical and political commitments
to ending the use of sexual violence in conflict, and
provides for the creation of an action plan for the SPLA
and the national police. Its main objective is to ensure
the proper investigation of sexual violence crimes,
the establishment of accountability mechanisms, the
exclusion of perpetrators of sexual violence from
amnesty provisions, and the explicit addressing of
sexual violence in the peace process, as well as in
the monitoring and implementation of cessation of
hostilities agreement.

The Government has taken serious steps in
addressing the issue of the recruitment of children
into the army or their use for military purposes.
The Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, in
collaboration with the Ministry of Justice, made
constructive proposals and amendments to the SPLA
Act of 2009. The amendments, which became part of
the new SPLA law, set out punitive measures against
SPLA officials who recruit children or use schools for
military purposes, and commit other violations against
children. Furthermore, the Government has been
working closely with UNMISS in launching different
initiatives and campaigns aimed at bringing to an end
the recruitment and military use of children by 2016.

The removal of capacity-building from the
UNMISS mandate has impacted negatively on the
vitally important area of developing the capacity of
a new and weak State, especially in the area of law
enforcement agencies and institutions. As indicated
in the Secretary-General's report, "[t]he lack of a
meaningful judicial system continues to have an
impact on due process protections" (ibid., para. 47) in
South Sudan. In light of the weakness of institutions in
South Sudan, which affects the Government's capacity
to provide essential services in conformity with
international standards, it would be advisable for the
Council to reconsider and reinstate that crucial element
of the UNMISS mandate. We also join the Secretary-
General in urging international partners and donors to
redouble their efforts towards meeting the humanitarian
funding shortfall.

In conclusion, we once again reiterate our
appreciation for the extension of the UNMISS mandate
for another six months, and remain committed to close
cooperation with the Mission.

