Mr. Ingelfsson (Iceland): Allow me to add the
voice of the Government of Iceland to this important
debate. The Security Council is now faced with one of
its greatest challenges in modern times. Can it cope
with its fundamental objective, which is to maintain
international peace and security? Hopes are high
among States Members of the United Nations. During
the past few months the Security Council has
demonstrated resolve and unity in addressing the
serious threat to international peace deriving from the
failure by Iraq to respect its obligations under Article
25 of the Charter to "agree to accept and carry out the
decisions of the Security Council".

Through resolution 1441 (2002), the Council has
unanimously given Iraq an ultimatum and a final
opportunity to comply with its demands. They are the
full and effective disarmament of Iraq, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
stretching back to 1991. Baghdad should not be in any
doubt concerning what is required of it.

Through its immediate, active and unconditional
cooperation, Iraq has the opportunity - and indeed an
obligation - to provide for the easing of the grave
situation that the international community now faces.
There is still time for a peaceful resolution of this
crisis, and it is our sincere hope that it can be achieved.

The United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission and the International Atomic
Energy Agency have our full support, and we
commend the able leadership of Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei. We do not believe, however, that a
strengthened inspection regime will necessarily provide
us with the answers so long awaited from the Iraqi
authorities. What is lacking is Iraq's demonstration of
full cooperation and its provision of all the required
information without further delay.

Mr. Blix has stated that "the period of
disarmament through inspection could be short if Iraq
chooses to cooperate fully, as required by the Security
Council". To that end, the inspectors should be given
more time. Firm pressure must be maintained.

However, the international community's apparent
lack of unity with regard to the ways to proceed has
been of some concern. It is of the utmost importance
that unanimous decisions by the Security Council be
respected and that Member States be prepared to
enforce them. The threat of serious consequences, as
stipulated in resolution 1441 (2002), must not be
compromised. The credibility of the Council and of the
United Nations is at stake.

The use of force must always be the last resort for
the Security Council. If, however, other measures
provided to it by the Charter have proved to be
inadequate, the Council must face its responsibility.

