Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First, the Russian delegation welcomes the
fact that today's meeting of the Security Council is
being chaired by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bulgaria, Mr. Solomon Passy. Your participation,
Mr. Minister, in this meeting underlines the importance
of the question before the Council.

We would like to express our appreciation to
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his thorough
briefing on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and on
the situation in Kosovo and the region.

An important step in the settlement process in
Kosovo is the establishment of a mechanism
monitoring compliance with internationally recognized
standards in Kosovo, on the basis of the principle of
"standards before status" and under the Security
Council's comprehensive political monitoring.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo, Mr. Holkeri, has issued a
document on standards for Kosovo which establishes a
set of criteria for assessing the region's movement
towards establishing a multi-ethnic democratic society
in which human rights are equally guaranteed for all, in
particular the rights of the members of all Kosovo
communities of all ethnic origins with respect to
security, mobility and return to homeland areas.

In that regard, we are greatly perplexed by the
removal, under pressure by Kosovo Albanian leaders,
of information from that text: the removal of the
preamble, which contains important basic provisions,
including references to resolution 1244 (1999), the
Constitutional Framework and applicable law in the
region. That approach is hardly in keeping with the
international community's objectives in Kosovo.

We believe that the region must carry out
significant work to achieve the standards set by the
international community. In spite of some progress, a
great number of important challenges are still far from
being resolved. Key requirements not being fulfilled
relate to the status of non-Albanian residents of
Kosovo and the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Reliable security does not exist
equally for the entire population of the region. There is
a lack of equality in fundamental rights and freedoms,
including the right to equal employment opportunities.
There is inadequate representation of minorities,
particularly Serbs, in the agencies of the region's
Provisional Institutions.

Despite the general decline in crime levels, as
noted in the most recent monthly report of the Kosovo
Force, there are still serious, clearly ethnically-
motivated incidents of violence. We condemn all acts
of violence, especially those with ethnic overtones. We
would like to convey our condolences with respect to
the incident that occurred in northern Mitrovica. As
well, we believe it is appropriate to draw the Council's
attention to the particular responsibility of the leaders
and the authorities for preventing situations in which,
given the elevated tensions and the particular
sensitivity of the parties, such acts could provoke
uncontrolled reactions, with unforeseeable
consequences.

The statements by the leaders of the regional
Provisional Institutions on their commitment to the
multi-ethnicity of the area must be followed by real
actions. Unfortunately, we see that in practice, the
interests of minorities still often go ignored. Like other
members of the Council, we are convinced that without
a radical improvement in the situation with respect to
these matters, the process of building a democratic and
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo will continue to fail to
gain traction.

A substantive element of the standards for
Kosovo is the establishment of a direct dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina on technical matters of
common concern. We hope that talks in the working
groups will begin in the very near future. We cannot
help but be concerned by the attempts of the leadership
of the regional Provisional Institutions to question the
powers of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, as was the case in particular on the question
of applicable law in Kosovo. We believe that such
actions demonstrate a lack of willingness on the part of
the Kosovo Albanian leaders to comply with the
standards set by the international community in
Kosovo.

We reaffirm our support for the work of the head
of UNMIK, Mr. Holkeri. We believe there is need for
full compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) on the
basis of the agreed principle of "standards before
status". The launching of a political process designed
to determine the final status of Kosovo must entail
compliance with the standards established by the
international community and the building in the region
of a democratic, multi-ethnic society. Based on that,
Russia will continue to participate actively in collective
efforts in the search for a just, balanced and lasting
solution to the question of Kosovo.

