Mr. Sidikou: I am honoured and pleased to address
the Security Council today on the situation in Somalia.

I would like to brief the Council on three important
developments - the prevailing security situation in
Somalia; my thoughts on the recently concluded joint
African Union-United Nations benchmarking exercise;
and the outcomes of our investigation of sexual
exploitation and abuse and the steps that the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has taken to
ensure an effective prevention and response regime.
There have also been significant political developments,
especially relating to the federalization process, the
constitutional review and the electoral process, that my
Office has been supporting, together with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and
the Federal Government of Somalia, as my good friend
and colleague Nick Kay discussed in his briefing this
morning.

With regard to the security situation, the overall
prevailing security situation in Somalia can be described
as having elevated terrorism threat levels characterized
by a rise in Al-Shabaab activities, mainly owing to
an increased number of attacks involving improvised
explosive devices and targeted assassinations. Overall,
Al-Shabaab activities are likely to continue, since its
intention of carrying out terrorist attacks and its ability
to do so have not diminished. Targeted assassinations
seem to be their preferred tactic, owing to their high
effectiveness and low cost. In response, however,
we - and by that I mean AMISOM, together with
our Somali counterparts - have boosted our joint
operations, especially in urban centres, in order to
continue to disrupt Al-Shabaab activities.

In terms of offensive operations, I should emphasize
that AMISOM. troops, together with the Somali
national army, have not relented in our efforts to defeat
Al-Shabaab. Operation Eagle and Operation Indian
Ocean have shown that AMISOM's offensive operations
against Al-Shaabab can produce positive results,
particularly in reducing that terrorist group's territorial
control. I would also like to assure the Council that we
will be reinvigorating operations against Al-Shabaab
as part of the outcomes and recommendations of the
recently concluded joint African Union-United Nations
mission, and that there will soon be a more prominent
resumption of offensive operations in some areas. For
obvious operational security reasons, I will leave it at
that.

I would now like to turn to the second issue,
relating to my thoughts on the outcomes of the joint
African Union-United Nations mission on benchmarks
for a United Nations peacekeeping operation in
Somalia, and its recommendations for the next steps
in the military campaign begun last month in Somalia
from 14 to 25 April. AMISOM, the African Union (AU)
Commission and UNSOM. have initiated consultations
with the troop-contributing countries and are working to
secure their necessary buy-in on the recommendations.
The joint mission reviewed the benchmarks for a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia
as outlined in resolution 2124 (2013), and found that,
while progress was being made on various benchmarks
at varying speeds, the situation in Somalia as a whole
would not be conducive to the deployment of a United

Nations peacekeeping operation until the end of 2016,
at the earliest. It is gratifying that, in its draft report,
the joint AU-United Nations mission appreciates
that, with the targeted support of partners, there has
been considerable success in reducing Al-Shabaab's
territorial control and degrading its leadership. That, in
turn, has created the essential space for the unfolding
of the political process, especially the federalization
process, albeit with uneven progress across the regions.

The joint offensives of AMISOM. and the Somali
national army have also provided the space needed
for stabilization efforts in the recovered areas, despite
the fact that a number of important factors have posed
challenges to it. While the joint operations were able to
recover territory, Al-Shabaab has still retained certain
capabilities, mostly employing asymmetric warfare
tactics, that have affected the population's confidence in
the army and AMISOM. and impeded further necessary
action against it, largely because AMISOM. does
not have the configuration and resources to respond
accordingly. In particular, the force's effectiveness
was undermined by a lack of most of the force enablers
and multipliers authorized under resolution 2124
(2103), including the helicopters capable of giving it
the degree of agility and flexibility it needs to adjust
to Al-Shabaab's change of tactics. Given the extent of
the threat and the status of the political process, ending
the surge in uniformed personnel before the end of
2016 could run a serious risk of reversals that could
derail Vision 2016's objectives and risk the success of
the investment that has been made by all concerned.
Finally, therefore, AMISOM's continued presence is
potentially required until the end of 2016.

I therefore welcome the recommendation to extend
the surge with a structured, targeted reconfiguration
of AMISOM. designed to respond to evolving realities.
That extension will enable AMISOM. to achieve three
interlocking objectives. First, it will allow the Mission
to resume offensive operations against Al-Shabaab,
which will be conducted under an enhanced AMISOM
chain of command, in a cross-sector manner when
necessary, with specialized capabilities based on the
use of Mission assets, including helicopters which may
be generated from within or without the continent while
recognizing the limitations and risks involved.

Secondly, the extension will enable the consolidation
and stabilization of the recovered areas, which will
require a gradual shift to police and necessitate an
agreement on the rebalancing of AMISOM. uniformed
personnel numbers at the right time, dictated by an
agreed sequencing of operations that is continually
adapted. The enabling of policing will free up troops
for area security operations, which is a requirement
for stabilization. In addition, the establishment of a
joint AMISOM/UNSOM. civilian presence will further
enhance the recovery and stabilization efforts.

Finally, the extension will enable AMISOM. to
secure main supply routes and other routes connecting
with newly recovered areas and interim regional
administrations, which will ensure free access Within
and through the newly recovered areas, which in turn
will facilitate governance and the delivery of services
and humanitarian assistance. It will also enable
freedom of movement and force protection for military,
Government and local authorities and enable resupply
and access for commercial and market traffic.

While the foregoing are noble objectives to which
I am sure the Council will give its blessings, I would
like to highlight some key assumptions on which these
laudable objectives are premised and to which we need
to give more careful consideration. If AMISOM. is to
achieve these objectives and if we are to make the right
decisions at this crucial point in our support to Somalia,
we will need to make some hard decisions regarding,
in particular, first, our support to the Somalia security
forces. The contribution, assumed by the Somali
national army on the basis ofresolution 2124 (2013), did
not materialize fast enough. When it did materialize,
the sustainability of the required follow-through
operations was severely constrained by a combination
of shortage in resources and considerable weaknesses
in the chain of command. Today, the Somali authorities
have developed the Guulwade (Victory) Plan, which
we should all support in a coordinated manner. This is
critical if we are to turn the Somali national army into
a more effective partner to AMISOM.

Secondly, we will have to make a decision regarding
the logistical support package to AMISOM. Although
it has significantly evolved, logistical support has seen
shortfalls that have been an important element among
many that contributed to the lack of a sustained pace
in operations. The approach in logistical support must
therefore take a new direction. The planned strategic
review of the United Nations Support Office for
the African Union Mission in Somalia (UNSOA) is
therefore critical and should, inter alia, recognize the
need for an expansion of UNSOA's quantitative and
qualitative capacities as well as the need to adapt the
Support Office to the nature of AMISOM. operations,
as well as to its other clients.

Thirdly, the benchmarking exercise proposed two
recommendations on the role of the AMISOM. police
component. The first is the deployment of formed police
units to provide operational and logistical support and
bolster the confidence of the national police force. The
second is to deploy individually deployed police officers
to provide support for the vetting, recruitment, training
and mentoring of local Somali police personnel.

As Somalia continues to work towards establishing
rule of law institutions, the Federal Government has
signed memorandums of understanding with the
interim regional administrations. This is a timely
development, and AMISOM. police will support the
recruitment, vetting, training and deployment of 600
police officers for each of the administrations. The role
of AMISOM. police in support of Somalia necessitates
the establishment of a support package for the Somali
police force that comprises elementary infrastructure,
rudimentary equipment and sustainment items required
to commence policing operations in the regions. The
final report of the benchmarking exercise jointly
developed by both the AU and the United Nations will
be submitted to the Security Council soon, and I look
forward to the Council's consideration and endorsement
of the report's recommendations.

I would like to conclude by addressing the outcomes
of the independent investigations of allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse allegedly perpetrated
by AMISOM. personnel as reported by Human Rights
Watch in June 2014. As I have stated on several
occasions, I would like to reiterate solemnly before
Council that AMISOM's leadership is committed to
enforcing the African Union's zero tolerance policy.
We will continue to respect the dignity of all Somali
women and girls and uphold the religious and cultural
values of Somalia as AMISOM. continues to implement
its mandate to restore peace and stability in the country.

Beyond concluding that two of the allegations
contained in the Human Rights Watch report are
indeed cases of proven sexual exploitation and abuse
perpetrated by AMISOM. soldiers, the investigation team
made a number of observations and recommendations
to strengthen existing mechanisms that the AU
Commission and the troop- and police-contributing
countries to AMISOM. have put in place to address
sexual exploitation and abuse. These recommendations
are informing our response and we have already taken
the following specific actions.

I have issued directives to the Force Commander,
the Police Commissioner and other senior
Mission leadership to immediately implement the
recommendations contained in the investigation report.
We have moved all the shops out of the AMISOM
base camp. We are restructuring the camp to prevent
unauthorized access by AMISOM. personnel to Somalis
living within the Mission area. The AU Commission
has recruited and deployed a Conduct and Discipline
Officer to the Mission. We are instituting a hotline
in AMISOM. in order to specifically respond to the
challenges for victims and witnesses that were noted in
the investigation report.

As a means of encouraging more reporting of sexual
exploitation and abuse cases and confidence-building,
the AU Commission, with input from AMISOM, has
developed a whistle-blower policy that we expect will
be passed by the policy organs of the AU this year.
The Commission, with input from AMISOM, has also
prepared a draft annex to the existing memorandum
of understanding between the Commission and the
troop- and police-contributing countries intended to
set up a more robust response to sexual exploitation and
abuse and improve prevention efforts, accountability
and reporting of the troop- and police-contributing
countries on sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as
to ensure that victims receive the support they need.

Given that conduct and discipline is primarily a
responsibility of the troop- and police-contributing
countries, the Commission has shared the detailed
report with those countries and requested their response
and comments on the findings ahead of a meeting with
them and Somalia in order to agree on the concrete
steps to be taken to implement the recommendations
contained in the report.

