Ms. Loj (Denmark): I, too, would like to thank
the Special Representative, Ambassador Qazi, for his
statement, as well as Ambassador Sanders for her
statement on behalf of the Multinational Force.

While the political process in Iraq since 2003 in
many ways has been successful, the current situation in
Iraq presents a very significant challenge to the
international community. As described in the
Secretary-General's report, over the last three months
the situation in Iraq has further deteriorated in many
parts of the country, with a significant rise in sectarian
violence, insurgent and terrorist attacks, as well as
criminal activities, which are now at an all-time high.

Unfortunately, in this difficult environment the
Iraqi Government's efforts to foster national
reconciliation, stem the violence and accelerate Iraq's
economic development have not met with sufficient
success.

We remain deeply concerned about the violence
perpetrated by the insurgents. The number of human
rights violations continues to rise in Iraq in spite of the
Government's resolve to promote the protection of
human rights and the rule of law. As noted by the
Secretary-General, in large areas of Baghdad and in
other parts of the country, insurgent and militia
activities remain uncontrolled. The number of
internally displaced Iraqis is growing and is now
estimated at about 450,000. Moreover, reports of
mistreatment of detainees at the hands of the Iraqi
police and security forces continue. We urge the Iraqi
Government to do more to ensure the protection of the
rights of all Iraqis. The new Iraq must do better than
the old Iraq.

In his observations, the Secretary-General points
to the importance of ensuring a fully inclusive political
process focused on reaching out to all communities, as
well as sharing the country's resources, with a view to
the broader national interest. Secondly, the
Government must establish a monopoly on the use of
force and address the violence in its many forms,
including dealing with the militias. Thirdly, there is a
growing need for a regional environment supportive of
Iraq's transition.

The international community must thus continue
its commitment to support Iraq at this critical time.
This needs to be done in a variety of ways. In
particular, regional and international backing can help
make the Iraq Compact a success and provide the
people of Iraq with a fresh start.

At the request of the Iraqi Government,
resolution 1723 (2006), adopted on 28 November,
renews the mandate of the Multinational Force until
the end of 2007. The mandate may be terminated at any
time if the Iraqi Government so wishes. The continued
presence of the Force is a clear expression of the
commitment of the international community to support
the Iraqi people.

As underlined by the Prime Minister in his letter
to the Security Council dated 11 November, security
and stability are the responsibility of the Iraqi
Government, and the Iraqi security forces will
increasingly play a greater role. The members of the
Multinational Force have long supported the training of
the Iraqi security forces, and those efforts are expected
to continue.

We are pleased to see the increasing capabilities
among the Iraqi security forces, which made transfer of
security responsibility in Al Muthanna and Dhi Qar
possible this year. We hope that, with stronger and
more confident national forces and with the continued
support of the Multinational Force, the level of
violence will decrease and the main focus will be on
the reconstruction of Iraq.

In addition, international support for Iraq's
reconstruction in the form of financial assistance and
contributions to capacity-building must continue and
be sustained.

As mentioned, the launch of the Iraq Compact
this summer marks a new departure for international
support for the realization of the Iraqi Government's
plans for a united, federal and democratic society at
peace with its neighbours. Denmark stands ready to
contribute to that process.

Denmark intends to maintain its presence in Iraq
as long as its support is requested by the Iraqi
Government and the United Nations and as long as it
believes its presence is meaningful. This spring the
Danish Parliament decided to extend the mandate of
the Danish troops in Iraq until the end of June 2007.
Denmark's involvement in Iraq also comprises
reconstruction and humanitarian assistance. To date we
have committed approximately $90 million.

As I mentioned earlier, Denmark supports an
expansion of the role of the United Nations in Iraq.

Denmark continues to directly support the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
Denmark's decision to comply with a UNAMI request
to deploy a C-130 aircraft suitable both for passengers
and cargo will be effective shortly.

Iraq stands at a crossroads. The international
community must remain committed to supporting the
Government's efforts to promote national
reconciliation and to improve the critical security
situation. The extension of the mandate of the
Multinational Force for another year, as well as support
for the Iraq Compact, form part of the support that is
vital to the development of a peaceful, democratic and
prosperous Iraq.

