Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): First, I
wish to congratulate you, Minister Caballeros, and
your country, Guatemala, on having inscribed on the
Council's agenda the important issue of peace and
justice, with a particular accent on the role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

I also thank the Secretary-General, the President of
the International Criminal Court and the representative
of the Office of the Prosecutor of the Court for their
introductory remarks on the issue under consideration
by the Council today.

Since the International Criminal Court was created
10 years ago, it and the Security Council have both
been working in the framework of their respective
statutes and mandates to achieve the objectives of
international peace and security and promotion of the
rule of law. In that regard, we welcome the Council's
quick reaction via a press statement following the
detention of some ICC officials in Libya (see SC/10674).
Both institutions are working towards those objectives
through the fight against impunity and promotion of a
culture of accountability with respect to violations of
humanitarian law and other international instruments
when such violations threaten international peace and
security.

The Togolese delegation believes that to eliminate
impunity and promote accountability in cases of threats
to international peace and security, relations between
the Security Council and the ICC should notjust follow
the same principles of rule of law and equitable justice.
Those relations should be seen in the application of
the rule of complementarity decreed by the Rome
Statute, other relevant regional and international legal
instruments and the general principles of law.

The debate on the role of the ICC and its relation
with the Security Council in the area of promoting and
strengthening the rule of law through the maintenance
of international peace and security can be dealt with
through various key points. Those points - which in
fact are challenges if they are to be well understood
and responded to - will enable the two institutions to
better achieve the common objectives set for them.

First, there is the relationship between the ICC and
the Security Council, which assumes a complementarity
between the two institutions. It is true that in the
name of the principle of the separation of powers,
the International Criminal Court should, in principle,
not have relations with the Security Council. It is
also true that relations between the Security Council
and the ICC are seen as a necessary evil and as an
exception to the principle of the separation of powers.
As a consequence, and like all exceptions, the rules
governing relations between the two institutions must
be applied in a restricted manner, so as to preserve the
Court's independence.

The proof is that the drafters of the Rome Statute
did not desire a very broad intervention by the Security
Council in the mandate of the ICC. Nevertheless,
a combined reading of articles 13 (b) and 16 of the
Statute of the ICC confers on the Security Council a
very important power that is not always in accord with
international law.

There is therefore reason for concern, hence the
need to avoid any extension of relations between the
Court and the Council beyond the terms and the spirit
of the Rome Statute. For that purpose, the agreement
between the ICC and the United Nations can serve as the
general framework for thinking to clarify the aspects
that particularly concern the Security Council. In that
regard, if it is acknowledged that the Security Council
can follow up the affairs of the ICC beyond the ICC's
periodic reports, it must be determined whether such
follow-up will be limited only to those cases referred by
the Council, or will also involve those cases with which
the ICC is seized or becomes seized of, under its own
initiative without the Council's intervention.

Furthermore, concerning the referral of cases to the

ICC by the Security Council, it should be noted that, for
reasons of their own, there are members of the Council,
including Togo, that are not yet States parties to the
Rome Statute. The fact that, as things stand, the Security
Council is far from being representative of States
parties to the Rome Statute should cause the Council to
declare itself not competent to apply articles 13 (b) and
16 of the Rome Statute. For the Security Council to take
action under those articles is comparable to a regime's
executive and political bodies applying laws to citizens
while exempting themselves from those same laws.

Moreover, certain somewhat ambiguous situations
strengthen that view. Even if most African situations
currently before the ICC were referred by African
States themselves, the only two situations referred by
the Council to the ICC to date pertain to Africa. The
question then arises as to why similar situations that
are taking place elsewhere have not provoked the same
interest on the part of the Security Council. That is
why we believe that, in order to achieve impartiality,
consistency and transparency, criteria will have to be
established for the Council to use in identifying, among
the situations that pose a threat to international peace
and security, those that should be referred to the ICC,
regardless of where they are taking place.

Another important issue to address is that of
funding the ICC. In principle, the fact that the Security
Council refers cases to the ICC without participating in
financing such procedures runs counter to article 115
(b) of the Rome Statute, which deals with the issue of
the use of the financial resources of the United Nations,
especially when it comes to referrals to the Court by the
Council. Even if we were unfamiliar with the Council's
criteria for referring situations to the ICC, one could
envision situations in which the Council would make
such a decision on the rationale that the Council and the
United Nations would have established an ad hoc, hybrid
or international jurisdiction had the ICC not existed.
Those jurisdictions would of course be financed either
fully, as was the case with the International Criminal
Tribunals for Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia, or
partially, as was the case with the Special Court for
Sierra Leone and the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. In
that regard, it would be enough to transfer to the ICC
the funds that would have been allocated to such ad hoc
jurisdictions.

Finally, when it comes to cooperation between the
Security Council and the ICC, it is true that the role of
the Security Council could be crucial, since the ICC, like
any other international jurisdiction of its kind, cannot
carry out its mandate without the active cooperation
of States and the international community. However,
if the Council wishes to intervene so as to promote
or to trigger such cooperation, relevant modalities
must be established, with full respect not only for the
relevant international legal instruments, but also for
the principle according to which cooperation is at the
discretion of States. In that regard, we should think
about and decide under what circumstances and with
what means States could be encouraged to cooperate,
without being coerced, given the gravity of the situation
and the obligation to fight impunity in the case of a
threat to international peace and security.

The experience of ad hoc jurisdictions shows
that Council resolutions have rarely obliged States to
cooperate if they themselves do not decide to do so, and
that dialogue and diplomacy have been more effective
in achieving cooperation than Council resolutions. As
proof of that, those jurisdictions have rarely reported
States that do not cooperate to the Council, especially
since the reporting or the threat of reporting could lead
the State concerned to take a more extreme position.

In conclusion, it is possible to imagine mechanisms
that would improve relations between the ICC and the
Security Council. In doing so, we will have to avoid
using informal mechanisms and arrangements that
run the risk of bypassing transparency or control
and open the way to arbitrariness. We believe that
one such mechanism could be the establishment of a
committee or working group on the ICC within the
Security Council in order to ensure better monitoring
of issues having to do with the implementation of
the ICC mandate and its relations with the Council.
Nevertheless, the mechanism to be established should
ensure the equitable application of the Rome Statute in
order to avoid negative remarks about the Court.

