Mr. Rovensky (Czech Republic): One of the pledges
the Czech Republic made when it campaigned for a non-
permanent seat on the Security Council more than two
years ago was that, if elected, it would actively encourage
greater transparency in the Council's working methods.
We have kept that promise.

We take part in the Open-ended Working Group on
the reform of the Security Council, where, together with
other, like-minded countries, we actively support the drive
for greater transparency in the Council's working
methods. By the same token, last year we supported the
initiative of Argentina and New Zealand which resulted
in the setting up of a consultation mechanism between the
Council members, troop contributors and the Secretariat.
This mechanism has been operating for a year or so, and
in our View this is long enough to draw some first
conclusions.

We believe that so far these consultations have been
rather formal in nature. They tend to be more briefings
for troop contributors that are not members of the Council
than true consultations. What they lack so far is genuine
dialogue.

The views and recommendations expressed by troop
contributors in the consultations have, in fact, very little
impact on the decision-making process within the Security
Council. In fact, the end results of these consultations

 

sometimes remind us of a folk tale in which the wolf is fed
and the goat remains in one piece.

In our statement in the Fourth Committee, we stated,
inter alia, that troop contributors are today at the mercy of
Security Council members. One would hope that Council
Members will View these consultations with troop
contributors not just as a chore, but as a source of wisdom
and as a relevant form of input into the formulation, as well
as termination and modification, of peace-keeping-operation
mandates. Let us not forget that Security Council members
do not always have troops in a given peace-keeping
operation, and while they have the ultimate political
responsibility for formulating mandates, the practical
experience from the field might not always reach them. The
consultations with troop contributors give them a perfect
chance to get such information firsthand. It is therefore
surprising and somewhat disappointing that in several
instances some members of the Security Council did not
even bother to attend these consultations.

After all the criticism, let me end on a positive note.
The consultation mechanism between the Security Council,
troop contributors and the Secretariat is without a doubt a
step in the right direction. In fact, most delegations, troop
contributors or not, acknowledge this.

What is needed, however, is further improvement and
refinement of the consultation mechanism so that it is less
formal and more effective in ensuring closer
communication and exchanges of views between the
Security Council and troop contributors.
We believe that the proposal introduced by Argentina,
which we strongly support, achieves this goal. We thank
Ambassador Cardenas and Ambassador Keating for this
important and timely initiative.

