I thank Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. As always, his efforts and those of his team are to be applauded, and I thank him warmly once again. I know that he does not have an easy job and, therefore, there is all the more reason to tell him how much we appreciate the fairness with which he works to address this conflict. At recent Council meetings on this issue, we have highlighted the encouraging cooperation that has occurred between Israelis and Palestinians in the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Combating the virus, as well as that cooperation, are both still important, but that is not what I am going to focus on here today. Today I want to speak about what needs to be done to move in the direction of meaningful progress in the Middle East. We listened closely to what each Council member has to say about this matter and what they said in February, March and April. So, I want to note, as I have before, that we understand that many of them have concerns with, and objections to, elements of the Trump Administration's vision for peace. But statements of concern from Council members will get us only so far. What is needed right now, if we hope to take even a first step in the right direction, is for the parties to sit down with one another. The Council cannot dictate the end of this conflict. We can only encourage the parties to sit down together to determine how they wish to make progress. For those here who have concerns, I want to stress that this monthly briefing is not where the real problem-solving will take place. It will take place at a table at which both the Israelis and the Palestinians are seated. The question for us should be not only about our individual concerns. The question is how we can each play a more proactive role in getting the parties to speak directly with one another to address their concerns. If both sides are serious about talking, it is time for them to prove it. And if the Council is serious about wanting to see progress in the Middle East, then I urge all present to look seriously at the steps they can take to encourage direct negotiations. President Trump presented our vision for peace because we think it is realistic and implementable. We heard this morning about President Abbas's recent announcement. With regard to that, we as the Council need to encourage the Palestinians to see this initiative as an opportunity to realize their aspirations. But it is also a starting point, as I have said many times. I truly believe that we all want to see an end to this conflict. Moreover, we have all expressed a conviction that conversation between the parties is the only way forward. But if that conviction is sincere, then we must concentrate our efforts on bringing the parties to the table, not on Council statements that, I think, we all have to admit have grown a little bit repetitive. Let me close by quoting President Trump: "All humanity should be able to enjoy the glories of the Holy Land. This part of the world is forever connected to the human soul and the human spirit. These ancient lands should not be a symbol of conflict but eternal symbols of peace."
