Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we wish to express
our solidarity with and condolences to our brothers and
sisters in Egypt following the tragic criminal attack in
that country. Our thoughts and our prayers are with the
victims of this tragic terrorist act and the Government
and the people of Egypt.

I thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing. He
has given us a very alarming picture of the situation
in the region, especially in Gaza. We hope that this
briefing will serve as a stimulus for the Security
Council to meet its obligations in that regard.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia reaffirms its
support for the self-determination of the Palestinian
people and its right to a free, sovereign and independent
State within the pre-l967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in accordance with relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.

As always, we came to this meeting hoping to
receive encouraging information about the situation of
the Palestinian people and its legitimate aspirations to
self-determination and the creation of an independent,
sovereign State. We hoped that Israel, the occupying
Power, would acknowledge the illegality of its
colonizing activities and halt its construction of illegal
settlement in the occupied Palestinian territories as a
gesture of political goodwill in order to achieve the
two-State solution. However, as on previous occasions,
the reality is completely different from our expectation.

Once again, we must express our frustration over the
fact that the situation remains essentially unchanged,
or has even deteriorated, since the previous briefing in
April (see S/PV.7929).

We are just a few days away from marking the
fiftieth anniversary of the occupation by Israel of the
Palestinian territories, which led to the adoption of
resolution 242 (1967), of 22 November 1967, which
expressly mentions, as one of the key principles for
achieving peace in the Middle East, the withdrawal
of Israeli armed forces from the territories they have
occupied during the conflict. Almost 50 years have
passed since the adoption of that resolution, and
Israeli forces continue to intimidate and terrorize the
inhabitants of the occupied Palestinian territories. My
Mission is struck by the fact that 50 years have passed,
which is long enough for the international community
to have been able to reach a definitive solution to the
tragic situation of the Palestinian people.

In his most recent report, dated 13 April 2017
(A/HRC/34/70), the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967 notes that the Israeli forces persist
in carrying out actions that represent human rights
violations, including the excessive use of force, forced
displacements and restrictions on the free movement
of the Palestinian people. The report also condemns
the fact that as of late January 2017, a total of 105
demolitions had been recorded in Area C and 14 in East
Jerusalem. It also states that in 2016 there were 1,093
demolitions in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
the highest number recorded since the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs began collecting
the data in 2009.

Unfortunately, despite the fact that on 23 December
2016 the Security Council adopted resolution 2334
(2016), which calls on Israel once again to put an end
once and for all to all settlement activities in occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, the
Government of Israel has done absolutely nothing to
rectify its colonizing practices. Rather, in February,
the Israeli Parliament passed the so-called regulation
law, through which the occupying Power intended to
retroactively legalize more than 5,500 settlements
on lands belonging to Palestinians. The bill is still
awaiting passage.

Bolivia calls on the Government of Israel to
immediately cease all settlement activities and
related construction, as well as demolitions of
Palestinian homes, especially when these are home
to Palestinian families, as they represent grave acts
of physical and psychological violence against the
Palestinian population.

I would like also to draw the attention of the
Council to the report of the mission that visited
Palestine, as contained in its letter dated 24 May 2017,
which sought to publicize the situation of the more than
1,500 Palestinian prisoners who as of today are on the
fortieth day of their hunger strike, an extreme measure
taken in order to achieve the release by the Government
of Israel of more than 6,500 Palestinian prisoners and
detainees. That measure has given rise to reprisals by
the Israeli authorities.

Finally, we wish to reiterate our request that
the quarterly report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) appear in
writing, so that we can see a detailed report of the
progress made, or the lack thereof, as well as current
maps of all occupied Palestinian territories in which
Israel has established settlements. Bolivia reaffirms its
firm commitment to resolution 2334 (2016) and urges
all Council members to pool their efforts to ensure
its implementation without further delay. We believe
that all resolutions adopted by the Council must be
implemented with due rigor and commitment, with the
single goal of ensuring international peace and security.

We highlight the importance of all contributions by
the international community, including the steps taken
by the United States of America, that would make it
possible to achieve a peaceful solution to the situation
of the Palestinian people.

