Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We express
our gratitude for the convening of this afternoon's
meeting and our thanks for the briefings we have
heard from Mr. Keating and Mr. Francisco Caetano
Jose Madeira.

Peru has been keeping a close eye on the situation
in Somalia, where, despite the progress made in recent
months, the humanitarian crisis continues to affect
more than 5 million people. In addition, the security
situation remains unstable, and human rights, including
those of women and children, continue to be violated.

We deem positive the new focus adopted to
address the humanitarian situation through the 2018
Humanitarian Response Plan for Somalia and the
recovery and resilience framework, which are aimed
at breaking the cycle of vulnerability and deprivation
by 2022. We highlight also the significant progress
made by Somalia in the economic area, which has been
acknowledged by the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund. We hope that the technical support
provided by those institutions will make it possible to
implement the economic reforms necessary to improve
the living conditions of the Somali people.

We condemn the attacks committed by Al-Shabaab
and support the Secretary-General's call for the Federal
Government and international partners to develop a
coherent approach to mitigating the threat posed by
improvised explosive devices, which are often used by
that terrorist group.

We underline also the importance of the transition
plan as a vehicle for the Somali authorities to assume
full responsibility for security. Said transfer must be
implemented in an orderly and gradual manner, so
as to safeguard the existing achievements. We also
highlight the need for the provision of the financial
support required for coordinated implementation by the
Federal Government and the federal states, backed by
the African Union and international partners.

We welcome the significant headway made in the
strengthening of Somali security institutions, including
the new police model adopted at the state and federal
levels, the political agreement on the justice and
corrections model for Somalia, as well as initiatives to
curb violent extremism. We welcome also the efforts
of the Federal Government to promote the peace and
reconciliation process, as well as the rollout of the
peace process aimed at easing tensions between clans
in Marka.

We hope that, now that the political crisis in the
Federal Parliament is behind us and the new Speaker of
the House of the People has taken up his post, Somalia
will be able to undertake the institutional efforts
required to sustain peace, including power-sharing,
resource management, the allocation of fiscal revenues
and the electoral model. We emphasize the importance
of the National Security Council moving forward
in the implementation of the road map to prepare for
the general elections, to be exercised by universal
suffrage in 2020-2021, prioritizing the constitutional
review process and the establishment of an electoral
legal framework.

We deem it important to promote the active
participation of women in national processes,
particularly given that Somalia is a country marred by
high levels of sexual violence. We wish to pay tribute
to the Victim-advocacy work carried out by the United
Nations Population Fund. Likewise, we commend the
initiatives aimed at empowering young Somalis, in
particular the establishment of an interim national
youth council and the launch of the Open Innovation
Challenge, which is led by young people and aimed at
finding solutions to the plight of internally displaced
persons in Somalia.

We also wish to welcome the strategy of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM)
to achieve gender parity in its ranks by 2021 and
the appointment of a gender adviser to the National
Independent Electoral Commission. We also voice
our support for UNSOM. and stress our expectations
regarding its proposals aimed at an appropriate
reconfiguration of the components required for an
effective implementation of the broad security approach
of the Mission, the national security structure and the
transition plan.

I wish to conclude by underscoring the need for
the Gulf countries to lend their support to the Federal
Government of Somalia as it seeks to improve its
relations with its federal member states and undertake
reforms aimed at State-building.

