Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I should like to acknowledge the presence of
the Secretary-General and the representatives of Israel
and Palestine and to thank them for their respective
statements.

Panama would like once again to express our
profound dismay at the situation to which the
population of Gaza is being subjected. We deplore the
breaking of the ceasefire and we call upon both Israel
and Hamas to immediately and unconditionally cease
violence, to take the necessary measures to avoid
civilian casualties and to allow the unrestricted
provision of medical and humanitarian aid.

Panama acknowledges the efforts made by a
number of regional actors - in particular Egypt, the
League of Arab States and the Palestinian Authority -
in striving to resolve the crisis. We also commend
France, both in its national capacity and as current
President of the European Union, and Brazil for their
initiatives. We endorse the statements made by both:
that only a renewed ceasefire can open the way to
establishing minimally acceptable conditions for the

people of Gaza, and that only continued political
negotiations between the Palestinian factions and
between Israel and a Palestinian Authority that is
negotiating on behalf of all Palestinians, can bring a
lasting solution to this conflict.

Finally, we stress the absolute need to speedily
resolve the underlying causes of the situation in the
Middle East. Here, we reaffirm Panama's great concern
about the fact that the Security Council - which bears
primary responsible for maintenance of international
peace and security - is on the margins of this process.
In this case in particular, some States members of the
Council that support one party or the other do so
unconditionally, without the necessary distance from
the specifics of the actions or decisions taken by the
parties. As a consequence, it seems to us that the
Council possesses neither the will nor the capacity to
promote an understanding that can help reach a
peaceful solution. In the light of that incapacity, peace
initiatives come and go without significant impact.

Panama calls upon the Council and its members
to shoulder our Charter responsibility and make a
serious effort to understand the causes and, especially,
the effects of the conflict at the international level, and
to promote and follow up approaches and solutions
leading to peace.

