Mr. Abdel Aziz (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
I should like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the situation in Abkhazia, which emphasizes the sincere
efforts being made by his Special Envoy, Ambassador
Edouard Brunner, and his resident Deputy, Mr. Bota, to
find a solution to the political status of Abkhazia within the
Republic of Georgia, with full respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Georgia.
Since the Secretary-General's last report, despite the
efforts of the Special Envoy, the Russian Federation as
facilitator and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to make progress towards
a solution to this problem, a political settlement is still not
in sight. The Council of Heads of State of the
Commonwealth of Independent States and the OSCE have
undertaken positive initiatives, not to mention those of the
group of "Friends of Georgia" in May, followed by other
demarches in June. These have helped to move
developments forward by trying to persuade the parties,
and in particular the Abkhaz side, that the status quo
could not continue. We hope that such initiatives will
continue to be launched until a final settlement is
achieved.

At the same time, Egypt expresses its deep concern
at the continued indiscriminate laying of mines on roads,
which has led to changes in the deployment of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UN OMIG) and in
the nature of operations in the Gali region. Moreover, it
endangers Mission personnel and displaced persons, and
hampers the work being carried out there. Despite the fact
that the United Nations intends to send a group of
demining experts and despite the agreement that has been
reached, there remains a need for increased demining
efforts. These efforts are of particular importance in the
light of the United Nations financial crisis, which will not
allow the Organization to assume large technical or
financial commitments in demining if the laying of mines
continues in the future.

That is why we should like to welcome the
constructive cooperation that exists between the United
Nations Mission and the forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) to cope with this important
problem, and the implementation by the United Nations
of its tasks in all areas.

Egypt shares the concerns of the Secretary-General,
as expressed in paragraph 56 of his report, concerning
how serious the parties are in the quest for peace. These
apprehensions are reaffirmed in the light of the letter from
President Shevardnadze addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

We are in agreement with the Secretary-General on
the financial crisis of the United Nations, which does not
allow him to allocate major resources to situations which
are making only weak progress. We cannot obligate the
United Nations to continue the presence of its troops in
such cases.

Egypt supports the establishment of a United Nations
office within the framework of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) because of its
important role for the protection of human rights.
Furthermore, we support the idea that the expenditures for
that office should be covered in the United Nations

 

budget for Georgia. We will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council.

