Mr. Pedersen: The scale ofviolence and instability
in Syria is extremely alarming. We have an ever-rising
civilian death toll, millions displaced, untold tens
of thousands detailed or missing, large parts of the
Syrian territory fragmented among various actors,
confrontations between States on multiple axes and a
resurgent Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant stepping
up its guerrilla attacks. But we do not yet have the
launch of a real political process. Those dynamics can
and must change. Let me highlight the dangers before
us and the prospects for launching the political track.
Let me also underline the importance of the support
of the Security Council if we are to begin to shift
the dynamics.

Let me highlight five major immediate concerns
regarding the situation on the ground. Let me start
with the situation in the north-west. Despite an
attempted Russian-Turkish reinstatement of the
ceasefire announced in early August, hostilities in and
around Idlib quickly resumed. A major Government
offensive retook the southern tip of the de-escalation
area, pro-Government air strikes, shelling, rockets
and mortars continue. More civilians have been
killed, as Mr. Lowcock just highlighted, and many
more have fled their homes. More health facilities and
other civilian infrastructure have been hit, including
markets, schools, camps for internally displaced
persons and water stations. Towns have been almost
entirely depopulated as civilians, including women and
children, flee shelling and are stranded without shelter,
food or water.

Turkey reported that one of its military convoys into
Idlib faced aerial attacks. Meanwhile, its observation
post in Morek has been encircled by pro-Government
forces * a reminder that the situation risks sparking
international conflict. President Putin and President
Erdogan met on Tuesday, 27 August, and indicated that
they had reached a common understanding on how to
stabilize the situation based on the September 2018
memorandum of understanding. We can only welcome
that high-level diplomacy and that statement and hope
that it will bring calm to Idlib. But let me express the
gravest concern that the violence is, so far, not abating.

No one pretends that there is an easy solution to
the challenge of countering the Security Council-listed
terrorist group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham or groups such
as Huras Al-Din and foreign terrorist fighters. Their
attacks must cease. But counter-terrorism cannot
put 3 million civilians at risk. They have the right to
protection under international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. The actions killing and
displacing them must stop now. The situation in Idlib
needs a predominantly political solution.
Secondly, let me turn to the situation in the north-
east. Tension flared in July with troop concentrations
on the Turkish side of the border. Advances in United
States-Turkey talks in August helped avert conflict. We
are closely following developments, as the first steps
appear to have been taken to implement those interim
understandings. But, as the Secretary-General said,
a concrete political settlement is needed - one that
respects Syria's sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity, takes into account legitimate Turkish security
concerns, provides for the well-being of the diverse
Syrian population in that area and allows their voices
to be heard.

Thirdly, with regard to Israeli-Iranian tensions,
Israel confirmed that it conducted air strikes on the
outskirts of Damascus on 24 August. Israel said its aim
was to pre-empt drone attacks staged from Syrian soil,
which it stated were being planned by Iranian Al-Quds
Force operatives and Shiite militias in Syria. Syrian
State media said that Syrian air defence systems had
intercepted hostile rockets before they reached their
targets. Hizbullah said that two of its fighters were
killed in the strikes and has threatened to retaliate
from Lebanon. Such escalatory actions are extremely
worrisome. I urge all parties and, indeed, all States
in the area, to respect the sovereignty of Syria by
refraining from attacks and provocations and showing
maximum restraint in actions and rhetoric alike.

Fourthly, in south-west Syria, reports of detentions,
demonstrations, disappearances and assassinations
are a source of serious concern. Mr. Lowcock just
highlighted the challenges in Rukban and Al-Hol and I
really have nothing to add to that.

Fifthly, let us remember that Syrian families face
multipronged dangers of violent conflict, terrorism,
displacement, conscription, arbitrary detention, torture,
separation, gender-based violence and myriad other
protection issues. Syrians also face unprecedented
levels of poverty, economic shortcomings and a sense
ofhopelessness. Millions of Syrian refugees continue to
see obstacles to a safe, dignified and voluntary return.

It should be clearer than ever that there is no
military solution to the situation in Syria. A nationwide
ceasefire, stipulated in resolution 2254 (2015), has
never been more relevant and necessary, including as
a matter of international peace and security. And it
is clear that only a political process and, ultimately,
a political solution can restore Syria's sovereignty,
protect the rights and future of all Syrians and begin to
address the deep divisions within Syrian society.
That is why, even amid the fighting, I have spared
no effort in discharging my mandate to facilitate
intra-Syrian negotiations that begin a process to
develop a new constitution, pursuant to which free and
fair elections, under United Nations supervision, shall
take place, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). I have
been carefully consulting the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and the opposition Syrian Negotiations
Commission in order to establish a solid agreement on a
credible, balanced and inclusive, Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned constitutional committee, convened under
United Nations auspices in Geneva, that can serve as a
door-opener to a broader political process. I thank both
the Government and the opposition for the substantive
and open dialogue each has with the United Nations.

Throughout, it has been clear that nothing is
agreed until everything is agreed. Nonetheless, there
is a strong understanding on two equal co-chairs, one
nominated by the Government and the other by the
opposition; United Nations facilitation through my
good offices; a 75 per cent voting threshold, while
striving for consensus; a large body of 150 members and
a small body of45 members; and a clear commitment to
guaranteeing the safety and security of the committee
members and their relatives.

In early July, I held productive talks with Syrian
Foreign Minister Walid Al-Moualem and the leadership
of the opposition Syrian Negotiations Commission on
all remaining details ofa package to resolve outstanding
names and agree on terms of reference and core
rules of procedure. The package is nearly finalized.
The outstanding differences are, in my assessment,
comparatively minor. I am convinced we can conclude
negotiations. I am in contact with both the opposition
and the Government. I have also conveyed my readiness
to return to Damascus in the very near future as part
of completing the work. I am quietly hopeful that the
United Nations will be in a position to announce an
agreement before the start of the seventy-fourth session
of the General Assembly.

The Governments of Russia and Turkey have been
of particular assistance and are fully supporting the
United Nations leadership of the negotiation process
on the constitutional committee. I will be visiting
Iran shortly and look forward to its continued support.
I have no doubt that the summit of the Presidents of
Russia, Turkey and Iran planned for mid-September
can contribute to the efforts under way.

I appreciate the strong support provided by the
United States and several European and Arab countries
for the overall United Nations effort, as well as the
active support of the European Union. I look forward to
visiting and holding consultations in Washington, D.C.,
later this week. I continue to strongly urge the United
States and the Russian Federation to deepen their own
direct dialogue, building on the efforts they have made
during the year.

In recent months, I have heard some Syrians react
with scorn at the notion of progress on the constitutional
committee in Geneva while violence surges and no
progress is being made on other files. I have found the
insights from a broad range of Syrian civil society and
Syrian women, including Via our Civil Society Support
Room and Women's Advisory Board, to be extremely
important in that regard. They reveal an underlying
reality: a viable process cannot just be about meetings
in Geneva. It needs to address real-life problems for
Syrians from the outset. To be a meaningful door-opener
and to be the moment that turns the page towards a new
Syria, the launch of a constitutional committee should
be accompanied by measures that have real impact on
the ground.

Real action on detainees, abductees and missing
persons could be one such measure, if done in a
meaningful way and on a meaningful scale. During
the reporting period, a fourth simultaneous release
operation took place under the umbrella of the Iran-
Russia-Turkey-United Nations working group. I am
pleased that, owing to the strong insistence ofthe United
Nations, there was clear progress in terms of respect
for basic provisions of international humanitarian
law. For the first time, the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) was allowed to act as a neutral
intermediary, and members of my team observed the
operation, too.

But that and all other release operations to date have
been vastly insufficient in scale. In line with resolution
2254 (2015), all sides should engage in unilateral releases
and move beyond one-for-one exchanges. I believe
that women, children, the sick and the elderly must be

released at scale. The Government and the opposition
must collect, protect and manage information they
have on individuals they are holding, monitoring or
seeking. Again, an internationally recognized neutral
intermediary, such as the ICRC, could play a key role
in supporting all sides, including families, with the
compilation of information on detained and missing
persons, as well as in keeping that information safe and
handling it confidentially.

With the support of the ICRC, my team has
developed procedures for conducting searches for
missing persons in Syria in line with international
humanitarian law and in the true spirit of resolution
2474 (2019), unanimously adopted by the Council in
June. Those procedures will be put on the agenda of
the next working group meeting. My invitation for that
meeting to take place in Geneva, as part of the working
group's rotating consultations, still stands.

International players have the responsibility to
deepen their dialogue too, as well as to support the
United Nations-facilitated process as we work directly
with the Syrian parties. I have no doubt that the Astana
format and the small group format will continue. The
United Nations takes a practical approach to working
with such important groupings. But the time has come to
bring together the will embodied in both ofthose formats
and in the permanent membership of the Council in a
very practical way, namely, a group of key players in a
common forum in Geneva, supporting a Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned process facilitated by the United Nations
in the discharge of its mandate from the Council. If the
Syrians are to overcome their mistrust and division and
move step by step along the path towards healing Syrian
society and restoring Syria's place in the international
community, a common international support format for
Geneva will be absolutely key. I ask for the Council's
support in making that happen.

I am deeply conscious of the profound grief and
suffering of the Syrian people everywhere and of the
need to end this conflict for the sake of Syria, the Syrian
people, the region and the world. We are entering a
crucial month for the parties to engage with the United
Nations in finalizing the constitutional committee and
key international players to stabilize Idlib, the north-
east and regional tensions, as well as to come together
behind the United Nations effort. That could enable the
United Nations to convene a constitutional committee,
accompanied by the first steps to overcome deep
mistrust, build confidence and offer some hope after
a long period of darkness. It will not be easy, but this
is the one path towards a better future for Syria and a
step-by-step implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).

