Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the initiative of the Kuwaiti presidency in
convening this meeting.

We appreciate the concept note (S/2019/455, annex), which encourages us to reflect on the current
state of cooperation between the Security Council and
the League of Arab States. We warmly welcome your
presence, Mr. President, and that of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Poland. We thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres, and his Arab League counterpart,
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, for their briefings.

Through its Hispanic heritage, Peru shares
historical links with the countries of the Middle East.
We recognize the rich cultural, scientific, religious and
ethnic diversity ofits peoples, as well as their continuing
desire for peace and prosperity. However, we deplore
the persistent regional challenges that have led to
serious threats to international security, as is evident in
the conflicts ravaging Libya, Yemen and Syria, as well
as in other scenarios that require the urgent support of
the international community and action on the part of
the Council. We are also concerned about the recent
attacks on oil tankers in the Gulf of Oman, which we
firmly condemn and which must be investigated.

In these sensitive situations, Peru considers it

particularly important to strengthen multilateralism
and relationships between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in line with the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. We
emphasize the synergies that this kind of approach
fosters in an increasingly interdependent world, thanks
to the comparative and complementary advantages that
these bodies can offer. In that connection, we recognize
the effective leadership of the League of Arab States in
its efforts to promote peace and stability in the Middle
East, to which it contributes a profound understanding
of the dynamics and underlying causes of the conflicts
in that part of the world. That compels us to reaffirm the
crucial role played by cooperation between the Council
and the League of Arab States and to emphasize the
need to reinforce it. In that regard, we welcome recent
developments aimed at promoting this partnership,
such as the decision to establish a United Nations
liaison office in Cairo and a more fluid exchange of
information in areas such as the conservation and
management of water resources, the fight against
terrorism, sexual violence and migration.

However, we believe it is essential to ensure that
this relationship is a predictable one that enables issues
that are particularly critical for the region, such as those
relating to peace and security, to be more effectively
addressed. We therefore have a positive view of the
proposals to establish a consultative framework between
the United Nations and the League in addition to the
holding of an annual meeting between the members of
both organizations.

We encourage accelerated efforts to arrange greater
collaboration on conflict prevention through enhanced
mediation, the facilitation of dialogue, early-warning
and rapid-response systems and confidence-building.
We also believe that opportunities for improved
coordination should extend to the areas of the protection
of civilians and of humanitarian assistance, where
both organizations can and must work together to
ensure compliance with the provisions of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. In that regard,
Peru stresses the benefits of this Council and the
League of Arab States joining forces to overcome the
current stalemate in the peace process between Israel
and Palestine, which means promoting a resumption of
direct negotiations leading to a two-State solution. The
validity and relevance of the Arab Peace Initiative is an
important example of the contributions that the League
of Arab States is in a position to make.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Peru's
commitment to peace, stability and prosperity in
the Middle East, which guarantees the protection
of the civilian population, respect for international
humanitarian law and the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.

