Miss Durrant (Jamaica): First of all, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for the welcome extended to Jamaica
as a new member of the Security Council and to
commend you and the delegation of the United States for
having organized this debate on an issue of importance
not only for Africa but for the international community as
a whole. My delegation was therefore very pleased that
Vice-President Gore opened the meeting and set the tone
for our deliberations. I also wish to express our
appreciation to your predecessor, Sir Jeremy Greenstock
of the United Kingdom, for his effective guidance of the
Council during December.

Today, the Council is taking a new step forward in
recognizing the threat that the HIV/AIDS epidemic in
Africa poses to the peace and security of that continent.
The many reports available to us point to one undeniable
fact: the AIDS epidemic has reached catastrophic
proportions and has created a serious development crisis,
threatening the future growth and prosperity of the
affected countries.
As the Secretary-General reminded us last
December:

"Twenty years ago, the global community had
not even heard of AIDS. Today, the AIDS
pandemic - unexpected, unexplained and
unspeakably cruel - presents us, especially in

 

Africa, with a tragedy we can barely comprehend, let
alone explain."

For us to ignore the effects of the AIDS epidemic on
the people of Africa would be an abdication of our
responsibilities. It would be morally wrong. Indeed, the
AIDS epidemic is a worldwide phenomenon having
deleterious effects on all regions of the world, including my
own region of Latin America and the Caribbean.

We have heard the grim statistics that point to the
conclusion that AIDS can no longer be treated solely as a
health crisis. As it continues to take its deadly toll on the
population, it has adverse impacts on the social fabric of
society. It destroys the productive capacity of the people,
significantly reducing life expectancy and per capita gross
domestic product. This, in turn, exacerbates poverty, often
leading to political unrest and violence, and provides a
feeding ground for conflict and rebellion. Marginalized and
orphaned children further add to the pool of recruits
fuelling violence and, possibly, armed conflict.

We know that internal political pressures lead to
internal conflicts. We also know that before long, many
internal conflicts spill across open, unprotected borders into
neighbouring countries. Very soon, what may have started
out as a local conflict becomes internationalized. Massive
flows of refugees, many infected with HIV/AIDS, provide
even more opportunities for the spread of the disease. The
data further demonstrate that the risk of contracting AIDS
in a refugee camp is six times the risk in the general
population.

We also know that in situations of conflict, HIV/AIDS
spreads indiscriminately. It spreads to women, children,
humanitarian workers, peacekeepers, soldiers and rebels
alike. The cycle of the epidemic seemingly has no end in
sight, unless the world community acts in unison to end this
scourge.

We are cognizant of the efforts undertaken by national
Governments and regional and global organizations to
respond to the AIDS epidemic in Africa. We may conclude,
from the interrelationship between the AIDS epidemic and
peace and security in Africa, that the Security Council has
a role - indeed, a responsibility to join with these
forces - in seeking solutions to the problem. We therefore
call upon the Council to recognize this relationship in its
peacekeeping and peace-building mandates and to seek
ways of cooperating with all interested parties.

Furthermore, the Security Council's role in conflict
prevention must be enhanced so as to eliminate the
environment that is conducive to the spread of
HIV/AIDS. In this regard, increased resources must also
be allocated to the preparation of peacekeepers, military
observers and humanitarian workers.

Today's debate points once more to the recognition
of the fact that peace and security cannot be divorced
from the socio-economic root causes of conflict. It further
points to the need for greater coordination between the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the specialized agencies, the Bretton
Woods institutions and the United Nations funds and
programmes.

My delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-
General, the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, the Executive Director of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) and the President of the World Bank for
demonstrating in their statements the commitment of the
United Nations system to the fight against AIDS.

The recently launched International Partnership
against AIDS in Africa - which brings together
Governments, the United Nations, civil society and the
private sector - is a significant step in the right
direction. The Security Council can, and should, provide
the moral and political commitment necessary to garner
the global financial and technical resources needed to
support the work of UNAIDS and of the Partnership in
general.

While researchers continue to seek a cure for AIDS
and to develop vaccines, the international community
must build on the experiences and lessons learned from
those countries that have successfully reduced the spread
of the disease. We must remove the stigma of AIDS
through public education, providing information on how
the disease is transmitted and changing at-risk behaviour.
We must provide public health facilities for testing,
particularly for women of child-bearing age. We must
reduce the cost of medication and treatment and make
them widely available. We must provide social and
economic support, particularly to those orphaned by
AIDS.

We have indeed embarked upon an urgent mission
that requires the full attention of the international
community if we are not to lose the brightest and best of
an entire continent.

 

