Mr. Hilale (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak today on behalf of the members of the
Central African Republic country configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission. It is an honour and a
pleasure to address the Security Council at this meeting
on the Central African Republic, held during the visit
of His Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera,
President of the Central African Republic. I would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's meeting despite the Council's busy workload
this month, and for your kind invitation to me.

This meeting is a concrete demonstration of
the synergies between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, with the ultimate aim of
promoting the conditions necessary for sustaining peace.
And there is no better example of that than the Central
African Republic, where in the past, unfortunately,
the international community's premature withdrawal
contributed to the country's relapse into conflict.
Although the security situation remains volatile, with
a recent outbreak of attacks by some armed groups,
today we are in a better situation, with the restoration
of constitutional order, an ambitious National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan, which received strong support
at the Brussels Conference for donors, and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
a multidimensional mission with an expanded mandate.

This morning, we held a meeting of the Central
African Republic country configuration, elevated
by the presence of the President of the Republic and
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. The visit of President
Touadera sends a strong signal to the international
community of his own and his Government's
determination to lead the efforts to restore peace and
security in the Central African Republic. The members
of the configuration unanimously reaffirmed to the
President their unwavering commitment to continuing
their productive collaboration with the Government of
the Central African Republic and to working with the
United Nations system as a whole under the leadership
of Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, whom I commend and thank
for his excellent cooperation with the configuration,
and with regional and subregional organizations and
international partners, in support of the efforts to
ensure lasting peace in the Central African Republic.

We were able to ensure the members' support for
the configuration's programme of work, which was
recently presented to the Council and which consists
mainly of meetings devoted to each of the three pillars
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan,
bringing together all the relevant stakeholders - the
United Nations, the European Union and the World
Bank - to discuss how best to support the efforts of
the Government and its partners. To that end, we will
intensify our coordination and collaboration with the
three main partners handling the implementation of
the Recovery Plan, under the leadership of the Central
African authorities - the United Nations, for the first
pillar of support to peace, security and reconciliation;
the European Union, for the second pillar, the
restoration of the social contract between the people
and the Government; and the World Bank for the third
pillar, promoting economic recovery and support to the
productive sectors.

With its proposed programme of work for the
coming months, the configuration has established an
ambitious medium- and long-term goal, which is to
make the Central African Republic a model of success
for the United Nations, for peacebuilding in general
and in particular for the concept of sustaining peace,
enshrined last year in resolution 2282 (2016) and
General Assembly resolution 70/282. In that regard,
the main elements needed for lasting peace are, first,
responsibility on the part of the national authorities
for identifying national priorities and translating them
into strategies, as reflected in this case in the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan; and, secondly, the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission in promoting
and coordinating all efforts and platforms by bringing
together the various peacebuilding stakeholders.

We are confident that the existing coordination
mechanisms, and those that are virtually finalized, will
enable us to facilitate coordination among key partners
and, through that, the implementation of the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. We should recall at
this point that the Peacebuilding Commission remains
committed to facilitating the coordination ofthe various
actors here in New York and to ensuring that the efforts
complement one another. In that regard, I intend to
visit the Central African Republic soon to talk to the
main national and international partners in the country
about the principal challenges to the implementation
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and
about ways and means of optimizing our support to the
Government in order to overcome those challenges.
When I return, I will consult with the members of
the country-specific configuration and the Security
Council how to garner the support necessary for the
national authorities.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the countries of
the region for their continuing support for the Central
African Republic and for their most recent mediation
initiative, involving the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Congo,
Chad and Angola. I also commend the Council's
efforts to keep the Central African Republic high on
its agenda. The organization of an interactive dialogue
on African mediation is an excellent illustration of
that commitment and will allow Council members to
explore possibilities for support.

The Peacebuilding Commission stands ready to
lend its full support, knowing that all actors involved
in the process are members of the Central African
Republic country-specific configuration.

