Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2254 (2015) by the Security Council. The resolution
embodies the broad consensus of the international
community, demonstrates the important role of the
Security Council, reflects the keen aspiration of the
Syrian people and lends fresh impetus to the political
settlement of the Syrian issue. We must follow through
on it with a view to translating consensus into action
and expectation into reality as soon as possible.

The protracted conflict of the past five years
has brought Syria, a country with a time-honoured
civilization, to ruins. Large numbers of Syrians
have been displaced and are unable to return to their
homes. What is worse, it has become a hotbed where
radical ideas breed and spread as well as a playground
for terrorists, posing a grave threat to the peace and
security of the region and beyond. As such, the
international community should work towards the
political settlement of the issue with a stronger sense of
urgency and responsibility.

For five years, relentless international efforts have
been made to seek a political settlement. This on-and-
offpolitical process has had its ups and downs. We need
to build on successful experience, learn the lessons
and press ahead with the political process firmly and
steadily, so that it can be put on an irreversible path.

First, we must remain committed to the goal of a
political settlement. What has happened tells us that the
greater the bloodshed, the higher the tension. There is
simply no military solution to the Syrian crisis. Political
negotiations are the only viable option. All warring
parties in Syria must stop fighting immediately, and
those organizations and individuals that reject the
ceasefire will find themselves in opposition to the
Syrian people and the whole world, and they will pay a
high price. The Security Council has already sent a clear
and strong message. The relevant countries, especially
the countries of the region, should also leverage their
respective influence to engage the various parties in
Syria and call for a meaningful ceasefire.

Secondly, we must remain committed to the
principle that the future of Syria must be independently
decided by the Syrian people. No one cares more about
Syria's future or knows the country better than the
Syrian people, as Syria belongs to the Syrians. The
political process should be Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned. This is consistent with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
universally recogtnized norms governing international
relations.

I wish to stress again that specific steps in the
political transition must be independently worked out
between the Syrian Government and the opposition
representatives through negotiations. The process of
drafting a new constitution must be independently
decided on by all parties and groups in Syria, and a
future leader of Syria must be independently chosen
by the Syrian people. Other countries could help in a
constructive way. The international community needs
to foster an enabling environment, and all parties
should create favourable conditions to that end.

Thirdly, we must remain committed to having
the United Nations serve as the main channel for
mediation. United Nations involvement would bring
more legitimacy and authority to the process, and it
is the largest common denominator acceptable to all
parties. Under Security Council mandate, the United
Nations will formulate a comprehensive ceasefire plan
and promote peace talks between the Government and
the opposition. We look to the United Nations to work
on both fronts steadily, as mandated, and play a greater
role in integrating the opposition groups, coordinating
international counter-terrorism efforts and other
areas. The international community should assist,
complement and provide cooperation and support to the
mediation efforts by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Special Envoy de Mistura in a constructive way.
The International Syria Support Group should build on
its previous efforts and continue to support the United
Nations mediation.

Since the outbreak of the Syrian crisis, China
has all along held an objective and just position and
has participated in the settlement of the issue. China
neither has nor does it pursue self-serving interests
on the Syrian issue. No matter how we vote - for or
against - our goal is always to avoid war and prevent
turmoil, give the Syrian people stability, give peace a
chance and make a political settlement possible. What
we are trying to do is to uphold the fundamental and
long-term interests ofthe people in Syria and the region,
safeguard the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the basic norms governing
international relations, and protect the legitimate
interests of developing countries, especially small- and
medium-sized countries.

The changing dynamics in the Syrian situation
affect the various parties, the region and the whole
world. Its increasingly clear, spiralling effects have
triggered severe global challenges, such as terrorism
and the refugee crisis. We call on all the relevant
parties to rise above narrow geopolitical rivalries
and a zero-sum approach, work for global strategic
stability and the greater good, work together to advance
political transition, jointly fight terrorism, ease the
humanitarian crisis and take a holistic approach to the
refugee problem.

Instability causes suffering, and conflict leaves
no winner. We must join hands to help parties to the
conflict to bury the hatchet and build peace so that the
Syrian people will be able to lead lives free of fear and
war.

