Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation believes the Security
Council's adoption of resolution 1769 (2007),
authorizing the establishment of a African
Union/United Nations hybrid operation in Darfur that
seeks to bring about a speedy and peaceful settlement
of the situation there, to be important and timely. That
decision embodies the positive cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union to achieve
lasting peace and stability in Darfur.

We are convinced that a settlement can be
achieved exclusively through political means. The
peace process must become genuinely comprehensive,
with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Sudan and with the constructive
cooperation of the international community with the
Sudanese leadership in the political and peacekeeping
spheres. It is important that those fundamental tenets
were reflected, with Russia's active support, in the text
of the resolution.

We hope that the hybrid African Union/United
Nations operation will have a real impact on moving
the Darfur peace process forward. That, ultimately, is
the main objective of the peacekeeping activities in
Darfur, along with protecting the civilian population
while observing the sovereign prerogatives of the
Government of the Sudan. We hope that the planned
talks with the Darfur groups will take place on
schedule and that those groups will join the Darfur
Peace Agreement, which will be effectively supported
by the new mission. All Sudanese parties must fulfil
their respective obligations.

Work on the resolution's text was protracted and
intense. We are pleased that the Security Council's
members managed to reach agreement and to adopt by
consensus the decision on this important question. We
commend the emerging constructive interaction
between the United Nations, the African Union and the
Government of the Sudan. It is important to continue to
deepen it and to strengthen mutual trust in the interests
of a speedy deployment and successful action of the
hybrid African Union/United Nations operation.

