Mr. Auvaeart (Estonia): I thank the briefers for their insightful overview of the latest developments in Somalia. It is important that 2020 is used not only to consolidate the progress made thus far but to further it. Dialogue between the Federal Government of Somalia and federal member states is a crucial priority to achieve progress on national priorities. Estonia joins the call to the country's leaders to take immediate steps to restore ties and consider instituting a mechanism for dialogue and consensus-building in the interest of the nation. This is crucial not only for the upcoming elections but also for the broader political, security, humanitarian and development challenges the country is facing, which cannot be solved unless there is constructive dialogue and strong unity of purpose between the Federal Government and the federal member states. As identified in Mutual Accountability Framework, organization of timely, credible and peaceful national elections must remain the first priority for 2020. We recognize the profound progress already made towards direct elections and welcome the enactment of the electoral law. However, there are some concerns about the frameworks governing the elections. Gaps in the electoral law need to be addressed to ensure that it is implementable. Among other important questions, such as the definition of the constituencies and the management of seats for Banaadir and Somaliland, Estonia emphasizes that female representation should be safeguarded in the elections, and the 30 per cent female representationshould be enshrined in legislation. Women must be equal partners in peace efforts. Al-Shabaab's ability to conduct attacks in Somalia, including in Mogadishu, remains extremely concerning. Ensuring security for the Somali people is at the heart of our responsibilities, and therefore it is crucial that the drawdown of African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) troops happen in line with the threat assessments on the ground. We condemn all grave violations committed against civilians, in particular against children, and the continued high numbers of child recruitment. We must also tackle conflict-related sexual violence, which remains pervasive across much of Somalia. In order to strengthen the legal frameworks, we call for the sexual offences bill to be passed by the Parliament. Estonia is deeply concerned about the current humanitarian situation, including the recent locust invasion and the threat it poses to the fragile food- security situation. As we heard from the Director of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, climatic shocks continue to severely impact Somalia and require comprehensive solutions that offer prevention and threat mitigation. Estonia encourages further efforts in this line of work that will proactively address these threats. Finally, I would like to express Estonia's support for the work of the United Nations in Somalia and to pay tribute to AMISOM and the Somali security forces for their efforts to make long-term peace and stability in Somalia a reality.
