The President (spoke in French): As this is the first
meeting ofthe Council for the month ofDecember 2013,
I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Liu Jieyi,
Permanent Representative of China, for his service
as President of the Security Council for the month of
November 2013. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Council in expressing our deep appreciation
to Ambassador Liu Jieyi and his delegation for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Central African Republic

Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic submitted pursuant to
paragraph 22 of Security Council resolution
2121 (2013) (S/2013/677)

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Central
African Republic, the Congo and Gabon to participate
in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Te'te Antenio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2013/7l7, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by the Congo, France, Gabon, Luxembourg,
Morocco, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Togo, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
and the United States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/677, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic
submitted pursuant to paragraph 22 of Security Council
resolution 2121 (2013).

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, China, France,
Guatemala, Luxembourg, Morocco, Pakistan,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Togo, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2027 (2013).

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council that wish to make statements after the voting.


