Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like thank and
commend the presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina

ll-2l268
for organizing today's open debate on this important
issue.

We currently have a sound conceptual framework
and a better understanding of post-conflict
peacebuilding, thanks to the considerable endeavours
made within the United Nations system in recent years.
We now need to focus more on translating this
framework into concrete action, both in New York and
in the field.

For its part, Turkey has been increasingly
engaged in preventive diplomacy, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding efforts,
which are closely interlinked. We believe it essential to
use these tools within a coherent and strategic
framework. Turkey placed particular emphasis on these
issues during its Security Council membership. Now,
together, with Finland and the Group of Friends, we are
working on how to further the concept of mediation,
both within the United Nations and beyond. In our
View, peace mediation and facilitation efforts are the
most cost-effective and efficient way of preventing and
resolving conflicts.

The concept paper presented by Bosnia and
Herzegovina (A/2011/ 16, annex) and the presidential
statement just adopted (S/PRST/20ll/2) contain
pertinent points about a wide range of issues on the
peacebuilding agenda. For this reason, and in order to
adhere to the time limit for statements, I will touch
upon only a few points that I deem particularly
important.

First, peacebuilding is primarily a national
responsibility. Hence, as has been stressed by many
delegations, national ownership is of critical
importance. The effective and sustainable realization of
peacebuilding goals requires the active engagement of
all local stakeholders, including civil society,
professional associations and women's organizations.
Therefore, one priority of peacekeeping operations
should be to win the hearts and minds of the local
people and to work together with them. This will not
only inoculate the operation against criticism that it has
been imposed on the national Government and
population, but will also increase its success. National
ownership and capacity-building are also essential
elements of a successful exit strategy.

At the regional level, the support and cooperation
of regional actors, particularly neighbouring countries,
is another essential aspect of successful post-conflict
peacebuilding and institution-building. Many conflicts
have cross-border dimensions beyond domestic
political circumstances. Accordingly, the scope of
conflict analysis and response needs to be broadened,
not only conceptually, but also geographically.

If our peacebuilding endeavours are to succeed,
we should pursue an integrated and comprehensive
approach. This approach should be based on coherence
among political, security, development, human rights,
humanitarian and rule of law objectives. We believe
that it is necessary to take complementary actions in all
those areas. It is also always important to bear in mind
that every country is unique. Local conditions, needs,
opportunities and limitations may differ considerably.
This means that the prioritization of peacebuilding and
capacity-building activities must be country-specific.
Strategic planning for peacebuilding activities must
therefore also be sufficiently flexible.

In view of resource constraints, the success of the
overall effort depends on the ability to strategically
coordinate the activities of different actors. In this
regard, the United Nations has a unique role to play, as
it can coordinate the work of various stakeholders to
deliver as one on the ground. United Nations support to
regional and subregional organizations should be
increased in order to develop their capacities to better
perform United Nations-mandated tasks in the future.

Before concluding, let me also underline the
importance of mainstreaming women's participation at
all stages of the peacebuilding effort. Turkey welcomes
the increasing awareness within the United Nations
system and among Member States of the importance of
removing constraints on women's full participation in
the peacebuilding process. We look forward to the
further empowerment of women's role in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and mediation endeavours.

