Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank France for giving the Sahel pride of place during
its presidency of the Security Council. My thanks also
go to the Secretary-General, the President of the World
Bank, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Sahel, the Permanent Observer of the African Union
and the Special Representative of the European Union
for their briefings, which have shown the extent to
which the whole international community is mobilizing
for security and development in the Sahel region.

During the past year, attention has focused on
resolving the multifaceted crisis in Mali. Reducing
the terrorist threat, the restoration of the territorial
integrity of Mali and the return to constitutional order
in Bamako have been major advances. However, we all
know that this crisis is the most acute and most recent

manifestation of a recurrent cycle od insecurity in the
Sahel.

While the causes of that insecurity are often local,
its ramifications are transnational. In response, we
need an integrated regional approach. In this regard,
we strongly welcome the initiative of the Secretary-
General to conduct a joint visit to the region with the
President of the World Bank and with the participation
of the African Union, the European Union and the
African Development Bank. The visit helped to initiate
the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel and to unify the efforts of the
international community. It resulted in particular in
the establishment of a coordination platform that will
be initially chaired by Mali. We now have a unique
opportunity to strengthen the partnership between the
international community and the countries of the Sahel
region and to review how we cooperate.

In the context ofthe close, long-standing partnership
of Luxembourg with several countries of the region,
including Senegal, Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger, we
have always stressed the intrinsic link between security
and development and the promotion and protection of
human rights. We welcome the recognition of this link
in the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
With a View to the implementation of the strategy, we
wish to focus on three elements.

First, in order to sustainably stabilize the Sahel, the
countries of the region will be invited to pursue their
efforts at regional and interregional cooperation in
addressing their common security challenges. Action is
needed in the fight against terrorism and transnational
organized crime, controlling the flow of weapons and
the management of border areas.

Meanwhile, we must address the root causes of
instability. In most countries of the Sahel, the lack of
development, inequality and poverty are the source of
much tension. Thus, the creation of viable economic
alternatives for the millions of young people currently
without prospects is of fundamental importance. We
must focus on food security, productive capacity-
building and support for local entrepreneurship that
creates jobs, as well as on further economic integration,
particularly in terms of energy and infrastructure. For
us, particular attention must be paid to strengthening
State institutions. They must be held accountable,
promote local governance and provide basic services to
all citizens, while helping to ease internal tensions and
strengthen social cohesion. The participation of women,
who are too often excluded from decision-making,
should be encouraged.

Only concerted, sustained and proactive action
on the part of the States of the region - action that
revolves around national priorities while integrating
the dimension of regional cooperation - will stabilize
the region and promote its socioeconomic development.
However, no country in the Sahel is able to face alone
the challenges faced by the region. Joint efforts are
required. Within the framework of their support for the
region, the United Nations system and all multilateral
and bilateral partners should strengthen and coordinate
their efforts, taking into account national and regional
initiatives and the concerns linked to appropriation.

Humanitarian assistance must also be stepped up
in order to help the Sahelian populations to strengthen
their resilience. We already know that 16 million people
are at risk of malnutrition next year in the Sahel. Only
59 per cent of the humanitarian appeal this year has
been covered. More needs to be done. Luxembourg
will continue to take an active part in efforts made
under the impetus of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and its Regional Humanitarian
Coordinator for the Sahel.

I will conclude by thanking the delegation of
Morocco for having prepared and facilitated the
presidential statement that the Council has just adopted
(S/PRST/2013/20). The strategy for the Sahel is in
place. The Security Council has endorsed it, and now it
is time to fully implement it.

