Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): It is an honour to make my
maiden statement in the Security Council on the vital
issue of Afghanistan and under your skilled presidency,
Mr. President.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2015/151). We welcome the perceptive briefing
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Haysom, whom we had the pleasure of
receiving recently in Islamabad. I also welcome the
statement of Ambassador Tanin.

The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) today
comes at a defining moment for Afghanistan - a
moment of hope for its people and the entire region.
Pakistan has welcomed the peaceful transition in
Afghanistan and the formation of the national unity
Government, led by President Ashraf Ghani. Pakistan
wholeheartedly endorses his decade of transformation
and the programme for effective governance, economic
and social development and national reconciliation.

President Ghani's historic visit to Islamabad last
November and his talks with Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif succeeded in overcoming in three days the
accumulated challenges of 13 years and produced a
strategic shift in Pakistan-Afghan relations. The leaders
of the two countries share a vision of a partnership
built on multiple pillars of common security and
economic interests. They have committed not to allow
their respective territories to be used against each
other. They have initiated actions to intensify security
cooperation, promote bilateral trade, streamline transit
trade and forge a close economic relationship. Renewed
interaction in the military and intelligence sphere has
strengthened mutual confidence.

We are working to strengthen border controls and
cooperation. Pakistan's Zarb-e-Azb military operation,
which is under way right now, is targeting all terrorist
groups without distinction. Afghanistan's cooperation
against terrorists targeting Pakistan is greatly
appreciated by Islamabad.

The security challenges confronting Afghanistan
remain imposing. As anticipated, violence has escalated.
The Taliban will no doubt test the mettle of the Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF). The ANSF will need
to demonstrate to them that a military solution is not
possible. The new Afghan Government has called for a
dialogue to resolve differences through political means.
There are encouraging indications that the Taliban
may be willing to negotiate with the national unity
Government. We hope it will join the reconciliation
process. It is for the Afghan Government to set out
the terms and framework for such reconciliation. The
international community should actively support that
process, and Pakistan will do everything possible to
facilitate it.

We welcome China's closer engagement in
promoting reconciliation and economic development in
Afghanistan. But as the Secretary-General warns in his
report, the process of achieving peace and reconciliation
in Afghanistan is not likely to be fast or smooth. The
Afghan parties and the international community must
exercise strategic patience. Those who desire to disrupt
the peace process should be discouraged. They are on
the wrong side of history.

Security and development are interdependent.
A priority aim must be to break the nexus between
drugs, crime, corruption and terrorism. We share the
Secretary-General's concern about the deterioration in
the Afghan economy. Short-term measures for economic
revival should be accompanied by steps designed to lay
the foundations for self-sustained growth. The road,
rail and trans-regional energy projects envisaged by
Pakistan and Afghanistan will contribute to creating
that foundation.
The Afghan refugees in Pakistan, still the
largest single-country refugee population anywhere
in the world, can make a valuable contribution to
Afghanistan's economic revival. We welcome President
Ghani's resolve to bring them home and provide a road
map to do so within a specified time frame. UNAMA
should give priority to assisting the process of refugee
repatriation and resettlement. Its core work in capacity-
building and supporting the Afghan Government
in coordinating assistance and in reconstruction,
socioeconomic growth and good offices remains vital.

The destinies of the peoples of Pakistan and
Afghanistan are inextricably linked by geography,
history, culture, language and faith. Such ties cannot
be cut or rent asunder by the tides of power or politics.
For the past 35 years, the people of my country have
shared in the suffering and tragedies of the Afghan
people. Now, with the dawn of hope, we look forward,
God willing, to sharing in the triumph of peace and
development in Afghanistan.

