Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The delegation of Egypt would like at the outset to
express its deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive and lucid report on the implementation
of phase II of resolution 986 (1995), known as the oil-for-
food resolution. The report clearly and sincerely records
the Iraqi people's continued suffering as a result of the
sanctions. It also reflects, even more starkly, the
insufficiency of the financial resources being devoted to
alleviating the suffering of the Iraqi people and the

 

shortcomings of the procedure being followed in the
implementation of this ambitious programme.
A close examination of the implementation of the
provisions of resolutions 986 (1995) and 1111 (1997) leads
to several conclusions that can be summed up as follows.
First, the financial resources resulting from sales of $2
billion worth of Iraqi oil every six months are insufficient
to deal with the severe humanitarian crisis the people of
Iraq are suffering. Secondly, the implementation of phases
I and II of the oil-for-food programme has led to financial
accumulations from oil sales in the escrow account, which,
according to the latest estimate, have reached more than
$300 million, while contracts for the purchase of
humanitarian supplies for the people of Iraq are being
scuttled by the slow pace of proceedings in the Committee
established pursuant to Security Council resolution 661
(1990) or as a result of routine financial procedures.

All of these obstacles prevent the achievement of the
careful balance that must be struck between the Iraqi oil
sales, which of course are not an end in themselves, and
meeting the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people, which
is the ultimate objective for which we are all striving.

The delegation of Egypt welcomes the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
recent report on these two problems. First, he recommends
that the Security Council re-examine the adequacy of the
revenues envisaged in resolutions 986 (1995) and 1111
(1997) and consider the possibility of increasing those
revenues in order to meet Iraq's priority humanitarian
requirements. Egypt strongly supports this recommendation.

Secondly, the Secretary-General directs the United
Nations Office of the Iraq Programme, headed by its
Executive Director, Mr. Benon Sevan, to formulate
recommendations that would ensure provision of the
necessary goods at the appropriate time without obstacles,
to address concerns over processing and supply issues, and
to devise a new system to clearly identify interrelated
applications and then bring them to the attention of the
Security Council Committee.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's intention to
provide as soon as possible a supplementary report
containing the results of a study of the situation, as well as
concrete recommendations, in order to achieve the ultimate
objectives of resolution 986 (1995) and the subsequent
resolution.

In the light of the recommendations of the Secretary-
General, and taking into account the urgent humanitarian
nature of this question, the delegation of Egypt had hoped
that the draft resolution before us today would reflect a
preliminary agreement by the members of the Security
Council to increase the amount of oil that Iraq would be
allowed to sell in order to deal with the urgent
humanitarian needs, and that the extent of this increase
would be considered in the light of the supplementary
report of the Secretary-General on this question. But the
negotiations yesterday and today, during which all
delegations showed a high degree of flexibility, have
made it clear that there is an agreement to deal with this
question by increasing revenues from oil sales, as well as
to adopt the necessary procedures to develop and improve
the working methods of the sanctions Committee and the
Secretariat in a manner that would ensure the delivery of
humanitarian relief in order to meet the needs of the Iraqi
people in parallel with oil sales. This must be
implemented when the supplementary report of the
Secretary-General, expected at the end of January, is
available, in order to allow Iraq to make full use of this
programme.

In view of the foregoing - and taking into account
the importance of renewing the validity of this resolution,
given its urgent humanitarian nature, as well as the
additions to its provisions, which have become more
balanced, and which affirm that the Council will consider
the situation once again when it receives the
supplementary report of the Secretary-General at the end
of January - the delegation of Egypt will vote in favour
of the draft resolution.

