The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Chile.

What is happening today in Lebanon is a throwback
to conditions we thought had been overcome. Lebanon
and its people have suffered a great deal over the past
decades. While many questions remained to be resolved,
we were pleased to see how that country was returning to
a process of normalcy. Its population, known for its hard
work, was attempting to overcome the ravages of
confrontation.

 

The attacks by Hezbollah in northern Israel and those
by Israeli military planes and other means on various areas
of Lebanese territory only bring back that nightmare of the
past. All military activity must come to an immediate end.
In our view, this military escalation cannot continue.

Israeli planes and helicopters have attacked Beirut for
the first time in 14 years. The number of deaths, including
those of innocent civilians, increases daily as a result of
these actions. Again we have witnessed the tragedy of
thousands of persons fleeing from their homes towards the
north of Lebanon, in a quest for safety - nearly 800,000
refugees and displaced persons. We are concerned at the
humanitarian situation. We must support the work of the
humanitarian agencies in Lebanon, which Chile is doing
through the Red Cross.

On the other hand, we cannot fail to mention the
attacks by Hezbollah, which have wounded many people in
northern Israel, from where many Israelis also have fled to
the south in search of safety.

At this time we cannot but support the appeal that was
made by the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali,
to all parties to refrain from escalating the violence across
the Israeli-Lebanese border, reiterating his concern at the
continued hostilities and in particular at the attacks against
civilians. We also support the recent steps taken by France
in this connection.

The international community must not permit any
group to use violence and terror as a means of imposing its
point of view. Terror, anonymous or official, is not the
way. Nothing can be achieved through those channels, but
a great deal can be lost if this type of action continues, in
particular the peace process in the Middle East.

We appeal to the Government of Israel to put an end,
as soon as possible, to its armed incursions into Lebanese
territory and to apply the principle of proportionality.

Furthermore, we reaffirm our support for Security
Council resolution 425 (1978), which demanded that Israel
cease its military action against Lebanese territorial integrity
and withdraw its forces from all the territory of that
country.

We also have told all those who believe it possible to
achieve their objectives through terrorism that it is
completely clear to the international community that
nothing can justify acts of terrorism against human beings,
who stand above and beyond States. Acts of terrorism bring
about only death, destruction, misery, hatred and the urge
for revenge.

The true fight is the fight for peace, for the security
of all human beings and for the integrated development of
the entire region. It is towards that objective that Israelis,
Palestinians, Lebanese and the citizens of the entire
Middle East must turn. With determination, tolerance and
shared work, they will be able to achieve a better world,
worthy of their children and their children's children. The
United Nations will have to be watchful so that it can
support them in every way towards that end.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The next speaker is the representative of the United
Arab Emirates. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

