Ms. Zerrougi (spoke in French): Let me first thank
France for organizing this open debate on the plight of
children in armed conflict, and for its continued support
for my mandate. I am delighted that the Security Council
continues to consider the issue of children affected by
armed conflict as a priority.

However, I find it regrettable that, in spite of the
consensus and our combined efforts to spare children
the horrors of war, we are faced with new challenges
every year. At the beginning of 2015, it is the Violence
of armed groups and the brutality with which they treat
children that pose our major challenge. That is the case
in Syria, Iraq and Nigeria, but also in other countries.
Recurring conflicts have intensified, and the growth of
armed groups is taking on alarming proportions. The
members of the Council have just returned from the
Central African Republic, where thousands of children
continue to be associated with armed groups. The
challenges to protecting them certainly did not escape
the Council. Today's debate is for all those children, for
we must continue our efforts and adapt our response to
the enormous challenges that face us.

As the Secretary-General reminded us, armed
groups constitute the vast majority of perpetrators
of violations against Children. They make up 51 of
the 59 actors listed in the annexes to the reports of
the Secretary-General on the situation of children
in armed conflict. As he also just mentioned, armed
groups professing extremist ideologies seize large
areas, erase borders, use increasingly brutal tactics and
take advantage of modern communication technologies
as part of their recruitment campaigns as well as to
illustrate their brutality. As evidenced by the actions of
Daesh and Boko Haram, mass abduction of women and
children is becoming a tactic of war routinely used to
terrorize, humiliate and subjugate entire communities.
Abducted children are also used for recruitment
purposes and to carry out all sorts of tasks, including
acting as human shields and using little girls to commit
suicide attacks. The abduction of children has always
been a component of conflicts, and we report annually
to the Council on such violations. However, mass
kidnappings have increased in several conflict zones.
That is why I call on the Council to give its full attention
to this disturbing phenomenon.

Schools and hospitals are not spared, as evidenced
by the recurrent attacks by Boko Haram and the
attack last December by Tahrik-i-Taliban on school in
Peshawar, in which 132 children were massacred and
133 injured. But schools are not only attacked in order
to kill, they are also to indoctrinate and radicalize
future generations.

In virtually every conflict situation, girl victims
too often remain in the shadows. They suffer the same
abuse as boys, but also the violence that affects simply
for being girls. They are raped, "married" to armed
groups or forced into sexual slavery. Their right to
education is denied. While progress has been made,
much remains to be done to effectively address the
challenges and complexity of the situations faced by
girls.

It is important to remember that it is possible to
engage in constructive dialogue with armed groups,
although such groups are not a homogeneous. Their
structure, claims and aspirations are diverse. Access
and communication with them are not always easy.
As part of my mandate, I try to favour an approach
that takes into account the context and uses every
opportunity possible for engagement.

As we commemorate the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1612 (2005), Iwant to emphasize that the tools
adopted by the Council have shown their effectiveness.
The majority of the 23 action plans signed so far has
been with armed groups. Other dialogue processes are
under way. The United Nations and other stakeholders
from civil society are also engaged on the ground to
stop the violations and negotiate the release of children.
That is the case particularly in South Sudan, where
the David Yau Yau armed group recently released and
handed over more than 1,300 children to national and
international child protection personnel. In the Central
African Republic and in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, United Nations awareness-raising activities
with armed groups led to the release nearly 4,000
children in 2014. In Darfur, an ongoing commitment on
the part of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur has led some groups to take
concrete measures to end the recruitment and use of
children. It is also the case in Mali, where the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission has been given a commitment by the National
Movement for the Liberation of Azawad and and other
armed groups to stop violations against children.

Mediation and peace processes represent an entry
point for securing firm commitments from the parties
to halt and prevent violations. That was possible both
in the Central African Republic with the Brazzaville
agreement, as well as in the context of the peace
process in the Philippines. However, we need to ensure
that child protection is part of coherent and systematic
negotiations and that it be reflected in any peace
agreement. I ask for the support of the Council and all
partners in including child protection as essential for
building a lasting peace.

For armed groups unreceptive to a dialogue with
the United Nations, it is imperative to identify and
activate the pressure means that each of us can use
to get them to stop Violations against children. A
multidimensional approach is needed. In addition
to military pressure, which is beneficial in some
situations, we must not overlook the importance of legal
pressure and sanctions. But to achieve that we must
work to strengthen the national judicial response and
international cooperation in criminal matters. Those
tools are essential to combatting impunity, terrorism
and transnational organized crime.

The initiatives taken by States and the entire
international community to address the threat that
extremist groups pose to international peace and security
are needed, but we need to ensure that such measures
do not create new risks for children. The answer,
therefore, as the Council has often reminded - and I
thank it for that ~ must be conducted in compliance
with international humanitarian, refugee and human
rights law. The measures taken to combat these groups
should be well supervised to prevent Violations and the
stigmatization of entire communities.

That is all the more important given the fact that
militias are often associated with the fight against
terrorism. The response must also address the root
causes that have led to the emergence of these groups.
That is the only way to isolate them, delegitimize their
speech and rally the support of the people.

Furthermore, it is not uncommon for children
involved in or suspected of association with armed
groups are arrested and detained, sometimes in
deplorable conditions and without charge or trial. When
they are charged, they are brought before special or
military courts, which deprives them of their right to
impartial justice or any kind of reparations and does
not take into account their status as minors. Children
associated with armed groups are first and foremost
victims, victims of these groups and of our inability
to ensure their protection. I would like to take this
opportunity to plead in their favour.

The successful reintegration of children from
armed groups is an essential component of sustainable
peace. It is also a tool for preventing the recruitment of
children. Nevertheless, is not always easy to develop
and support programmes that are well adapted to the
needs of children and communities where opportunities
are limited. New challenges can be seen with regard to
the reintegration of children associated with extremist
groups, who have been exposed to their violence and
indoctrinated by a radical ideology. The impact of
their association with such these groups can mark
them for life. Their reintegration requires structured
programmes that are specially adapted for their needs.
That is why I call for the Council's support for such
programme, which are essential to rebuilding the future
of these children and their communities.

The campaign "Children, Not Soldiers" is a little
more than a year old now. It was launched jointly with
UNICEF and aims, as the Secretary-General pointed
out, to put an end to the recruitment and use of children
by Government armed forces in conflict by the end of
2016. The Council's support has enabled us to make
significant progress. However, a little less than two
years away from that deadline, a tremendous amount
of work remains to be done. The conflicts in South
Sudan and in Yemen remind us that the progress made
can be reversed and give rise to new challenges. It is
essential that we learn lessons from these crises and
work with all our partners to build on what has been
achieved and ensure that the measures put in place are
institutionalized and sustained.

I should like to stress that the majority of the armed
groups mentioned by the Secretary-General operate in
the countries covered by the campaign. To put an end
to and prevent the recruitment of children in national
armed and security forces also requires that measures
be put in place that will help these Governments and
the international community address the Violations
committed by non-State actors against children.

In conclusion, I urge the Council to continue its
efforts and use all of the tools at its disposal to protect
children affected by armed conflicts. Its mobilization
and support are indispensable in order to address new
challenges and better protect children.

