Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Lacroix for
their briefings.

Allow me to make three important points.

First, we take note of the Secretary-General's
latest report on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) (S/20l9/248) and share his
grave concern at the escalation of tensions between the
parties to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. In
that regard, we urge all parties to abide by the terms
of the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement and
maintain the ceasefire. The ongoing tensions in the
area of separation could potentially pose a threat to
civilians and United Nations personnel on the ground.
Full cooperation with UNDOF is critical to preventing
any escalation.

Secondly, we would like to underline the importance
of the safety and security of UNDOF peacekeepers as
well as that of other United Nations personnel on the
ground. We support the mission's priority regarding the
return of UNDOF to full operationality on the Bravo
side. We deem it important to allocate immediately
the resources necessary to support the mission's full
operationality on the Bravo side.

Thirdly, I wish to reiterate Indonesia's position in
strongly rejecting the recognition by the United States
of the Golan Heights as part of Israel, as clearly stated
by the Indonesian Vice-Minister yesterday. This action
could be provocative and disrupt the ongoing efforts
to create peace and stability in the region, and also
undermine the long-standing ceasefire between both
parties. Unilateral recognition by the United States
would not only complicate the already complex situation
in the region, but also jeopardize the credibility of the
Council as well as multilateralism.

Indonesia recognizes the Golan Heights, occupied
by Israel in 1967, as an inalienable part ofthe territory of
the Syrian Arab Republic. This position is in accordance
with the principles of sovereignty and territorial
integrity as enshrined in the United Nations Charter
as well as the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497
(1981), which underline that the acquisition of territory
by force is prohibited under the United Nations Charter
and international law. They also call for the withdrawal
of Israeli armed forces from the territory of the Golan
Heights and state that Israel's decision to impose its
laws, jurisdiction and administration in the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights is null and void and without
international legal effect.

We urge all parties to maintain their commitment
to respecting international law and the United Nations
Charter and to work together to create an environment
that is conducive to the ongoing peace process in
the region.

