Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Madam
President, I wish to thank you for convening this debate
on Afghanistan.

I would also like to thank Mr. Haysom, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his briefing, and Ambassador Tanin,
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for his
statement.

Afghanistan is faced with the arduous task of
restoring national stability and achieving comprehensive
social and economic development. This year, 2015,
marks the beginning of its Transformation Decade.
Thanks to the joint efforts of the Afghan Government
and people, significant progress has been made in
maintaining stability and promoting development, and
the Transformation Decade is off to a good start. The
comprehensive creation of a united, stable, developed
and friendly Afghanistan and the achievement of the
ultimate objective, which is to see the Afghan people
governing Afghanistan, require not only the sustained
and unremitting effort of the entire country but also the
continued support and assistance of the international
community, while ensuring that Afghanistan's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
are respected. In that regard, I would like to make the
following comments.

First, China welcomes the recently formed Afghan
National Unity Government and the creation of the
Special Commission on Election Reform, which should
be able to actively advance the process of electoral
reform. We hope that the parties in Afghanistan will
be able to help the Commission make progress through
dialogue and consultation and ensure that the National
Unity Government can implement its mandate and
honour its obligations, so that parliamentary and local
elections can be held successfully, something that is
crucial to promoting the Transformation Decade in
Afghanistan.

Secondly, we support a national reconciliation
process led and owned by the Afghan people, which
is essential if comprehensive national peace and
stability are to be achieved. We commend the Afghan
Government's serious efforts to advance national
reconciliation, and we hope that all actions taken in
Afghanistan will bear in mind the country's need for
peace and stability and the interests of its people though
the promotion of positive progress in the national
reconciliation process. China welcomes the ongoing
assistance being provided by countries in the region,
and we hope that the international community will
support and coordinate with the Afghan Government
and people's efforts with a View to creating an external
environment conducive to the country's national
reconciliation process.

Thirdly, the situation in Afghanistan is still
challenging. Security incidents are quite frequent and
have led to massive civilian casualties. China supports
the Afghan Government's efforts to improve the
domestic security situation, and we hope that all parties
will shoulder their responsibilities in working to help
Afghanistan strengthen the capacities of its national
security and police forces so that they can respond
effectively to the various security threats and challenges
facing the country, and in that way create a foundation
conducive to economic and social development.

Fourthly, China supports Afghanistan's efforts to
advance peace and reconstruction, and we hope to see
those efforts supported vigorously by the international
community. While respecting the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Afghanistan,
the international community should proactively
support the country's new Government as it creates its
administrative programme, honour its aid commitments
and strengthen Afghanistan's self-reliance in working
to achieve social and economic development. We
support the efforts of the United Nations and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to address the country's issues. We hope that UNAMA
will improve its communication with the Afghan
Government so as enhance synergy in the promotion of
peace and reconstruction.

Fifthly, we support Afghanistan in its efforts to
strengthen neighbourly and friendly relations with other
countries in the region and improve its participation
in regional cooperation. Such cooperation can help it
respond effectively to joint challenges and threats, such
as those represented by terrorism and drugs. We would
like to congratulate Afghanistan for its participation,
for the first time, as an observer at the meetings of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization held in April, and
we will work to promote the continuing and constructive
role of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
other regional entities in the Afghanistan issue. China
is looking forward to the fifth foreign ministerial
meeting of the Istanbul Process, to be held this year in
Pakistan, and believes it will produce positive results.

This year marks the sixtieth anniversary of the
establishment of diplomatic relations between China
and Afghanistan. It is also a year of friendship and
cooperation between the two countries. We will further
promote our countries' strategic partnership and work
within the framework of the Belt and Road initiative
to help the Afghan Government intensify its capacity-
building and play a constructive role in achieving
peace, stability and development in Afghanistan as
soon as possible.

