Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to congratulate you, Madam,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council, and to wish you success in your duties.

We have carefully studied the report of the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2018/416), which was once again issued belatedly and
just before the start of today's meeting. We would once
again like to point out the importance of complying
with the time frame for submitting it to the Council.
We are compelled to note that like its predecessors, the
text has a certain anti-Serbian tone, suffers from biased
and politicized conclusions and does not provide an
objective picture of the situation in the country.

Republika Srpska is once again being blamed for
literally all of the current difficulties afflicting the
process of achieving the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, which is
particularly surprising, for the major political crisis that
has overtaken the Bosniak-Croat Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. As before, the selection of evidence
in support of the report's assertions is unbalanced
and frequently based on unverified information. As a
result, the real situation in the country is distorted and
false impressions are created. That applies particularly
to the celebration on 9 January of Republika Srpska
Day, which took place in accordance with a law
enacted in October 2016 that the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina did not object to at the
time. The report's concerns about the modernization
of automatic weapons that the Republika Srpska police
are equipped with are also difficult to understand.
The process is being conducted in full compliance
with the laws of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has
been acknowledged, incidentally, by the European-
led force responsible for security in the country. For
some reason, the report does not mention the fact that
similar replacement programmes for outdated police
weapons are also being carried out in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Federation.

We were baffled by the so-called concern expressed
in the new report about the March pilgrimage tour
to Orthodox and historic sites in Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina by the Night Wolves multinational
motorcycle club, which is dragged in inappropriate
references to unilateral United States sanctions and
Ukrainian issues. The Night Wolves always coordinate
their events with law-enforcement bodies and have
been conducting regular tours of European countries,
with purely humanitarian intentions, for several years
now. The primary aim is to pay tribute to the memory
of our great forebears who defeated fascism during
the Second World War. By the way, Victory Day is
celebrated in Europe today and tomorrow in Russia and
the countries of the former Soviet Union.

We call on the High Representative to focus his
efforts on implementing the 5+2 plan, which should
have remained his top priority. Regrettably, in practice
he has focused on other issues that have nothing to do
with his mandate. It is strange to hear his say publicly
that there should be less Dayton and more Brussels
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is an overly free
interpretation of his mandate, to put it mildly. The result
is that we have an obvious impasse in implementing the
5+2 plan.

In that regard, we support the principle of
transferring all responsibility for the current processes
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to the local authorities and
further reducing the budget and personnel of the Office
of the High Representative with the aim of closing it
in accordance with the existing conditions and criteria.
We see no reason for any executive role for the Office.
The time for this special instrument is over.
In the Bosnian leadership's View, the current internal
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is experiencing the
worst systemic political crisis of the post-Dayton period
both at the State level and in the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, reaching a point of paralysis in the
normal functioning of Government bodies. At its heart
is a rupture in relations of trust and cooperation among
the three constituent peoples of the Federation whose
depth is worse than at any time since the end of the
period of armed conflict. There are serious fears for the
inviolability of one of the key, foundational premises
of the Dayton Agreement - equality. That is a major
concern, since we believe that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has no viable alternative to the Dayton framework.

The Dayton algorithm is also fully applicable to
the most serious practical problem, which is reform of
the Federation's election laws. The key event in Bosnia
and Herzegovina this year is the upcoming general
elections in October. That expression of the people's
will should be fair, free and independent, including
free from foreign interference, and should reflect the
interests of all the country's peoples.

The role of the international community in internal
Bosnian affairs needs particular attention. The main
function of foreign participation should be to encourage
the processes of genuine national reconciliation and the
strengthening of mutual understanding and cooperation
among all the peoples living in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In the past few months, unfortunately, we have seen our
partners take a number of steps aimed at interfering
directly in the work of the Bosnian authorities, of
which the most revealing is the pressure that has been
put on the Bosnia and Herzegovina High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council to change decisions that do not
meet certain external expectations. Regrettably, with
regard to reform of the election laws, the international
mediators also deliberately favour one side, which
cannot contribute to establishing the necessary climate
of trust.

The activity of the semi-clandestine so-called Bern
process in Sarajevo initiated by a group of States last
year is not part of any coordinated efforts. As far as
we know, the agenda of that closed diplomatic club

includes issues related to broad constitutional reform of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which come under the Dayton
Agreement. By the way, representatives from the
Office of the High Representative took part in the work
on that so-called process, but we were not officially
informed. There is no information about it in the report.
It is hardly likely that this kind of factionalism in the
international community can benefit the common goals
of strengthening peace, stability and security in the
country and the region. We must be united if we truly
want that for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In the context of procedural issues, apart from the
importance of submitting the report on time, we would
also like to draw attention to the extract it contains
from the final communique of the December meeting
of the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
in Sarajevo, which was not adopted by consensus.
In future, we would request that in such cases it be
compulsory for the reports to include the relevant
references to the particular positions of the States
members of the Steering Board. We would also like to
propose to Council members and anyone else who wants
to that they study the alternative report on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina prepared by Republika
Srpska. It contains useful information on a number of
issues, including the outside funding for a number of
media outlets in Bosnia and Herzegovina that position
themselves as so-called independent sources.

Russia intends to continue to consistently contribute
to the implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which still has significant
positive potential, and to strengthen its constructive
bilateral cooperation with the country. Bosnia and
Herzegovina has every chance of becoming a place for
successful political, economic and cultural cooperation
for the broadest possible range of participants. We hope
that those chances can become a reality through our
joint efforts.

