Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, we thank Ms. Jamila Afghani
for her frank briefing. We would say to her that we
know very well that by helping women, we are helping
Afghanistan as a whole.

We also thank our brave United Nations women at
the very helm of the Organization - Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed and Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary DiCarlo - for their briefings. It
is very important that they visited Afghanistan and
received their information first hand. Their recent visit
to the country and the Council's mission to Kabul in
January 2018 confirmed that the situation there is not
only difficult, but critical. The country continues to be
shaken by large-scale bloody terrorist acts, including
in Kabul. There has been an increase in civilian
casualties, including women and children, as well as
among Afghan military and police forces. We recognize
and appreciate their dedication to the fight against
terrorism. Coordinated action is needed to address this
harmful trend.

We are gravely concerned about the presence of
the terrorist organization the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in Afghanistan. Afghan security
forces have had some success, but militants continue
to strengthen their positions and influence, including
in the north and south of the country, replenishing their
ranks with foreign terrorist fighters from Syria and
Iraq. We are also concerned about the diversification
of ISIL's methods and channels of youth recruitment.

The terrorist threat is inextricably linked to the drug
problem, which poses a serious threat to Afghanistan,
the region and the world. Drug dollars fuel terrorism.
We believe that it is essential to maintain and redouble
international efforts to combat this scourge. We wish
to draw attention to the professional operations and
measures undertaken by the Collective Security Treaty
Organization in the fight against drug trafficking.
Russia will facilitate Afghanistan's establishment as a
peaceful, independent and flourishing State that will
generate neither terrorists nor drug threat. We intend to
continue to work with our Afghan friends to eradicate
security threats, primarily from ISIL and Al-Qaida,
and to strengthen the capacity of civilian, security and
anti-drug entities.

Despite the difficult military and political situation
in Afghanistan, we see a window of opportunity for
a peaceful settlement and national reconciliation,
with the participation of the broadest possible range
of social and political circles in the country. At this
stage, international cooperation is coalescing around
the settlement of the regional conflict in Afghanistan.
We believe that this is a step in the right direction.
We are convinced that this process should not be
turned into a vain and frivolous display or a political
competition. Our common objective is to preserve a
unified and indivisible ethnically diverse Afghan State
that provides equal opportunities in life for all groups
in the population, including women.

Russia has consistently supported the Afghan
people's aspirations for lasting peace. We have a genuine
interest in promoting the Afghan-owned and Afghan-
led peace and reconciliation process and the subsequent
stabilization of the country. A peaceful, stable and
prosperous Afghanistan is our common objective.
We are ready to continue to provide assistance to that
end. It was this objective that guided our own efforts
in this area when we organized the second meeting of
the Moscow format of consultations in November 2018,
which brought together the broadest possible range of
stakeholders, and when, in May, we also provided a
forum for intra-Afghan discussions with the delegation
of the Taliban.

We highly appreciate our constructive and
honest relations with the people and political forces
of Afghanistan and we intend to develop them in
every way possible. We support the policy of making
the peace process in Afghanistan as inclusive as
possible and encourage the participation of all the
country's sociopolitical forces, including women. We
are convinced that broad discussions are the key to
achieving peace in Afghanistan.

We are pleased that the inter-Afghan
dialogue - which was launched in Moscow on 5 and
6 February and brought women, leading politicians and
the Taliban around the same table for the first time - was
taken a step further in Doha on 7 and 8 July. We know
that the German Government contributed significantly
to the convening of this dialogue. It is all the more
encouraging that both rounds have confirmed the
sincere commitment of all Afghans to achieving peace
and reconciliation. We welcome the fact that, in both
Moscow and Doha, the participants adopted an outcome
document that reflected their intention to continue
moving consistently towards intra-Afghan peace.

We would like to highlight another successful
channel of cooperation on Afghanistan, namely,
the trilateral consultations at the level of special
representatives of Russia, the United States and China.
These meetings took place in Washington, DC, in
March, in Moscow in April, and in Beijing in July.
It is important that a joint statement was issued after
the meetings in Moscow and Beijing, details of which
our colleague from China has just conveyed to us. We
welcome the inclusion ofPakistan in these consultations
with the troika, and we are confident that Iran can play
an important, constructive role.

On the whole, the inclusion of regional players
in this format would have a beneficial impact on the
development of solutions to the post-conflict order
in Afghanistan, as only an atmosphere of good-
neighbourliness and cooperation will allow us to
solve the acute problems in Afghanistan today. We
are convinced that we need to move forward in
Afghanistan using tried and tested structures, and we
see great potential in the Contact Group ofthe Shanghai
Cooperation Organization with Afghanistan, as well as
in the counter-terrorism and anti-drugs cooperation
between Afghanistan and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization.

Afghanistan is on the threshold of presidential
elections that are planned for September. We believe
that these elections should be a powerful consolidating
factor for Afghan society. On the whole, the criteria for
unification should be defined not only in the holding of
elections, but also through efforts to achieve national
reconciliation. It is that approach that will allow us to
strengthen the dignified status of women, which has
always been and will remain not only a decoration
in modern Afghanistan, but an embodiment of the
bravery of the Afghan people as a whole in fighting
terrorism, in politics and diplomacy, in journalism, in
parliamentarianism, in national reconciliation and in the
social and economic reconstruction of the country. We
must not forget that very serious challenges lie ahead.
Therefore, any steps towards the future in Afghanistan
should be acceptable to all Afghans, including women.
