Ms. Frick (Liechtenstein): For decades, conflicts in
the Middle East and North Africa have deeply affected
the lives and livelihoods of the peoples of that region.
In recent years, new waves of violence have contributed
to a humanitarian crisis and population displacements
not seen since the Second World War, especially in
Syria, Iraq, Libya, Yemen and Gaza. The terrorist
threats in and emanating from that area have reached
unprecedented levels, with vast territories ruled by
brutal extremists. The international community has
discussed Middle East issues for a long time, but often
to no avail. As a result, the effects of instability are
more evident and more broadly felt than ever.

The reasons for that dramatic state of affairs are
highly complex. Sustainable solutions will also require
efforts outside the realm of the Security Council.
Nevertheless, the situation in the Middle East and
North Africa falls squarely within the competence of
the Council. The way it responds in that area serves
as a measure of the Council's performance in general.
I would like to make a few brief observations in that
regard.

Many of the conflicts in the region, most
prominently the war in Syria, can be seen as failures of
preventive diplomacy. That is not meant as a criticism of
United Nations envoys and their teams. They are doing
their best in desperate circumstances. Rather, the main
problem is that preventive diplomacy has often been
marshalled too late and lacks political and financial
backing. That situation is all the more regrettable, as
we know that diplomacy can be effective in the most
complex of crises, as was demonstrated recently with
the agreement on Iran's nuclear programme. Proper
implementation will of course be essential, and that
may encounter difficulties or delays. Nevertheless,
that historic deal should pave the way for greater
collaboration on other strategic issues affecting the
region.

The conflicts in the Middle East and North
Africa are set against complex historic backdrops and
geopolitical alliances. Council members frequently
find their own interests at stake, which is not exactly a
catalyst for effective decision-making. Yet the Council
is a collective organ mandated to maintain peace
and security on behalf of the entire United Nations
membership. The Council is not meant to be a forum for
pursuing national political goals. That is particularly
true for situations where civilian populations are
subject to massive crimes.

I would therefore like to remind Council members,
as well as all other States Members of the United
Nations, that they are invited to support the proposed
code of conduct regarding Security Council action
against genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes, prepared by the Accountability, Coherence,
Transparency group. The proposed code calls for a
voluntary political pledge to support Council action in
such situations. It is, in other words, a pledge not to
leave civilians under attack to their fate. I hope that it
will also strengthen the resolve of Council members to
overcome divisions and enhance the sense of ownership
among non-permanent members.

The conflicts in the region are also marked by
extreme levels of impunity. Perpetrators of the most
serious crimes fear the crimes of revenge perpetrated
by their enemies more than they do trials in a court
of law. We have to make the fight against impunity
a building block in our efforts and signal to victims
that they are not forgotten. Ratifications of the Rome
Statute are important in that regard. A Security Council
referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court, complemented by other accountability
efforts, is an obvious option. The counterarguments
raised in that regard - "let us not interfere with the
political process" - have frankly been overtaken by
the realities on the ground.

