Ms. Zahir (Maldives): I thank Poland for convening
this important open debate. As many speakers have
already noted, it has been two years this month since
the Security Council adopted its landmark resolution
2286 (2016), which calls for the protection of civilians,
especially where the provision of medical care in
conflict situations is concerned.

The protection of civilians should be the first
objective in managing any conflict. The reality,
however, is that the character of conflicts has
undergone radical changes in recent years. Non-State
actors fighting on their own or on behalf of other States
are replacing States as the key participants in conflicts.
In such situations, respect for and even recognition
of international humanitarian law have been ignored.
That situation requires finding ways to stop attacks
on civilians and hold perpetrators accountable. Most
important, we have to start thinking of ways in which
such attacks could be prevented. That is where civil-
society organizations can play an important role in
creating awareness among potential and actual warring
parties of the need to protect civilians and the delivery
of humanitarian aid in particular.

Open debates of this nature are extremely important
for drawing attention to the seriousness of situations,
such as those involving attacks on civilians in conflicts
in various parts of the world, and to offer suggestions
for remedies. But the importance of ensuring that the
Security Council takes immediate action, as required
under the Charter, in protecting unarmed civilians, is
quite another matter. It is unacceptable that the Council
failed to act when unarmed civilians were attacked
and killed in Palestine last week. Every member of the
Council, and indeed every State Member of the United
Nations, has the solemn responsibility to respect and
implement the resolutions both of the Council and the
General Assembly. If any Member decides to ignore
them, it will harm the legitimacy and credibility of the
United Nations, particularly the Security Council.

The Maldives is competing for a non-permanent
seat on the Security Council for the 2019-2020 term at
the elections to be held on 8 June. If we are elected,
the Maldives will work with Council members,
troop-contributing countries and civil-society
organizations to create greater awareness about respect
for international humanitarian law. The primacy of
upholding international humanitarian law should be
a crucial element in the preparation of peacekeepers
and indeed in designing peacekeeping missions, for
they have a significant role to play both in protecting
civilians and providing humanitarian aid.

The Maldives has continued to reiterate its call
for constructing an analytical framework that can
enable the Council to consider essential changes to the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping missions.
The framework would start by establishing greater
coordination and operational coherence between
peacekeeping operations and the United Nations
country teams on the ground at the level of a mission's
inception. Peacekeepers can fully execute their
mandate only if they are given the necessary resources.
The Maldives stands ready to be a partner in helping
to save civilians trapped or threatened by conflict. We
will help to craft shared solutions for a shared destiny.

