Allow me first to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of October, and I thank you for organizing this important debate on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the milestone resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. I would also like to thank the speakers for their thorough briefings, as well as for their leadership in their respective field. Coming from a country where women have shown the whole world that women's role is not to bear the brunt of conflicts and heal the wounds resulting from them, it is with great pride that I address the Council today. Women have proved that they are not just victims but essential and active agents of change. Allow me to recall one particular relevant moment that asserts the latter. On 27 November 2019, following a night of unrest in the Beirut suburbs, Lebanese mothers and women of the area flooded the streets and marched together in a solidarity rally, carrying Lebanese flags, banners, white roses and candles, calling for peace, coexistence and unity and chanting out loud: "We, the mothers of the country, will not accept its segregation." Lebanese women have been at the forefront of every occasion. They have played an essential role through their widespread participation in the 2019 movement on the ground, raising their voices to call for systemic change, maintaining the peaceful face of the protests and forming buffers between security forces and protesters to prevent outbreaks of violence. They were also the first responders to the tragic blast of 4 August 2020 as firefighters, nurses, doctors, paramedics, pharmacists, caregivers, social workers, activists, journalists, reporters, media workers, survivors, human rights defenders, leaders and volunteers. In that context, our first national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), which was endorsed by the Council of Ministers last year, reflects Lebanon's aspirations to achieve gender equality and women's empowerment and to consolidate the equal, full, meaningful and effective participation of women in building sustainable peace, preventing conflicts and promoting national stability. This year, despite all the ongoing challenges, implementation is on the right track, with the National Steering Committee 1325, spearheaded by the National Commission for Lebanese Women and supported by United Nations agencies, leading the coordination and implementation efforts. Despite the unprecedented domestic crises, Lebanon is progressing rapidly in the field of women's participation in the defence and security sectors. The Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) made it a top priority to enlist women within their ranks, which resulted in a significant increase in female enrolment, with more than 4,000 women, including in the air force, land border regiments and the Republican Guard Brigade. Today, the participation of women in the Military Academy amounts to 43 per cent and the percentage of women among high-ranking military officers and soldiers is 5.5 per cent, with five women brigadier generals. Moreover, women in the LAF have been deployed to high-risk areas, such as the Wadi Hmeid checkpoint in Arsal, one of the military's most dangerous deployments, which was attacked by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Jabhat al-Nusrah in 2014. Women were also stationed in the Nahr al-Bared Palestinian refugee camp in northern Lebanon, where fighting took place between the LAF and the Fath al-Islam group in 2007. Regarding the participation of women in the security forces, the General Directorate of General Security has included the goal of a gradual increase in the recruitment of women in its ranks in its five-year strategic plan. With respect to the political participation of women, Lebanon is committed to advancing this agenda. The current caretaker Government comprises six women ministers, among them the Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister, making her the first Arab woman to hold that position. In 2019, the previous Government also embraced the Arab world's first female interior minister. Allow me to express my great gratitude for the immense contribution and achievements of female peacekeepers in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and to stress the key role of women in peacekeeping. Today, women represent a small but increasing percentage of the peacekeepers serving under the UNIFIL flag. Over the past years, UNIFIL, which ranks second among major United Nations peacekeeping operations in terms of the percentage of female peacekeepers, has witnessed a slight increase in the number of women peacekeepers, with around 29 per cent of approximately 800 civilian peacekeepers and around 5 per cent of approximately 10,300 military peacekeepers being women. We strongly support the United Nations efforts to ensure gender parity in peacekeeping. We thank UNIFIL troop-contributing countries for expanding the participation of women in their contingents, and we strongly support the expansion of the role and number of women in UNIFIL, as well as their meaningful participation in all aspects of operations. As a signatory country to the Action for Peacekeeping Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, we consider the women and peace and security agenda critical to enhancing the performance of peacekeeping operations at all levels, thereby contributing to longer lasting and sustainable peace. In that regard, we commend UNIFIL for incorporating a gender perspective in its mission and for ensuring women's full participation in the day-to-day operations, in compliance with resolution 1325 (2000). Despite the progress that has been made during the past 20 years regarding the women and peace and security agenda, millions of women still agree that much work remains to be done to evolve into a future where women lead and participate equally, fully and meaningfully in peace and security matters. The voices of women, their active presence on the ground across the world, their demands and their aspirations should be translated into real change. The world of today, grappling with widespread conflicts, wars and upheavals, needs an increased representation of women in all domains at all levels for the prevention, management and resolution of conflict and the promotion of peace and security.
