Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): At the outset, may I
offer my congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council and for
initiating this timely discussion. I thank the Permanent
Representatives of Austria, Mexico and Turkey for
their briefings on the implementation of the three
crucial Council resolutions on terrorism, so central to
maintaining international peace and security.

Much had been said within the United Nations, in
particular in the Council, on countering terrorism. Yet
the world continues to be rocked regularly by senseless
acts of terror or attempts to unleash death and
destruction in our midst. The scourge of terrorism
poses a suffocating threat to our common values of
decency and humanity and to our democratic way of
life.

Constant fear 4 induced by terrorism, insecurity,
anxiety and the never-ending tragic losses both human
and material - and economic stagnation were a
common experience of life in Sri Lanka for nearly
three decades. Fortunately, that vile menace was
completely eradicated from our soil last year, after
repeated efforts to talk to the perpetrators and get them
back into the democratic fold had been rebuffed. For
our part, we will take every measure to ensure that our
lives will never again be allowed to be tortured by
warped minds wantonly sowing death and destruction.

The agony imposed by terrorism does not respect
boundaries. It is a menace that has affected countries
across the globe - their attitudes, their economies and
their daily lives. Hence, our response to terrorism
cannot and should not be viewed or judged by looking
through different prisms. The United Nations, and this
Council in particular, should act with a common
purpose to assist every sovereign State and to respect
its right to free its territory from the abomination of
terrorism and protect its people's right to life, peace,
security and democracy.

The presentations we have just heard from the
three Committee Chairs were comprehensive. We
recognize the efforts of the Committees to assist with
capacity-building and knowledge-sharing and to bridge
gaps in implementing counter-terrorism measures.

We see enormous benefits in all Member States
closing ranks in order to implement the Security
Council resolutions on countering terrorism. In that
context, we emphasize the need to prevent the use of
their territories as safe havens by terrorist groups and
front organizations, including for raising funds,
acquiring financial assets and economic resources and
other related activities that fuel and sustain terrorism
and pose threats to peace and security elsewhere.

The continuing danger posed by seemingly
innocent front organizations exploiting the democratic
freedoms of our societies to perpetuate this evil must
be stopped. Enhanced cooperation among intelligence
and defence establishments across borders, active
intelligence-sharing and constant vigilance are vital in
our efforts to counter terrorism. Sri Lanka is grateful to
our network of friends with whom we have effectively
developed intelligence links. The value of intelligence-
sharing was lucidly illustrated in recent days when
multiple tragedies were avoided due to the vigilance of
intelligence agencies and their willingness to share
information.

Similarly, such cooperation is vital to prevent the
acquisition of arms and other destructive material by
groups bent on sowing death and destruction. Cross-
border cooperation in thwarting the ever present link
between international terrorism and transnational
organized crime becomes critical. Terrorism's tentacles
have spread to such areas as the illicit trade in arms,
the multibillion-dollar narcotics trade, money-
laundering and trafficking in persons - a phenomenon
that my own country is now confronting.

Collective action has become all the more vital
due to the ease with which terrorists establish cross-
border linkages and exploit advances in technology and
communications that can lead to formidable and
destructive innovations. In parallel, it is also necessary
to address underlying social, economic and political
factors that may contribute to breeding terrorism.

Against that background, it becomes incumbent
on all countries to re-examine their policies on granting
asylum and refugee status, especially to prevent the
abuse of well-intentioned, generous and humane
policies by terrorists, front organizations or facilitators
of terror. It would also be imperative to streamline and
enhance domestic law enforcement and security
mechanisms to close any loopholes.

Cooperation across borders also becomes an
absolute necessity if this hydra is to be placed back in
its box. Arrangements for mutual legal assistance and

the extradition of terrorists - a requirement under a
number of conventions concluded under the auspices of
the United Nations - and helping countries to develop
national capacity in the areas of investigation,
prosecution, intelligence gathering, border protection,
customs and immigration surveillance and forensic
science are vital tools that can add to global efforts in
countering terrorism.

In this regard, we thank the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Governments
of Canada and Australia for facilitating the second
workshop in South Asia, which was hosted by Sri
Lanka in August 2010, for police and prosecutors on
the subject of effectively countering terrorism.

Collective regional efforts could significantly
boost efforts in deterring terrorist activity. It was in
that spirit of cooperation and understanding that the
members of the South Asian region adopted the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters and the ministerial declaration on cooperation
in combating terrorism, during the fifteenth SARRC
meeting, held in Colombo in 2009, for which Sri Lanka
provided firm leadership.

Sri Lanka earnestly hopes that all the Members of
the United Nations will demonstrate the necessary
political will by concluding negotiations on the
comprehensive convention on international terrorism,
which has unfortunately been on the table for almost a
decade. It is time to send an unequivocal message of
our commitment to eradicate the menace of terrorism
by taking the appropriate political decisions now.

My country remains committed to cooperating
with the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1540 (2004), 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001) - as well
as with other related intergovernmental bodies working
on countering terrorism such as the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL, the
International Civil Aviation Organization and the
International Maritime Organization - both at the
international and regional levels, as well as to sharing
its experience and expertise in that regard.

