Mr. Alnor (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): As this
is the first time I am addressing the Council since I
have been appointed Permanent Representative of
the Sudan, I would like at the outset to express my
appreciation for the role of the United Nations and the
Security Council in support of peace and stability in
the Sudan. I want to personally extend my greetings to
you, Madam President, in recognition of Nigeria's role
in the maintenance of security and peace in Africa, in
particular in the Sudan; to thank Mr. Ladsous, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
briefing; and to assert that I am here to cooperate and
coordinate with all members of the Council.

Paragraph 30 of the report of the Secretary-General
on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (S/2014/279) refers to the all-inclusive national
dialogue initative announced by the President, which is
based on the specific priorities of peace and security,
political reforms and democratization, economic
reforms, and national identity. We appreciate the
support of the Secretary-General and of the Council, as

expressed in resolution 2148 (2014), for that initiatve. At
the same time, we call on the international community,
in particular the Security Council, to strongly welcome
that announcement and to support it in order to send
a message of encouragement to the armed movements
to lay down their arms and participate in the dialogue
without condition, like any other political party, in
light of the guarantees provided by the Government.
We reaffirm that the success of the inclusive national
initiative is the only means of achieving stability and
securiy in Darfur.

In more than one instance, the report refers to
intercommunal conflicts among the different tribes and
their humanitarian impact. However, in its observations
and conclusion section, in particular in paragraph
74, the report welcomes the Government's efforts to
contain such confrontations and to strike reconciliation
agreements among the tribes. We therefore affirm
that we are determined to continue to strive to reach
a comprehensive and sustainable solution to the root
causes of such tribal confrontations, in coordination
with the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the United Nations country
team. In that context, I refer to the important role
played by President Deby Itno of Chad in containing
the tribal confrontations and in including the anti-peace
movements in the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
I would also like to refer to the decisions taken at the
second gathering in Um Jaras in Chad, which is part of
an effort which included major participation from all
the groups of Darfur.

In more than one paragraph, the report refers
to the Rapid Support Force, describing it as a militia
whose members were recruited in Darfur and trained
in Khartoum. I would like to point out that the Force is
a regular force that is part of the Sudan Armed Forces
and subject to its rules and regulations. They have been
depoloyed in Darfur to confront the military action of
the armed groups against the civilians in Darfur.

We value the efforts of the Joint Chief Mediator,
Mohamed Ibn Chambas, to make the non-signatory
movements join the Doha Document and his meetings
with the leaders of the three armed groups, in particular
the Minni Minawi, Gibril Ibrahim and Abdul Wahid.
Although paragraph 31 of the report refers to the fact
that the leaders of those movements have welcomed
the idea of a national dialogue as a positive step, it
also confirms that they have not yet committed to
participating in it. The Security Council therefore needs
to support the dialogue in order to dispel the skepticism
and doubts of those movements and reassure them that
all guarantees will be made to ensure that they are able
to fully and freely express themselves.

In conclusion, within the framework of the political
action and the positive reaction to the President's
iniative, we would like affirm that yesterday in
Addis Ababa, negotiations were launched between
the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement-North. As the Council is aware,
the armed movements of Darfur and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement-North are all under the banner of
the Sudanese Revolutionary Front. We have previously
affirmed that we are providing all guarantees to
ensure their participation in the inclusive dialogue
so asto provide more space for the achievement of a
comprehensive and sustainable political settlement for
Darfur and in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states.

