Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): This open debate is the first to be
held since the Palestinian people peacefully began,
on 30 March, the so-called March of Return, along
the border between Gaza and Israel. It began with a
celebration of Earth Day and will end with Al-Nakba, on
15 May, on which date there will be a commemoration of
the illegal dispossession of Palestinian territories over
the more than 50 years of Israeli occupation. Tributes
will be paid to all Palestinian victims who perished as a
result of the brutality of the Israeli Government.

According to the latest special report of the World
Health Organization, between 15 and 20 April, during
the fourth mobilization of the March of Return, four
Palestinians, including one child, were murdered, and
832 wounded by the Israel Defense Forces as they
demanded an end to the inhuman blockade that Israel
has been using to choke the life out of the inhabitants of
Gaza for more than 11 years now.

In total, 32 Palestinians perished, including three
children, and more than 1,600 persons have suffered
a range of injuries over the past four weeks. I need not
remind members here that Palestinian victims of the
latest events, including those killed by sniper bullets,
those seriously wounded by shootings, be it by rubber
or lead bullets, are proof positive that the State of Israel
is violating the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and is acting in clear breach of the
prohibitions set forth in the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949.

The Security Council must call on the Government
of Israel to fulfil its international obligation to
protect the mobilized Palestinian civilians. This body
must demand that the relevant international bodies
immediately and without further delay conduct an
investigation into the events of the past three weeks
on the border area between Gaza and Israel. This
must be an independent, transparent and conclusive
investigation, so as to identify those responsible for
firing on Palestinian demonstrators.

In this order of priorities, we wish to place on
record once again our strong condemnation of the
decision by the Government of the United States and
other countries that seek to move their embassies to
Jerusalem. These decisions are in violation of several
Security Council resolutions, including resolution
478 (1980), which calls for States to withdraw their
diplomatic representations from Jerusalem. We would
alert everyone to the fact that as the date for the transfer
of the United States embassy to Jerusalem comes closer,
we will see an increase in tensions and violence on the
ground in the region.

My delegation wishes to state its categorical
rejection of the clear intent of the Government of
Israel, with respect to the construction of settlements
in occupied Palestinian territories, inasmuch as it is
a direct violation of resolution 2334 (2016) and other
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, which reiterate that the establishment of
settlements in Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, including East Jerusalem, have no legal basis and
represent a flagrant violation of international law and a
major obstacle to achieving the two-State solution and
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.

We reiterate our full commitment to resolution
2334 (2016), on the illegality of Israeli settlements on
Palestinian occupied territories, and we stress once
again that the quarterly report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the resolution should be in
written form, so as to afford us detailed knowledge of
its implementation status, and that we should also be
provided with up-to-date maps of all settlements on
occupied Palestinian territories. We have consistently
as Council members made this request here; so far it
has not been heard or heeded.

Likewise, there are concerns about the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), because it
provides humanitarian assistance to more than 5 million
people and is currently experiencing a financial crisis
that is jeopardizing its capacity to respond to the many
pressing needs of refugees in the areas of health,
education, safe drinking water, inter alia. We express
our firm commitment to all international efforts geared
towards a peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Here we endorse initiatives such as the Quartet
road map, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative and others, which serve as safeguards ofajust
and lasting peace that would enable both parties to live
within recognized and secure borders.

We reiterate our conviction that the only long-
term solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the
two-State one, which would finally give rise to a free,
sovereign and independent Palestinian State, within
pre-l967 international borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.

In closing, allow me to read out statements by two
young Palestinians, Tarek and Ghanam, who were born
in a Lebanese refugee camp.

(spoke in English)
Tarek said:
"My religion is the freedom of all oppressed
people, not only the Palestinian people. I want to
know why the international courts never address
what is happening in Palestine".

Ghanam said:

"I would like my voice to be heard and to send
a message to the world about Palestine and the
Palestinian people, the people who are holding onto
and carrying the history and identity of Palestine.
I am living in a refugee camp in Lebanon, I was
raised and lived off ofhumanitarian assistance, and
I continue to survive at the mercy of international
aid programmes. Our story, the story of the
Palestinian people, is one of a human who has a
home and his home was invaded and occupied by
an outsider, an occupier.

"We are a people that love freedom for the
whole world, and we are against injustice anywhere.
We are deprived of our basic human rights every
day. I hope that the international community and
the media will shed light on the Palestinian cause
and suffering. UNRWA is reducing its services
to the Palestinian refugees living in camps due to
the lack of international support for the Agency. I
wish freedom andjustice to all oppressed people in
the world".

(spoke in Spanish)

Let me conclude by responding to the representative
of Israel, who asked what Bolivia would do. First of
all, Bolivia would respect international humanitarian
law. First of all, Bolivia would respect international
human rights law. First of all, Bolivia would comply
with all Security Council resolutions. However, I do
not think that Bolivia would ever find itself in that
situation, because we would never use violence in order
to occupy land that belongs to another people. Bolivia
would blockade others in the way that Israel isolates
the population in Gaza. We hope that the Council can
be useful in resolving the very protracted, regrettable,
tragic and unjust issue of Palestine.

