Ms. Meitzad (Israel): I have asked for the floor in
order to comment on some of the remarks made here
earlier today.

In his statement earlier today, the observer of the
Observer State of Palestine insisted that the Palestinian
demonstrations were entirely peaceful and that all
reports to the contrary are "Israeli propaganda". Either
we believe that planting and detonating explosive
devices, throwing Molotov cocktails and attempting
to breach the fence are forms of peaceful protest, or
the representative is deliberately choosing to ignore
the facts also presented earlier today by the Special
Coordinator in his briefing.

As for Bolivia, as predicted, its representative
has once again delivered a statement to the Council
that is simply incorrect. As I pointed out in the last
open debate on the Middle East (S/PV.8167), although
Bolivia has sat on the Security Council since January
2017, not once has its representative even approached
us to discuss the conflict. It is now April 2018, and still
there is no contact.

As for the statement that was made here earlier
today by the Ambassador of Lebanon, while Hizbullah,
the internationally recognized terrorist organization,
plays an open, active and prominent role in the Lebanese
Government. The result is the deployment of over
100,000 rockets on our northern border as Hizbullah's
fanatical bloodlust draws conflict ever nearer.
Meanwhile, Lebanon, which presumed to lecture Israel
about human rights, continues to perpetrate official
and systematic discrimination against Lebanese people
of Palestinian origin, preventing them from gaining
access to health care, education, social services and
opportunities for employment. There is, sadly, a new
meaning of the phrase "cedars of Lebanon" - the
irresponsible Lebanese officials who are ceding control
to Hizbullah and Iran, and seeding the ground for
future conflict.

Moving from Hizbullah to its master, Iran, the
Islamic Republic of Iran is the world's leading State
sponsor of terror. All present in the Chamber are
well aware that Iranian-made and Iranian-supplied
weapons are fuelling conflicts and promoting terror
in Syria, Lebanon and, as the most recent Panel of
Experts has reported, Yemen. Iran's activities violate
multiple resolutions and, as Iranian officials regularly
tell the world, they dream of the day when they will
be able to destroy Israel. We have repeatedly provided
the Council with evidence of Iran's malicious and
dangerous activities throughout the region, especially
in Syria. It is a moral obligation of the international
community to take concrete actions against those who
insist on fuelling violence, promoting terror and doing
their utmost to undermine global peace and security.

The meeting rose at 4.50 pm.
