Mr. Prosor (Israel): It was a great honour to have
President Bachelet here earlier today. Allow me to
thank and congratulate Chile on bringing this important
subject to the attention of the Council.

It is fitting that a debate on inclusive development
falls on Martin Luther King Jr. Day. Dr. King was a
champion of human rights and human dignity. He
taught the world that strong societies do not succumb to
division. They teach tolerance and embrace diversity.
He also taught us that we must commit ourselves
wholeheartedly to the values that we believe in. He said:

"The ultimate measure ofa man is not where he
stands in moments of comfort and convenience, but
where he stands at times of challenge".

The challenge before us is immense. In the coming
year, the United Nations will unveil a new development
agenda. It is our duty to ensure that it is truly
transformative and can serve as the key to unlocking a
better future for millions of people throughout the world.
We must create an enabling environment for inclusive
and peaceful societies by promoting good governance,
supporting strong institutions, and advancing the rule
of law at both the national and international levels.

Fifteen years ago, the Council adopted resolution
1325 (2000), which recognizes the critical role that
women play in promoting and maintaining peaceful
societies. The situation on the ground in many nations

has yet to match the Council's aspirations. Throughout
the world, too many women continue to be treated
as second-class citizens. From Nigeria to Syria,
from Pakistan to the Sudan, women are subjected to
unspeakable violence and discrimination. In many
places they are barred from participating in political
life, cannot work or attend school, or are victims
of sexual violence that is often overlooked by local
authorities.

Societies that oppress women are doing a double
disservice. First, they are committing an injustice
against half the population, and secondly they are
obstructing development. We know that when half of
the population is sidelined, the path to development
is blocked. We also know that women promote peace
and reconciliation in these societies. As an example, in
Rwanda women have been the driving force in post-
conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding. Today,
Rwanda is ranked seventh in gender equality and
women are fully engaged in the country's economic and
political leadership.

Martin Luther King Jr. taught us that "Change
does not roll in on the wheels of inevitability, but
comes through continuous struggle". The challenges
to development - the hardship, the despair, the
poverty - can seem overwhelming. The security
challenges that we face are equally daunting.
Nonetheless, I am optimistic because I have seen at
first hand how inclusiveness enriches a society.

From its earliest days, Israel opened its door to
all people of all nationalities and faiths throughout
the world. We championed an education system that
teaches tolerance and a justice system that safeguards
the rights of every person. Today one can find people
of all colours, creeds and religions succeeding in every
area of society. Israel also understands that empowering
women is the foundation of thriving societies. The
pioneers who founded Israel's kibbutz movement built
a society centred on cooperation and equality. Women
contributed to every aspect of kibbutz society, from the
agricultural fields to the political field.

Gender equality is also enshrined in our 1948
Declaration of Independence. More than 40 years ago,
when Golda Meir was elected Prime Minister, Israel
was the third country in the world to elect a woman to
its highest office. In fact, Israel is the only country in
the Middle East where women have presided over each
and every one of the three branches of Government.
Today, we continue to invest in women. The Israeli
Government funds a number of high-tech vocational
training programmes to enable Arab, Bedouin and
Jewish women to reach their full potential.

The prosperity and stability of societies also
depend on enabling young people to play a meaningful
role in shaping their future. The current generation of
children and youth is the largest in human history. Of
the 7 billion people living on the planet, nearly half are
under the age of 25. These young people have hopes
and dreams. When young people see a future devoid of
jobs and opportunities, frustration sets in. If it is not
addressed it is a ticking time bomb.

Members may have read about a 14-year old Syrian
boy named Usaid Barho. Like other boys of his age,
Usaid dreamed of growing up and finding a job that
would make his family proud. But there are no simple
dreams for a boy growing up in Syria. Last year, Usaid
was recruited by Sunni extremists from Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham who threatened to rape his Mother
if he did not join them. Seeing no alternative, Usaid
volunteered to be a suicide bomber. He strapped on a
suicide vest and made his way to a Shiite mosque and
revealed himself to the local guards.

Usaid's story is not unique. Extremist groups thrive
in regions with poor governance, weak rule of law, and
a rampant social exclusion. It is no coincidence that so
many of the countries that threaten global peace and
stability are the very places where millions of people
are deprived of their basic dignities and freedoms.
Throughout the world radical Islamists are waging war
against our way of life, our values and our freedoms.
Development can lay the groundwork for stability, but
it is not enough. We must confront the extremists who
sow the seeds of hatred. We must uproot radicalism and
we must weed out the terrorists who seek to destroy our
way of life.

Working together, we are succeeding in doing what
the United Nations was created to do, improving the
lives of hundreds of millions of people. We are the
first generation with a chance of eliminating extreme
poverty. There is an African proverb that teaches that if
you want to go fast go alone, but if you want to go far,
go together. We have come so far and achieved so much
that we cannot stop now. Together, we must struggle
to break down the barriers that divide us. Together we
must build more peaceful societies and together we
must be united in achieving the common dream of all
people, a better future for our children and a chance to
live in peace and security.

