I would like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary- General for Syria, for his briefing. Recently, there have been signs of hope, as the efforts made by relevant parties, the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy have to a certain degree borne fruit, namely, the relatively calm situation on the ground since the beginning of March, as well as the progress made within the framework of the Constitutional Committee. Yet the calm is fragile, with a number of sporadic incidents of violence, as well as the reported increased operations of terrorist groups in several parts of Syria. The progress towards a political solution is being hampered by the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Meanwhile, this pandemic is also worsening the humanitarian situation, which is already desperate. Time and tide wait for no one. The pandemic may take away some of the time and the means; we cannot let it take away our humanity and love for peace. Let us not waste the positive momentum, but let us join forces to fight the common enemies, which are war and COVID-19. My delegation would therefore like first to re-emphasize the importance of maintaining and promoting stability in order to create the most favourable conditions for a lasting solution through dialogue and negotiation. We strongly support the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire in Syria, and we urge all actors to heed that call to facilitate not only an all-out effort to combat COVID-19 but also the political process in Syria. Secondly, it is important for the Council to be united during this time so as to take advantage of any achievement we have made and any viable diplomatic efforts in order to help the Syrian people through this current impasse, as well as to provide unwavering humanitarian support for people in urgent need. We would also like to stress the importance of the unceasing support for the facilitation work of the United Nations. Last but not least, Viet Nam has always firmly believed in a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political solution, with full respect for the principles of sovereign equality, territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of States, in full accordance with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
