Mr. Kapoor (India): At the outset let me thank
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Morocco, for
organizing today's briefing on peacekeeping operations,
a subject of great interest to my country. My thanks are
also due to Under-Secretaries-General Herve' Ladsous
and Ameerah Haq for their detailed briefings.
Today's debate reflects the enduring relevance of
United Nations peacekeeping operations in fulfilling the
Organization's obligations under the Charter towards
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Peacekeeping has not only withstood the test of time
for more than six decades now; it has in fact expanded
its mandate and reach. India has partnered with the
United Nations in peacekeeping operations since its
very inception, in the 19505. More than 100,000 Indian
soldiers have served with distinction in more than 40
peacekeeping missions. Even today, India is one of the
largest contributors to such missions, and we remain
committed to this global enterprise.

The nature of conflict has changed significantly
over the past few decades, and so has the mandate of
peacekeeping missions. It is no longer restricted to
keeping peace between warring parties, but includes
peace- and nation-building tasks. Unfortunately,
resource allocation has failed to keep pace with the
mandate expansion, and peacekeeping missions are
called on to do more and more with less and less. It
is therefore not surprising that the past few years have
been operationally challenging for peacekeeping. An
unusually large number of peacekeepers have lost their
lives in the service of peace mandates, and the missions
are overstretched, due to shortages of personnel and
equipment. Our briefers have mentioned some of these
challenges.

During our two years on the Security Council, we
have seen continued efforts to expand the mandates of
peacekeeping missions without any concrete measures
to bridge the resource gap that should be a real cause for
concern to us. The concept ofinter-mission cooperation
is promoted not to increase the effectiveness of
peacekeeping missions, but to cut down the resources
available to individual missions. The cross-borrowing
of equipment between missions in recent times is part
of that trend.

My delegation agrees that if several missions are
deployed in a region, cooperation among neighbouring
missions, including through exchanges of information,
coordinated strategies on cross-border illicit trafficking
of weapons, drugs and combatants, integrated approaches
to disarmament, demobilization and rehabilitation, and
so forth, can enhance their effectiveness. Similarly, the
adoption of regional and subregional strategies can help
in delivering humanitarian aid.

As the Council has already been doing,
resource-management strategies with a cross-border
perspective in crisis situations can be continued.
Managing weapons collected from demobilized
combatants could also be better conducted in regional
settings. Such measures, however, should be crafted
in consultation with mission leaderships and host
countries; they cannot be imposed from Headquarters.

However, inter-mission cooperation that is overly
focused on resources will diminish its usefulness.
Headquarters-driven sharing of critical mission assets
will also compromise the ability of field commanders to
deliver on their mandates. Moreover, the implementation
of inter-mission cooperation faces substantial legal,
political, and financial challenges. First, obtaining the
collective consent of host nations in a disturbed area
is a challenging prospect, with implications for the
overall peace process. Secondly, the transfer of troops
and equipment across missions would need to address
financial issues, since budgetary allocations are
mission-specific. Thirdly, such transfers would involve
legal complexities pertaining to immunity, privileges
and safeguards. Fourthly, troop-contributing countries
will have to calibrate their positions on a case-by-case
basis. Amending the memorandum of understanding
templates may not resolve that matter to the satisfaction
of one and all.

In conclusion, as a long-standing troop contributor,
India is ever ready to shoulder peacekeeping initiatives.
We support the potential of inter-mission cooperation
as a mechanism to enhance information exchange and
integrated strategies in a regional context.

