Mr. Kaul (Germany): I should like first to extend to
you, Sir, my delegation's congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of September. My delegation is ready to work
closely with you during your period in office. I would
also like to express the thanks and appreciation of my
delegation to Ambassador Wisnumurti for his convincing
leadership and very effective conduct of business during
the month of August.

Germany has taken an active role in all efforts aimed
at furthering peace and security in and around Rwanda
and the Great Lakes region. In line with our active and
intensive commitment since the outbreak of the crisis in
Rwanda last year, Foreign Minister Kinkel travelled to the
subregion in July. But the problems in the subregion are
by no means resolved, and, unfortunately, instability
persists.

My delegation voted in favour of resolution 1013
(1995), which we have just adopted, because we think
that an International Commission of Inquiry to investigate
allegations of arms flows to former Rwandan government
forces in the Great Lakes region can make a valuable
contribution to achieving regional stability. First, it will
help curb the illegal flow of arms in the subregion.
Secondly, it will bring stability to the countries concerned
by establishing clarity and the truth with regard to
existing allegations. Thirdly, it will help foster
cooperation between the countries of the region.

This resolution is based on recommendations made
by the Secretary-General, for which we are grateful. The
Government of Zaire, in particular, has called for the
establishment of such a Commission. Consequently, we
expect that the authorities of Zaire and of the other
countries in the region will closely cooperate with and
fully support the work of the members of the
Commission.

We hope that the establishment of this Commission
will be an important step towards stabilizing the situation
in the Great Lakes region. Others will have to follow. In
this respect, we welcome in particular the appointment of
a Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to work for the
preparation and convening of a regional conference. Such
a conference will help the countries of the subregion
achieve long-lasting stability. Germany is willing to assist
them in their efforts.

 

