Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica welcomes the opportunity provided by this
open debate to comment on one of the most urgent
issues of our times. I would like first to endorse the
statement made on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China. However, Costa Rica believes that, beyond the
issue of the increasing and repeated encroachment of
the Security Council on the responsibilities of other
organs, the subjects of this debate can, and, indeed,
should, be addressed from various perspectives. At the
end of the day, the principal aim of the Organization is
the maintenance of international peace and security,
and all of its organs must, within their respective
mandates, contribute to the achievement of that
purpose.

In our view, there is no need for further
arguments to prove the undeniable link that exists
between energy and the climate on the one hand and,
on the other, human security and the preservation of
the ecosystems that sustain our existence. We need
think only of the flooding of lowlands, the real
possibility of the disappearance of island States, the
forced displacement of many millions of people and
the triggering of conflicts as a result of the
deterioration of biophysical systems.

I would like now to speak as a Central American
in describing how we are already suffering the effects
of climate change and how we want to contribute to
our common endeavour. The inhabitants of
Mesoamerica have been suffering increasingly over
recent years as result of changes in weather patterns
and the increased frequency and strength of hurricanes
and floods. Year after year, those phenomena have been
resulting in increasing loss of life and infrastructure, as
well as having an impact on the competitiveness of our
economies. Climate change endangers our food
security, threatens the economic and social stability of
our countries and creates further obstacles to the
human development of our peoples. It is the ominous
harbinger of further and greater calamities ahead.

In our countries, the increase in intensity and
frequency of extreme climate events also reduces the
water resources and has an impact on the availability of
renewable resources for the generation of electrical
energy.

Our national strategy to deal with climate change
is based on an ethical principle of internal and external
responsibility. Externally, Costa Rica is participating in
this debate for the purpose of once again championing
a set of policies formulated in relation to the
environment, development and security. These policies
should be based on the shared principles of sustainable
development, international cooperation, solidarity and
shared but differentiated responsibilities, all of which
are considered in the 1992 Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development. We must unite all
efforts in order to adopt the necessary global actions.

On the internal level, and in addition to those
policies that we are supporting collectively, Costa Rica

has set itself the goal of being the first country in the
developing world to develop a neutral carbon balance.
That means arriving at a situation in which the
generation of greenhouse gases would be totally
compensated for by sustainable compensatory actions.

My country calls for the convening of a high-
level session at the start of the next General Assembly
session in order to hold an open, participatory and full
debate on the issues of climate change and energy in
all their aspects.

This is a struggle of sacrifices, firm commitments
and sustainable actions. It is not a struggle against
anyone; rather, it is a fight against time and for the
benefit of humanity.

