Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): For several weeks we
have witnessed the spectacle of the people of Palestine
being subjected to extraordinary measures which have
rendered their lives infinitely more difficult. As the
Palestinian memorandum (S/1996/235, annex) on the
situation makes clear, the arbitrary closure of the
occupied territories has paralysed their lives and is

 

causing irreparable harm. In consequence, the fragility of
the ongoing peace endeavours has become increasingly
evident.

As part of its campaign against violence and terror,
which we do not condone, Israel has resorted to a policy
involving a harsh regimen of collective punishment of the
residents of the West Bank and Gaza. As a result, the
movement of people and goods within the occupied
territories has been prohibited, as has that between the
occupied territories and Israel and neighbouring countries.
Consequently, economic activities have come to a virtual
standstill. Furthermore, Arab Jerusalem has been placed
off-limits to all residents of the West Bank and Gaza. In
action reminiscent of Israel's policies and practices in the
past, schools of higher learning and other educational
institutions have been summarily closed and the houses of
alleged perpetrators of violence have been demolished,
while the expansion of settlements and confiscation of lands
has continued unabated. These and other measures,
including the expansion of military operations and strategic
control by Israel, are in utter violation of all internationally
accepted norms and principles, and represent a massive
abuse of fundamental human rights. This has directly
contributed to the Palestinian sense of alienation and
frustration.

All of these actions have turned a new, crueller page
in Palestinian-Israeli relations, and are tantamount to a
policy of retribution against the entire Palestinian nation for
acts committed by individuals. They are incompatible with
the vision of Palestinian-Israeli reconciliation and a
Palestinian nation at peace with neighbouring Israel.
Ominously, they cast a shadow over the peace process.

It is paradoxical that while significant strides along the
road to peace are being made, we are witnessing an
exponential increase in restrictions on Palestinian access,
not only within the occupied territories but to Israel.
Confining Palestinians to their new, self-governing enclaves
and cutting them off from the rest of the world is a recipe
for heightened tension and confrontation. Yet concerted
Arab efforts to call international attention to the disastrous
consequences of a policy of closure have been rebuffed.
Marginal compensation for the immense hardship of a
sizable segment of the population would not suffice and
would not create conditions conducive to building the
economic infrastructure necessary for durable peace.

As heinous as the consequences of violence and
terrorism are, they should not deter us from expressing our
strong and unequivocal condemnation of the punishment of
an entire nation. The Palestinian Authority, which itself
has condemned terrorist attacks, has taken determined
steps not only to apprehend the perpetrators of crimes but
to maintain law and order. Reasons of security cannot
therefore be invoked by Israel to justify its draconian
actions.

It is self-evident that the prolonged closure and the
imposition of restrictions have already caused
considerable damage to the fabric of the Palestinian
economy and society. They must now cease. It is
therefore imperative that people and goods be allowed to
move freely across the pre-1967 borders. Furthermore, the
Government of Israel should be prevailed upon to observe
the provisions of the 1949 Geneva Convention applicable
to the occupied territories, and to refrain from illegal
actions. Of no less importance is the scrupulous
implementation of the provisions of the agreements now
in effect. The future of the peace accords and their
continuing support by the Palestinian people may well
hinge upon Israel's actions.

The Middle East peace process faces a critical test:
either it can move forward inexorably despite the setbacks
or it will relapse into a dangerous phase with unknown
consequences. The most Viable policy at this juncture is
to establish a stable political environment and to persist
in building peace. The peace process leading to Israeli
withdrawal from all occupied territories is the only door
open to coexistence and a secure future for all the
countries in the region. Prolonged delays in reaching
tangible gains may well erode the mutual confidence that
has been assiduously built in recent times. We remain
hopeful that the peace process will prove resilient and
irreversible.

