Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
thanking Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Mark Lowcock for his comprehensive update
on the humanitarian situation in Yemen, and we convey
our readiness to extend our full support to alleviate the
humanitarian crisis in the country. We also express our
deep appreciation to Mr. Lowcock and, through him, the
staff of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for working tirelessly in one of the worst
humanitarian crises in the world. My delegation has
closely followed the recent developments and would
like to make the following observations.

Kazakhstan strongly supports the United Nations
call on all parties to safeguard civilian lives, prevent
deaths and injuries, allow freedom of movement and
protect hospitals, clinics and schools, in accordance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law. In that regard, we welcome the coordinated
efforts of stakeholders, namely, the United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizations and the Gulf
countries, to provide humanitarian assistance to the
people of Al-Hudaydah. We endorse the United Nations
call on all parties to uphold international humanitarian
law and refrain from the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas.

All parties to the conflict should facilitate the
continuation and expansion of commercial imports into
all ports, including by addressing the delays linked to
Yemeni Government Decree 75 and other restrictions.
That will ensure that critical supplies can travel safely
and quickly along all routes. Presently, the volume of
commercial imports through the ports of Al-Hudaydah
and Saleef continue to be below the needs of the
population. Regrettably, access throughout the country
is still impeded by the ongoing fighting, procedural
checkpoints and the destruction of infrastructure.

We envisage a worsening situation if parties do
not refrain from committing acts that may lead to
an escalation of regional tension and insecurity. My
delegation therefore urges all parties to immediately
contribute to de-escalating violence and ending the
offensive on Al-Hudaydah, as well as an unconditional
ceasefire. All sides must find compromises and reject
unilateral decisions that could harm the peace process,
in order to prevent the potential break-up of the country.

We support Mr. Lowcock's call and acknowledge the
importance of concerted action to address distortions
in the Yemeni economy, including by supporting the
currency, injecting liquidity, expediting lines of credit
for importers and paying pensioners and civil servants.
In that regard, we welcome today's announcement by
the United Arab Emirates and the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia ofa contribution of $70 million through UNICEF
to pay the salaries of teachers in Yemen, including in
Houthi-controlled areas.

Kazakhstan would like to draw the Security
Council's attention to the plight of 1.8 million children
under the age of five, who are acutely malnourished and
for whom immediate assistance must be mobilized. That
is especially critical in the light of a new nationwide
wave of cholera. The destruction of water supplies must
therefore be prevented at all costs. Women, youth and
civil society organizations need to be encouraged to
play a critical role at the grassroots level, not only to
alleviate suffering but also to become peacemakers and
agents of change.

Finally, Kazakhstan expresses its unconditional
support for the Special Envoy's efforts and urges parties
to engage in good faith and without preconditions in the
political process. We also call upon the parties to the
conflict to demonstrate flexibility, avoid disagreements
and properly resolve complex issues. We fully agree
with the words of Secretary-General Guterres that
"a negotiated political settlement through inclusive
intra-Yemeni dialogue" (S/PV8231, p. 2) is the only
solution. All measures must proceed in that direction.

