Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by
congratulating you and your team, Mr. President, for
your remarkable and successful presidency during
the month of September. My delegation would also
like to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his
comprehensive briefing.

Indonesia welcomes the announcement by the
Secretary-General on 23 September on the agreement
of the Syrian Government and the Syrian Negotiations
Commission for a credible, balanced and inclusive
Constitutional Committee, one that will be facilitated
by the United Nations in Geneva. We are pleased
and delighted with that positive and encouraging
development in the political process in Syria. The launch
and the first meeting of the Constitutional Committee
in Geneva next month, inshallah, will indeed serve
as a door opener for a serious political path towards a
sustainable and lasting solution to the current crisis in
Syria, in accordance with the 2012 Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015).

Indonesia commends the hard work of Special
Envoy Pedersen and his team in facilitating the process
and engaging with various relevant parties. As we have
stated many times, my delegation strongly supports and
stands ready to assist the Special Envoy's mandates.
My delegation would like to emphasize three points on
ways forward.

First, we encourage the immediate launch of
the Committee and the commencement of its first
consultation as scheduled, under the United Nations
in Geneva, so as to keep the positive momentum alive.
To that end, the Security Council should continue to
spare no effort in supporting the work of Special Envoy
Pedersen. A strong and genuine commitment from all
parties in ensuring and assisting the Committee to
succeed is urgently required, a commitment that is based
on respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. Those
principles must be respected and should not be taken
for granted.

Secondly, moving forward, we need to ensure that
we have all agreed to work in a cooperative manner in
addressing future challenges. Indonesia appreciates all
efforts from various parties in trying to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict and, in that regard, invites all
the relevant parties to work together. We will be able
to find solutions and reach middle ground if we talk to
each other instead of talking about each other. Again,
dialogue is key.

Thirdly, my delegation believes that a political
process and a ceasefire should move ahead in parallel
and expeditiously. Upholding the ceasefire agreement
is critical, not only to prevent further humanitarian
catastrophe but also to support the political initiative. In
that context, Indonesia supports a nationwide ceasefire
in Syria and calls for parties to strengthen their efforts
to implement it.

The Council's support for a Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned United Nations-facilitated political process is
needed today more than ever. We are entering a crucial
phase, one for which we have been waiting for so long,
namely, the launch of the Constitutional Committee. I
have heard much support for that, and the Council needs
to work in harmony to guarantee that we see progress
in that regard. The pressure is on. The road ahead is
not going to be easy. But reaching the destination is
indeed possible.

