Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, I would
like to thank Poland for organizing this open debate on
children and armed conflict. The debate is timely, as it
coincides with the celebration of the tenth anniversary
ofthe adoption ofresolution 1882 (2009), which gave an
additional emphasis to the children and armed conflict
agenda regarding the violations of killing, maiming and
sexual violence. We wish to congratulate Peru on its
successful presidency in July.

I would also like to thank all the briefers for
their insightful briefings and express my gratitude to
Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan for sharing with us their
stories as they journeyed through the valley of death to
freedom and its possibilities today.

It is concerning that a decade since the adoption
of resolution 1882 (2009), there are still thousands of
boys and girls killed, maimed and abducted, who fall
victim to sexual violence and who are denied access
to humanitarian assistance. Their basic rights to
education and health are threatened and their schools
and hospitals are closed or cease to function as a result
of violent attacks, as witnessed in many parts of the
world today.

We are deeply disturbed by the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/509), which states that more than 24,000
grave violations against children were verified by
the United Nations in 20 countries in 2018. Children
represent an alarming percentage of the overall number
of casualties of war as refugees, internally displaced
persons, unaccompanied minors, trafficked persons or
sexual slaves. Those are some of concerns to which we
are witness.

South Africa welcomes the efforts of Mrs. Gamba
de Potgieter, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, to sign
action plans with the parties to armed conflict so as to
end and prevent the recruitment and use of children, as
well as other grave violations. It is paramount that such
action plans be concrete and their timebound measures
be implemented.

We also commend Ms. Fore, Executive Director
of UNICEF, for the Fund's rapid response to urgently
support children in emergencies and engagements with
all parties to negotiate humanitarian access and build
trust on all sides in order to serve children.

South Africa welcomes the release of 13,000
children from armed forces and armed groups.
However, we remain concerned about the manner
in which children are forced to take an active part in
hostilities, including carrying out suicide bombings
against civilians.

We call upon the armed groups to stop the
recruitment and use of children in armed forces, as
Mr. Awan justified this morning. We are aware that
children, particularly girls, associated with such armed
conflicts are vulnerable to sexual abuse, including
sexual slavery. Resolution 2467 (2019) is instrumental,
as it aims to prevent those grave violations and
provide for the protection of girls from sexual violence
during conflict.

The detention of children who are part of, or
perceived to be associated with, parties to conflict is
worrisome. It is important that such children be treated
primarily as victims. States have an obligation to ensure
that relevant programmes are put in place to ensure that
children are reintegrated into society after they have
been released from armed groups. South Africa applauds
the measures put in place by countries such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan to improve the protection of
children and emphasizes that a greater focus needs to
be placed on extensive child reintegration programmes,
as was recommended by Ms. Kamara this morning.
We therefore commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and UNICEF for launching
the Global Coalition for the Reintegration of Former
Child Soldiers in September 2018 to encourage greater
support for child reintegration.

We are aware that, in many situations, perpetrators
of grave violations remain unidentified. Even in
cases where programmes and mechanisms to advance
accountability exist, they often fail to achieve tangible
outcomes for children. Access to justice is imperative
for the advancement of children's rights and for
defending their legitimate interests. That is paramount
to their psychological and psychosocial development in
ensuring that they are able to grow and develop into
adulthood free from fear and unintended irreversible
consequences, such as those described in Peter
Awan's testimony.

On 16 June 1976, thousands ofblack South African
children took to the streets to protest about the inferior
quality of education to which they were subjected
and demanded the right to be taught in their native
languages. A hundred of them were shot dead and in
the weeks of protests that followed, more hundreds of
children were killed and a thousand injured. To honour
their courage and in memory of those killed, in 1991
the Organization of the African Unity established the
Day of the African Child. The Day also draws attention
to the lives of African children today. The Day of the
African Child's objective is to remember those children
as well as to inspire sober reflection and action towards
addressing the plethora of challenges that children in
Africa face daily.

Children are fundamental to the future of peaceful
and prosperous societies in all corners of the world.
It is imperative that we partner globally, regionally
and nationally to combine our efforts to collectively
strengthen institutions and services for children,
including justice, education and health services.

In conclusion, addressing the root causes ofconflict
should be the primary objective to prevent violations
against children. My delegation wishes to emphasize
the importance of providing the necessary support
to such boys and girls so that they can thrive in their
reintegration processes and have opportunities for a
better and brighter future. We should all remember an
African saying: any child is my child.

