The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.

First of all, let mejoin other colleagues in thanking
Ms. Coninsx and Mr. Voronkov for their, as always,
very comprehensive and informative briefings.

Poland fully shares the assessment made by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/20l9/612) and
reflected in the interventions by Ms. Coninsx and
Mr. Voronkov. Despite the progress made in fighting
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), Member
States and the Security Council must remain vigilant so
as not to allow ISIS to revive its operational capacities.
Allow me also to echo my colleagues calls for stepping
up international cooperation in combating terrorism,
as terrorism today is of a transboundary nature. Such
cooperation is instrumental in effectively addressing
this challenge, and it also requires the cooperation
with and the engagement of the private sector and
civil society.

Poland is deeply concerned about the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs), returnees and those
who have relocated. Women and children associated
with FTFs returning and relocating from conflict zones

may require a special focus and assistance, as they may
have served in many different roles.

We also wish to echo the remarks made by
Ms. Coninsx with regard to the potentially disastrous
situation of overcrowded camps for internally displaced
persons, in which there are stranded families with links
to United-Nations-listed terrorist groups, if that is not
addressed. With limited access to food, water, medical
care and other basic services, people may be easily
recruited by terrorists offering better living conditions.

I also wish to touch upon the challenges that
Member States are facing in the justice and corrections
systems, which was raised by some representatives. In
Europe, radicalization in prisons remains an important
issue, with the estimated number of FTFs who
have returned from conflict zones reaching several
thousands. Without additional resources allocated by
Member States, prisons will become places in which
radical ideologies can thrive. The sharing of extremist
views among inmates coming from backgrounds
marked by poverty and violence pose the potential risk
of further violence.

Lastly, I would like to draw the Council's attention
to the proper investigation by Member States of
ISIS operatives for their crimes, including crimes of
sexual violence. Resolution 2467 (2019), spearheaded
by Germany, recognizes victims of sexual violence,
perpetrated by terrorists, as victims of terrorism. We
would like to recall that that resolution encourages the
Secretary-General to ensure that monitoring teams for
sanctions committees include members with specific
sexual violence and gender expertise and, in that spirit,
we encourage Member States to allow expert bodies to
carry out work in the field.

I also wish to echo what the representative of
Equatorial Guinea said about the importance of
ensuring accountability and affirm Poland's full support
for the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and all United
Nations-established investigative mechanisms aimed at
fighting impunity and ensuring accountability, as we
believe that both are key counter-terrorism instruments.

We also echo the Secretary-General's appeal
to comprehensively address the needs of survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence, while bearing
in mind that investigations should lead to fair trials
and be conducted in accordance with international
law, including international humanitarian law and There are no more names inscribed on the list

international human rights law.
of speakers.

I new resume my functions as President of
the Council. The meeting rose at 4.55 pm.
