The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Terje Roed-
Larsen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1559
(2004).

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Larsen to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members to
document S/2005/673, containing the text of a letter
dated 26 October 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the second semi-annual report on the
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004).

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls all its
previous resolutions on Lebanon, in particular
resolutions 1559 (2004), 425 and 426 (1978),
resolution 520 (1982) and resolution 1614 (2005),
as well as the statements of its President on the
situation in Lebanon, in particular the statements
of 18 June 2000, of 19 October 2004 and of 4
May 2005.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
support for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
unity, and political independence of Lebanon, as
well as for the freedom of its press.
"The Security Council welcomes the second
semi-annual report of the Secretary-General to
the Security Council of 26 October 2005 on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
1559 (2004).

"The Security Council notes that significant
further progress has been made towards the
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004), in
particular through the withdrawal of Syrian
forces from Lebanon and the holding of free and
credible parliamentary elections in May and June
2005, but it notes also with regret that other
provisions of resolution 1559 (2004) have yet to
be implemented, particularly the disbanding and
disarming of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias
and the extension of Government control over all
Lebanese territory, and free and fair presidential
elections conducted according to the Lebanese
constitutional rules, without foreign interference
and influence.

"In this context, the Security Council
commends the Lebanese Government for the
dialogue it has initiated in October 2005 with
representatives of Lebanese and non-Lebanese
militias, for the steps it has taken towards
restoring fully its authority throughout its
territory and for its stated willingness to establish
full diplomatic relations and representation and to
demarcate the border between Lebanon and Syria.
The Council calls on the Lebanese Government to
sustain its efforts to achieve progress on all these
issues in accordance with resolution 1559 (2004)
and to pursue a broad national dialogue, and the
Council calls on all other parties concerned, in
particular the Government of Syria, to cooperate
to this end.

"The Security Council notes with concern
the report's suggestion that there have been
movements of arms and people into Lebanese
territory and, in this context, commends the
Government of Lebanon for undertaking
measures against such movements and calls on
the Government of Syria to undertake similar
measures.

"The Security Council condemns the
continued terrorist attacks in Lebanon, which

have resulted in the death or injury of scores of
Lebanese citizens, including several prominent
Lebanese figures, as part of a deliberate strategy
to destabilize the country and to intimidate the
Lebanese people, their Government and their
media.

"The Security Council warns that those
responsible for such crimes must be held fully
accountable and will not be permitted to
jeopardize the stability, democracy and national
unity of Lebanon.

"The Security Council reiterates its call for
the full implementation of all requirements of
resolution 1559 (2004), and urges all concerned
parties to cooperate fully with the Security
Council and the Secretary-General to achieve this
goal.

"The Security Council commends the
Secretary-General as well as his Special Envoy
for their efforts and dedication to facilitate and
assist in the implementation of all provisions of
resolution 1559 (2004)."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under symbol S/PRST/2006/3.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its

agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.
