Mr. Siddig (Sudan): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of September and to express our deep appreciation to my friend Dian Triansyah Djani for Indonesia's successful presidency last month. Allow me also to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for their briefings. I would also like to extend my thanks and gratitude to all Security Council members for the support they expressed and offered to my country. Late in August and after almost one year of candid and fruitful negotiations in Juba, the transitional Government of the Sudan and the major armed groups in Darfur and the Two Areas of South Kordofan and Blue Nile concluded a historic peace deal. The deal is comprehensive in scope and addresses the root causes of the armed conflicts and political instability in the country. It includes resource-sharing, land ownership, social justice, governance and equality at the national level. The deal also includes clauses to resolve the consequences of conflicts, including humanitarian relief, the safe and voluntary return of internally displaced persons and refugees to their areasof origin, the disarmament of combatants and their integration into the national army or into society, and the development, rehabilitation and reconstruction of the conflict-affected areas. Three elements characterize this peace deal and make it different from previous agreements. First, there is strong political will and commitment from the transitional Government to deliver peace, justice and freedom in line with the key objectives of the Constitutional Document. Secondly, the agreement was negotiated and concluded between the Sudanese themselves. As His Excellency the Prime Minister of the Republic of the Sudan, Abdalla Hamdok, put it: "This is a Sudanese peace, made with our own hands and by our own efforts". In that regard, the Sudan is deeply thankful to the Government of South Sudan for its important role in hosting and facilitating the talks. Thirdly, the negotiations were conducted between partners, not between adversaries, in contrast to the confrontational atmosphere that prevailed during the previous regime. Earlier this month, Prime Minister Hamdok met with the leader of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North, Abdelaziz Al-Hilu, in Addis Ababa. Together they signed a declaration of principles in which they secured the continuation of the current cessation of hostilities for the duration of the negotiation process. They also agreed on six principles that would pave the way to resolving the few remaining issues. I take this opportunity to reiterate our call to Abdul Wahid Mohamed Al-Nur to join the peace process and pursue a prosperous future of peace and stability in Darfur. My Government is fully committed to taking on its responsibility to protect its people in Darfur in particular and throughout the country in general. In this regard and following the unfortunate intercommunal clashes in Darfur at the beginning of the farming season in July, the Government guaranteed the non-recurrence of such conflicts by enhancing its security capabilities in Darfur by sending 15,000 army and police forces. Additionally, a regionwide arms collection campaign is under way. Furthermore, peaceful intercommunal coexistence is being encouraged and criminal justice mechanisms have been improved and strengthened. More importantly, the appointment of civilian governors across the country, most especially in Darfur, would have a profound effect in preserving security and stability in the region. In May, the Sudan shared with the Security Council its national plan to protect civilians in Darfur and the war-affected areas. The plan is guided by best practices, as well as successful policies and standards. Ten days ago, a periodic progress report on the implementation of the plan was also shared with the Council. On top of that, the signing of the peace deal would inevitably clear the way not only for lasting peace but also for a better civilian protection in the affected areas. Right after the adoption of resolution 2524 (2020), by which the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) was established, the Prime Minister made a decision to form a national mechanism for coordination with UNITAMS, and appoint a veteran diplomat as national coordinator. This interdepartmental coordination body includes all relevant national authorities and is tasked with synergizing between the Government and UNITAMS at the federal and state levels, as well as with identifying the areas in which the Sudan needs support. When the Secretariat planning team visited the Sudan in August, the national mechanism played a key role in making the visit a success. We will spare no effort to facilitate the establishment of the new Mission and ensure a smooth transition from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur to UNITAMS in December. While thanking the Security Council and the Secretariat for responding to the Sudan's request for creating this special political mission, we expect further close consultation with the Government during the planning for the Mission and the setting of its structure, policies and priorities. It is also our hope that the Security Council will soon agree on the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to lead UNITAMS. All members of the Council know that the transitional Government of the Sudan is tirelessly tackling huge challenges. As a result of the economic mismanagement of the previous regime, the economic situation is dire. That is coupled with the coronavirus disease pandemic and the unprecedented level of heavy rains and devastating floods. This situation requires the sustained and generous support of the regional and international partners, including the Sudan's urgent removal from the United States State Sponsors of Terrorism list, which is preventing debt relief, access to concessionary loans and large-scale foreign investment. We would like, in this connection, to thank the countries that participated and pledged in the High-Level Sudan Partnership Conference, which was held virtually and co-hosted by Germany, the European Union, the United Nations and the Government of the Sudan in June, as well as the follow-up meeting hosted by Saudi Arabia in August. The transitional Government of the Sudan will continue its efforts to make fundamental changes in the political, social and security landscape in order to build a prosperous and peaceful country.
