Mr. Ishikawa (Japan): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis for his participation
and for his comprehensive briefing today. I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize
the important role of the United Nations, especially
that of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in 2014 and beyond, in
supporting the Afghan Government's efforts to meet
its political and development goals. In that regard, I
would like to express my highest respect to all the staff
of UNAMA for their deep commitment and dedication
to their challenging mission.

We hope that UNAMA will also continue to play
an important role in coordinating both the Afghan
Government's and the international community's
efforts in implementing their commitments under
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework. Japan
attaches particular importance to reforms in the area
of public finance and private banking, as revenue
mobilization is a matter of urgency for the Afghan
Government to attain sustainability. We request the
Afghan Government, including the future Government,
to make consistent efforts in the fight against corruption
and demonstrate tangible results in the run-up to the
next Ministerial Meeting of the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board, which will be held in January
and will be co-hosted by the Afghan Government and
the United Kingdom. We expect UNAMA's continued
engagement in that process.
The year 2013 was a busy one of critical
importance. It paved the way for Afghanistan to
achieve important goals in 2014, the final year of its
political and security transition. Looking back at the
year, the Government and the people of Afghanistan
have made significant achievements. To name a few,
the Afghan National Security Forces have taken the
lead in most operations since June, preparations for the
elections have been advancing and intensive dialogue
for regional cooperation has taken place. Today, I
would like to address some key issues on which Japan
believes Afghanistan must make further efforts in order
to ensure successful political and security transitions,
which will be indispensable for long-term stability in
the country.

First, in terms of political transition, it is of the
utmost importance that the next presidential and
provincial elections give strong legitimacy to the new
Government. To that end, elections must take place in
compliance with the Afghan Constitution and other legal
frameworks, and the current schedule for the holding of
the elections, in April 2014, must be observed. A fair
and transparent elections process is also imperative.
Furthermore, the election result should be a reflection
of the will of the country's entire population.

Japan welcomes the diversity of presidential
candidates, as well as the participation of women
in both elections as voters and candidates. Yet the
security situation continues to be of concern. In order
to encourage the full participation of all eligible voters,
especially female voters, security challenges must
be properly addressed. The Afghan Government is
encouraged to take further risk-mitigation measures
based on a realistic security assessment.

In order to make a positive impact on the election
processes, Japan has donated approximately $20 million
to support the work of the Independent Election
Commission through the second Enhancing Legal
and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow project. We are
also looking into the possibility of sending an election
observer mission.

I would now like to turn to the security transition.
Despite the increased competence and confidence of
the Afghan National Security Forces, serious security
challenges persist. A number of brutal terrorist attacks
over the past quarter again caused the tragic loss of
innocent lives, including those of aid workers and other
civilians. Japanjoins in the message sent by the Security
Council in its press statement of4 December (SC11199)
condemning acts of violence against development and
humanitarian aid workers.
With that security uncertainty, it is a matter of
critical importance for the Afghan Government to
conclude a bilateral security agreement with the
United States at an early stage, as recommended by the
consultative loya jirga in November. The Government
bears the responsibility to ensure that the dividends of
the security transition are irreversible. Furthermore,
security uncertainty will inevitably impact negatively
on our future aid policy. We strongly hope that the
Government of Afghanistan will fulfil its duty to
provide its people with a sense of security and stability.

Lastly, I would like to emphasize that without
progress of the peace process, the dividends of all the
transitions will remain uncertain. The process should
be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned; responsibility must
not be shifted to any other parties. But, as witnessed
in the constructive engagement of Pakistan as well
as in other third parties' initiatives, the international
community stands by Afghanistan ready to lend a hand
as it takes steps forward.

I would like to conclude my statement by recalling
that the whole transition process and the peace and
reconciliation process are supported by mutual
trust among all the stakeholders, including the trust
between the Afghan Government and the international
community.

