Mr. Cohen (United States of America): As the
United States said in April (see S/PV.8246), we have
embarked on a new approach to the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO).

First, there can be no more business as usual on
Western Sahara. Secondly, we must lend our full
support to the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Western Sahara, Mr. Kohler, in his efforts to achieve
a just, lasting and mutually acceptable solution that
will provide for the self-determination of the people
of Western Sahara. We are encouraged by the progress
made in the past six months. We welcome Personal
Envoy Kohler's decision to restart a direct negotiation
process, beginning with a round table in Geneva. We
are pleased that Morocco, the Frente Popular para
la Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro,
Algeria and Mauritania have all accepted Personal
Envoy Kohler's invitation in good faith and without
preconditions. We urge that they engage constructively
with the Personal Envoy throughout the duration of
the process in order to realize a realistic, practicable
and enduring political solution. However, we caution
against any notion that we have crossed a finish line.
The political process is only beginning.

We believe that direct negotiations under United
Nations leadership offer a real opportunity to achieve a
mutually acceptable solution, and the upcoming meeting
in Geneva will be a critical first step in the process.
The parties must remain committed to negotiations
at the December round table and throughout to a
successful conclusion. The meeting in December is not
a one-off event. It must be the beginning of a process
of direct negotiations. We fully support Personal Envoy
Kohler and believe that the Security Council should
do everything it can to ensure that he can actively
lead and advance the political process, while building
on the momentum we hope Geneva will generate, in
order to achieve a long-overdue political solution. The
United States further calls on the parties to respect
their relevant obligations and assurances and refrain
from any actions that could undermine United Nations-
facilitated negotiations or further destabilize the
situation in Western Sahara.

We express our gratitude to and full support for
Personal Envoy Kohler and his team. We welcome the
Personal Envoy to the Security Council at any time
to brief it on the status of his efforts. We also express
thanks to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Western Sahara, Colin Stewart, and all
those working tirelessly as part of MINURSO. We
thank the Government of Switzerland for hosting the
upcoming talks.
There are those among us who would have preferred
a 12-month mandate. However, the political process
now beginning under the Personal Envoy's leadership
requires the Security Council's close attention and
support. Shortening MINURSO's mandate to end in
April 2019 signals that the Council is determined to
accelerate the political process and move beyond the
status quo. Renewing MINURSO's mandate for only
six months reflects our continuing resolve to see the
negotiations proceed swiftly, in good faith and without
preconditions. It also makes clear that the Security
Council will not let Western Sahara and MINURSO
slip into the shadows.

As the political process resumes, the United States
will carefully evaluate the MINURSO mandate going
forward. Further renewals will not be automatic and will
hinge on whether or not MINURSO is contributing to a
political solution. With the launch ofa political process,
we have started to rectify one of the key challenges to
MINURSO, which is making sure that the peacekeeping
Mission supports a political solution. That change
was pivotal to our decision to continue extending the
mandate of the peacekeeping Mission. As we said in
April, the United States will continue to stand by the
core principle that peacekeeping missions must support
political solutions, and we will assess MINURSO's
future performance accordingly. The United States will
continue doing everything possible to support Personal
Envoy Kohler and to advance negotiations.

