Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by
the observer of the European Union.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2019/373) and Mr. Mauer and Mr. Borello for
their briefings.

Pursuant to the excellent concept note (S/2019/385, annex) submitted by the Indonesian presidency, this
open debate takes place in the context of a number
of important anniversaries this year, as has already
been mentioned in many of today's statements, with
the aim of reflecting on the work carried out for the
protection of civilians. In that regard, in the case of
Spain, I should like to mention the annual retreat on
international humanitarian law, which the Spanish
Mission organizes with the support of the delegation
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
to which we invite members of the Security Council,
other Member States, agencies, programmes and the
Secretariat of the Organization, and representatives of
civil society and the academic world.

At this year's retreat, held in March, the focus
was on the protection provided for under international
humanitarian law to civilian infrastructure, especially
hospitals and schools, given that the two priority
issues for Spain on this agenda are the protection of
health care in conflict and the protection of access to
education. The protection of all health and humanitarian
personnel dedicated exclusively to medical missions is
a very clear, direct obligation under international law,
as recalled and demanded in resolution 2286 (2016), of
which Spain was a co-penholder and which was adopted
by the Security Council during the open debate in May
2016 (see S/PV.7685).

However, according to the latest Safeguarding
Health in Conflict Coalition report, in 2018 there
were at least 973 attacks in 23 countries, representing
an increase of 38 per cent from 2017. As a result of
those attacks, at least 167 health workers died and 710
were injured. Here, I should like to acknowledge their
dedication and sacrifice. Those 167 deaths should not
have happened and must not go unpunished. In the light
of those attacks, we wish to emphasize that resolution
2286 (2016) remains fully applicable. Spain is working
for its full development because we believe that part of
its content has yet to be put into practice, particularly
with regard to the investigation and fact-finding
mechanisms. Its development would allow us to make
progress in verifying the correctness of the facts and
in ensuring both political and criminal accountability
and prevention.

Given the data before us, it cannot be denied
that there is a real and concrete need for a permanent
instrument responsible for clarifying data collection
mechanisms; analysing that data; identifying trends,
best practices and lessons; identifying ways to repair
the damages caused, restore services and recover
humanitarian space; as well as preparing reports
and, where appropriate, investigating allegations of
violations of the obligations to protect health care
in conflict.

Next Tuesday and Wednesday, 28 and 29 May,
Spain will host the third International Conference on
Safe Schools, in Palma de Mallorca, where we expect
to see a broad participation of representatives from the
Foreign Affairs, Defence and Education Ministries of
the 86 countries that endorsed the 2015 Safe Schools
Declaration, as well as other countries that, without
having yet done so, are also committed to protecting
access to education.

Our goal is for the Conference to serve as an impetus
for new progress, and we therefore hope that all States
will participate. Based on the excellent foundations laid
down at the two previous Conferences - Oslo in 2015
and Buenos Aires in 2017 - the Conference in Palma de
Mallorca will serve as an exchange forum, particularly
on cooperation opportunities for the implementation
of the Safe Schools Declaration and Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use
during Armed Conflict, as well as a forum for a focused
discussion on: first, the gender-based impact of attacks
against access to education; secondly, the military and
militarized use of educational centres; and thirdly, the
development of mechanisms to investigate and follow
up on attacks against access to education.

Based on what I have said, it is clear that Spain
is working for concrete mechanisms and actions to
strengthen the protection of civilians, particularly
in relation to health care in conflict and access to
education, as I have detailed. We are also working on
other issues, such as, first, fostering knowledge on the
situation of civilian interpreters and translators who
work in a context of conflict, which is why the Spanish
Mission is collaborating with the non-governmental
organization Red T; secondly, on situations of Violence
below the threshold of armed conflict, which have
similar consequences for civilians; and thirdly, on
the protection of civilians caught up in low-Visibility
conflicts or crises, especially those related to the media
and donor decisions.

In December this year, the thirty-third International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent will be
held under the theme "The power of humanity". Spain
is currently preparing for that event, drawing up the
commitments that it will assume, which will follow
the provisions I have outlined: respect for and the full
implementation of international humanitarian law and
promoting the universality and integrity of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court and its work.
We call on States that are attending the Conference to
do so in a constructive spirit, which will allow us to
continue to make progress on those issues.

In conclusion, the protection of civilians is a
universal, legal and moral obligation that derives from
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and, in equal measure,
from the historical trauma of the terrible wars of the
twentieth century. As the Secretary-General recalls
in the report underpinning today's debate, since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) the protection of
civilians has become one of the central issues on the
Security Council's agenda, permeating all its work.
However, the situation today regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflict is very similar to that
of 20 years ago. The majority of the victims of armed
conflict remain civilians. In order to change that, the
international community must act urgently to strengthen
and guarantee respect for international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, particularly in
the conduct of hostilities, in order to effectively protect
civilians in situations of armed conflict.

