Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): Since this is the first time that I take the floor
in the Security Council in my capacity as Permanent
Representative of Guinea-Bissau to the United Nations,
I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of November. I would also like to express our
gratitude to Council members for the understanding
they have shown towards my country, which has been
on the Council's agenda for a little more than 12 years.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
warmly thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/550) and the particular attention he has been
devoting to my country, Guinea-Bissau. I also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Mutaboba; the Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Sebastiao da Silva Isata; and the
Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission's configuration for Guinea-
Bissau, Ambassador Maria Luiza Viotti, for their
presentations and the excellent work they have been
carrying out for Guinea-Bissau.

Guinea-Bissau has experienced some difficult
times over the past 12 years as a result, among other
things, of our now-concluded struggle for liberation
and the lack of adequate means to support those men

and women who, through their great determination,
ensured our country's sovereignty. Because of them,
we can stand before you today as representatives of a
legitimate State.

Many of those men and women, our former
freedom fighters, are fearful of being abandoned, as
happened in the past, and are thus still active as
soldiers, despite their advanced age that prevents them
from serving effectively in the army.

This situation is compounded by the country's
enormous economic and financial difficulties and by
the lack of adequate infrastructure and factories, in
particular for processing commodities such as cashew
nuts, for which there is significant global demand.
These nuts are mostly processed in India without any
added value for my country, thus depriving our youth,
who make up over 60 per cent of the population, of
employment opportunities.

To remedy the situation, our State institutions are
trying to reform the national army and adapt it to the
requirements for a modern army, one that is entirely
subservient to political authority, in conformity with
the rule of law. That was stated by our President, His
Excellency Mr. Malam Bacai Sanha, during his speech
on 25 September 2010 at the open debate of the
General Assembly, as follows:

"The reform that we desire in our defence
and security sector, for which we have sought
international assistance, has become a matter of
prime urgency and extreme sensitivity."
(A/65/PV.16)

Despite the events of 1 April, which were
promptly condemned by the legitimate authorities of
the country and by the entire international community,
Guinea-Bissau continues to seek a path towards
political stability.

In this respect, we are planning an international
reconciliation conference, to be held next year, which
should allow all political and military stakeholders, as
well as civil society, in Guinea-Bissau to explore ways
to build peace in the country. We must note here that
that initiative is supported by the main political,
military and religious leaders and by civil society.

I would also like to mention that the Government
has undertaken substantial work to continue to
strengthen its credibility with the international
financial institutions through appropriate reforms and
by demonstrating great budgetary discipline, in order
to achieve, by the end of 2010, the completion point of
the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative.

Thanks to improvements in the management of
public finances, which have brought about positive
economic results, salaries are being paid on a regular
basis, thus defusing the social tensions that prevailed
previously.

Guinea-Bissau remains determined to fight drug
trafficking relentlessly, including by adopting laws that
criminalize the possession, transfer and processing of
drugs and that strengthen the capacities of the police
and judiciary, while recalling that this effort must be a
regional undertaking. In that connection, we would not
deny that substantial progress has been made, despite
the very limited logistical means and the geography of
the country, which is an isolated area that includes over
80 islands in the Bijagos Archipelago.

In this regard, we welcome the decision taken at
the summit of heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), held in Praia, Cape Verde, in July 2010.
That decision called on the Community's Commission
to study, together with the European Union and other
relevant partners, all of the synergies that would enable
an immediate implementation of the ECOWAS
regional plan of action to combat the scourge of drug
trafficking.

I must also highlight the visits undertaken by the
civilian and military leaders of the country to Brazil to
seek technical military assistance; to Angola to
strengthen relations in the economic, defence and
security areas; and to Cuba, to strengthen bilateral
relations.

In that context and as the Secretary-General did
in his report, we would like to commend the joint
efforts by ECOWAS, under the Nigerian presidency,
and by the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), under the Angolan presidency,
aimed at adopting a common plan of action to provide
assistance to our country, as recently requested by our
President.

We are very confident that, with the new
ECOWAS/CPLP partnerships and the implementation
of the road map recently adopted by the ECOWAS
Chiefs of Defence Staff, which will shortly be endorsed
by the ECOWAS Council of Ministers, the stabilization
mission that will be sent primarily to provide training
and support peacebuilding and stability, and efforts to
promote reconstruction and post-conflict development,
it will become possible for the country to be
definitively stabilized and for it to be able to focus on
sustainable development.

We are aware that the primary responsibility for
development and stability in the country falls on the
people of Guinea-Bissau themselves, but, despite the
Government's efforts, our country remains dependent
on international solidarity, assistance and cooperation.
We find ourselves faced with the inescapable and
urgent need to reform our defence and security sectors.
A pension fund is needed for those sectors in order to
adequately compensate those who fought for our
freedom and enable them to return home once and for
all.

Beyond that reform, we also need a wider reform,
in particular one targeting the public administration
aimed at providing our public services with the means
to deal with the many challenges we face in terms of
development and stability. In that regard, the
Government remains committed to holding a high-level
meeting and a roundtable discussion for donors. This
was initially planned for 2010 but unfortunately could
not be held, given the tragic events of 1 April.

Our country has an area of a little over 36,000
square kilometres and a population of approximately
1.6 million. If our partners wake up tomorrow and
decide to bolster the work of the United Nations, the
African Union, ECOWAS, CPLP and other partners on
the ground, Guinea-Bissau will soon become a stable
and developed country that no longer needs to be on
the agenda of the Council.

We thank our development partners, including the
European Union, ECOWAS, CPLP, the African Union,
10-62182
the United Nations, Angola, Brazil, Portugal, Spain,
the People's Republic of China and others, for
everything they have been doing to help us. Now is the
time to help us more, so that we can hope to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals.

We would therefore like to reiterate our call to all
our partners to continue in the same spirit of
friendship, solidarity and cooperation with the people
and democratic institutions of Guinea-Bissau. Just as
President Sanha stated during the general debate of the
General Assembly, "it is now, in our current
circumstances, that our country most needs such
support." (A/65/PV.16) This is indeed the time when
Guinea-Bissau needs sustainable investment and work
in the political, development and security areas, and
stronger commitments by the entire international
community to be able to fulfil the aspirations of its
people and its legitimate authorities.

To conclude, I would like to once again take this
opportunity to thank all the members of the Council for
their continuing interest in and commitment to Guinea-
Bissau and convey to them once again my country's
gratitude for resolution 1876 (2009), which established
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, under the wise leadership of
Ambassador Joseph Mutaboba, enabling our country to
benefit from the focused assistance and support of the
United Nations.

