Mrs. Haley (United States ofAmerica): The United
States is very pleased to have supported this renewal
of the the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL). Iwant to thank all Security Council members,
but especially France for its leadership on this vitally
important peacekeeping mission. France, of course, has
a historic relationship with Lebanon. It has many troops
in UNIFIL, and we appreciate their sacrifices and the
sacrifices made by all troop-contributing countries.
We appreciate France's willingness to work with us to
make significant improvements in this renewal.

Conditions in south Lebanon are very dangerous
today. The clouds of war are gathering. UNIFIL exists
to help prevent war from happening again in south
Lebanon. It is supposed to do that, in part by helping
the Lebanese Government to ensure that there are no
weapons outside of State control in UNIFIL's area of
operations. We have to be honest: for too long UNIFIL's
leadership has failed to make sure that goal is realized.
In particular, UNIFIL Force Commander Beary's lack
of understanding of the threat Hizbullah poses to the
region is baffling.

At the direction of its patron, Iran, the terrorist
organization Hizbullah is stockpiling an offensive
arsenal in southern Lebanon. It has thousands of
missiles and trained fighters, all beyond the control of
the Lebanese Government. That is apparent to everyone
who cares to see it.

Some have observed that there have been no
major hostilities in the area since 2006. They say
that is proof that the mission is successful. It is proof
of no such thing. Hizbullah is not seeking to prevent
war; it is preparing for war. Hizbullah has used the
relative quiet since 2006 to rearm itself, in violation
of resolutions 1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004). That is
no secret. Hizbullah admits it and brags about it. It
parades in front of television cameras. UNIFIL has a
difficult mandate and operations in a difficult part of
the world. Its troops, including some from members
of the Council, have served with dignity and courage.
That is why the United States has strongly supported
the mission and will continue to do so.

Today's resolution gives UNIF IL robust authority
to help Lebanon and keep the south safe. What we
sought in the renewal was to make sure that UNIFIL is
doing itsjob to the fullest possible extent, and I am very
pleased with what we have accomplished here today.
The status quo for UNIFIL was not acceptable, and we
did not accept it. The renewal we adopted today does
several important things. It expressly highlights the fact
that UNIFIL has a mandate to take all the necessary
action to prevent its area of operations from being used
for hostile activities. It calls on UNIFIL to establish
a more visible presence and step up its patrols and
inspections so as to disrupt Hizbullah's illicit activities.
For the first time since 2006, the resolution emphasizes
that UNIFIL can assist the Lebanese Government in
securing its borders in order to stop the flow of illegal
weapons into the country. And very critically, it tells
UNIFIL to give us clear reports on what it is being
prevented from seeing. For too long, when UNIFIL has
hit a Hizbullah roadblock, it has turned away. We do not
learn what is going on behind those roadblocks. It does
not require an active imagination to know that what
Hizbullah wants to keep secret is its illegal weapons.
UNIFIL must now tell us the details of where, when
and why it gets stopped.

Those are all big steps forward. Today's resolution
demands that UNIFIL step up its efforts at a moment
when Hizbullah is stepping up its own. Hizbullah's
past actions tell us what it will do in the future. It has
terrorized the people of Lebanon. It has terrorized
the people of Syria, standing on the front lines of the
AI-Assad regime's criminal activity. It has engaged in
terrorist action far beyond the Middle East. Any nation
that has experienced the pain of terrorist attacks in its
own country should consider the fact that it might be
next. The purpose of UNIFIL is not to go to war with
Hizbullah. It is to keep its area free ofterrorist personnel
and weapons, and to report on any denial of its ability
to do so. If UNIFIL does that, it will contribute greatly
to the area's peace and stability. Our action today will
help to ensure that this peacekeeping mission has the
power and the will to do its job.

For the United States, this is a time for strength,
resolve and accountability at the United Nations. Our
actions today go to the heart of our new approach.
The United States will not sit by and watch Hizbullah
strengthen itself for the next war. We will not be passive
as Iran makes a mockery of the Council's work. Today
we took a very good step forward. Together, our next
job is to make sure that UNIFIL does what we have
instructed it to do here today.

