Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Kosovo situation has a bearing on peace, security and
stability in Europe as a whole, as well as in the Balkans
in particular. The overall security situation in Kosovo
is relatively calm at present, but tension in the north
remains a cause for concern. China hopes that the
parties concerned will exercise restraint, work together
to maintain stability in the north and avoid the
escalation of tensions.

We welcome the cooperation between the parties
concerned, with the assistance of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
on the issue of missing persons and religious and
cultural heritage sites. China hopes that all parties will
take concrete measures to promote reconciliation
between all of Kosovo's communities and protect the
rights and interests of Kosovar Serbs and other
minorities.

China calls for efforts to meet the needs of the
most vulnerable groups, in particular efforts to provide
education and health services for children.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and appreciates the commitment and
efforts of the Government and people of Serbia to
achieve lasting peace, stability and development.

We continue to believe that the best approach to
the settlement of the Kosovo issue is for both parties to
negotiate a mutually acceptable solution within the
framework of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains in effect and is still
the legal basis on which solutions can be found to the
Kosovo issue. The advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice does not stand in the way of the parties
seeking a proper solution through negotiations.

China supports UNMIK in continuing to fulfil its
responsibilities, in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We are concerned about acts and
speech that might endanger the safety and security of
United Nations personnel. We urge all the parties
concerned to continue their cooperation with UNMIK
to ensure its smooth functioning.

