Mr. Normandin (Canada): Canada welcomes the
resolution adopted today, which we had the honour of
sponsoring. We congratulate Austria for its leadership
in bringing this initiative forward. And we also
congratulate other Council members on their work to
take further steps to better protect civilians in armed
conflict.
Ten years ago this fall, the Security Council
marked an important turning point in enhancing the
protection of civilians. Resolution 1265 (1999), as we
know, was a fundamental turning point. It was the
moment when the Council acknowledged that the
protection of civilians was an issue central, not
tangential, to its responsibilities for maintaining
international peace and security. Canada argued then,
as an elected member of the Council, and still does
today, that if this body is to maintain its legitimacy, it
must face up to today's tragedies. The Council must, of
course, take the necessary political action, backed up
by the range of tested non-coercive and coercive tools
that can be utilized by the international community.
The Secretariat and United Nations missions in the
field must provide the Council with what it needs to
take effective decisions. And those deploying to such
missions must have the training and resources to
deliver on the mandates.

On balance, important progress has been made.
We have a normative framework in place, which has
been buttressed by practical strategies, including on
questions related to humanitarian access, child
protection, sexual and gender-based violence and
issues of accountability. These are all encouraging
developments. And yet, it is clear that important
challenges remain.

When the Council's progress was reviewed five
years ago, Canada noted that, while resolutions
contemplated action that was early, systematic and
bold, Council responses were too often ad hoc, seldom
timely and rarely pro-active. While we recognize the
complexity of the issues to be dealt with, this remains a
valid critique today. Implementation, capacity and the
political will needed to deliver on this agenda are
uneven. Peacekeeping operations, whose mandates
include the protection of civilians, often lack the means
and capabilities to fulfil their tasks. Mission planning
and training have been weak, and civilian-military
cooperation has fallen short.

We must, of course, build on good practice. In
that context, we very much welcome the release of the
independent study prepared for the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Canada was
pleased to support that initiative. Its findings and
recommendations can provide useful guidance in the
development of new strategies, tools and techniques.
We urge all Member States to consider it seriously.
(spoke in French)

I would now like to mention three main areas of
action critical to strengthening the protection of
civilians. First is the need for better planning and the
mobilization of appropriate resources in the context of
peacekeeping mandates. Thus, the protection of
civilians must be taken into account from the start of
the planning. If, from the beginning, a mission is not
well designed, it will ultimately fail. Throughout the
process, all challenges to protection, in particular for
specific sectors of the population, including women
and children, must moreover be clearly identified.

Secondly, systematic training is essential in order
to fulfil that protection role effectively. Ideally,
personnel should receive that training prior to their
deployment, not on their arrival in the theatre of
operations. Systematic protection training would help
to clarify the protection mandates of missions. It would
also be a good way to provide operational orientation.
Civilian mission staff must also receive the necessary
training, and that training must strengthen the need for
accountability. Canada is pursuing that approach in
various contexts, including in Afghanistan.

Thirdly, we need to enhance dialogue and
cooperation on overlapping issues, such as children in
armed conflict and women and peace and security. We
cannot operate in silos. We can learn a great deal from
our practices in each sphere of activity. For its part,
Canada is helping to organize a series of conferences to
promote dialogue among Member States on the future
of peacekeeping operations. We hope that that will also
contribute to breaking down the silos in those various
fields.

Before concluding, I wish to take this opportunity
to emphasize the importance that Canada attaches to
safe and unhindered access by humanitarian workers to
populations in need, as well as to the safety and
security of all humanitarian actors. In that regard, I
wish to pay tribute to United Nations staff and
associated personnel, who are increasingly the target of
belligerents, as we have recently seen in Pakistan and
Afghanistan. We must be sure to set up strategies and
measures that make it possible to reduce the number of
those attacks and to hold the perpetrators accountable
for such crimes, where necessary.

This tenth anniversary is clearly the opportunity
to review both our achievements and what remains to
be done in order to protect civilians in armed conflict.
To that end, I urge the Council to resolutely continue
its action towards achieving concrete results in the
field. As always, the success of our efforts is measured
by the number of lives saved and the population
displacements prevented.

