Mr. Ipo (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today's meeting to consider
the report of activities of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), on non-proliferation.
We commend Ambassador Djani, Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, for his excellent briefing.
We wish him every success in the conduct ofhis mission
and pledge him our support.

Scientific and technological progress has
contributed to the development and proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, which represent a serious
threat to international peace and security. My delegation
is seriously concerned about that continued threat and
the risk of non-State actors acquiring such weapons. In
that context, we welcome the significant progress that
has been made in countering non-proliferation since the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) and the subsequent
resolutions that go to make up its regime. In that
regard, we commend the outstanding work of the 1540
Committee and its Group of Experts in assisting States
to fulfil their obligations under the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We welcome the fact that 182 States
have submitted their first reports to date. However, we
believe that there are still immense challenges in this
area. Continued national, regional and international
efforts are therefore essential to preventing non-State
actors, particularly terrorist groups, from developing,
possessing, manufacturing, acquiring, transporting,
transferring or using weapons of mass destruction in
all their nuclear, chemical and biological forms.

Cote d'Ivoire continues to believe that combating
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is a long-term task that requires an integrated and
coordinated approach at the regional level from all
stakeholders, including Member States, international
and regional organizations, the private sector and civil
society. In particular, States should work together to
identify best practices for preventing the diversion of
chemical agents. It is also vital to harmonize national
legal frameworks for the effective implementation of
measures on a global scale to prevent the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and establish
effective national controls for related materials. That
means strengthening collaboration on border control,
on the surveillance of financial flows and Internet
networks and on legal assistance, as well as adapting
the means for combating evolving threats.
In addition, we should emphasize the importance
of capacity-building for Member States in order to help
them implement their obligations. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the regional capacity-building
workshops and concrete measures aimed at facilitating
the implementation of the relevant resolutions on
non-proliferation. We welcome the adoption of
voluntary national action plans and the forthcoming
joint holding of a meeting with the African Union to
strengthen the capacities of points of contact.

We must also work to gradually eliminate weapons
of mass destruction. In that context, we should give the
Secretary-General's disarmament programme more
consideration. We also believe that the Committee should
continue to work to strengthen its cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations
and to promote the exchange of information and best
practices. In that connection, my country welcomes
the enriching experiences led by States participating in
peer reviews, which is a good example of cooperation
among countries in implementing measures to
combat proliferation.

My delegation would like to reiterate its full
support for the work of the 1540 Committee and
urges it to continue its rigorous and effective work by
calling on States to ensure the effective implementation
of international legal standards relating to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
strict compliance with them. We believe that the Group
of Experts entrusted with assisting the Committee
has a key role to play and therefore fully endorse the
concern expressed by Ambassador Djani about its
members' administrative situation, with a view to
finding an appropriate and speedy solution. We also
attach great importance to the strategic review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) scheduled
for 2021.

In conclusion, my country, which has ratified
virtually all the relevant international legal
instruments on the subject, in particular the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction, would like to reiterate its
willingness to cooperate with all parties to support
the actions of the 1540 Committee and to strengthen
the non-proliferation regime with a view to achieving
peace throughout the world.

