Mr. Nambiar (India): Please accept my
delegation's congratulations, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July.

While the agenda item under consideration today
is the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the issue
that has so far prevented the Council from adopting a
substantive resolution on that item is the immunity of
peacekeepers from the jurisdiction of third parties,
including international criminal tribunals, with respect
to possible allegations of criminal offences committed
during peacekeeping operations.

We appreciate the opportunity given to non-
members of the Council to share their perspective on
the ongoing debate in the Council's informal
consultations on this important and, indeed, divisive
issue. We shall do so in a constructive spirit and with a
sense of responsibility as a major contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

United Nations peacekeepers, by definition, are
deployed to serve the cause of international peace,
often in lands unknown to them, far removed from their
homes or national interests. They operate under strict
mandates and tight rules of engagement established by
the United Nations. They are drawn from a number of
countries and are supervised from United Nations
Headquarters, in addition to the political leadership of
the mission concerned. Moreover, they are accountable
to their own Governments for their actions in the field.
It is therefore highly unlikely that United Nations
peacekeepers would commit criminal offences of an
egregious nature or gross, premeditated and systemic
crimes.

As of now, United Nations peacekeepers are
provided immunity under status of forces agreements.
Such immunity is provided for sound practical reasons
that have stood the test of time. Exposing them now to
allegations and possible harassment through charges of
crimes committed during the exercise of their functions
as peacekeepers, apart from laying them open to the
possibility of motivated charges, is likely to put these
forces on the defensive, constrict their capacity to take
firm action when required and, eventually, adversely
affect the readiness of potential troop contributors to
provide troops to the United Nations for peacekeeping
functions.

Over the past five decades, United Nations
peacekeepers have contributed immensely to the
preservation of peace in different parts of the world.
Their record has been a matter of pride for all of us.
This is particularly true for countries such as India that
have contributed peacekeepers in significant numbers.
To our knowledge, there has been no instance of a
United Nations peacekeeping force having been
accused of committing an egregious crime. We are of
the view that, in practical terms, the possibility of
United Nations peacekeepers being involved in crimes
that would bring them within the purview of
international tribunals such as the International
Criminal Court is extremely remote. Therefore, in
taking a decision on this matter, the Council will do
well to bear in mind the actual historical experience
and to ponder whether there is need at all to seek a cure
for an ailment that does not exist.

As a measure of abundant caution, the Council
should ensure that troops for United Nations
peacekeeping missions are drawn from countries that
uphold healthy democratic traditions and where respect
for the rule of law, constitutional order, civilian control
over armed forces and basic transparency in the
functioning of institutions are observed. Obviously,
troops that usurp power at home and undermine or
emasculate constitutional structures are unlikely to
promote or reinforce the rule of law elsewhere.

As representatives of a democracy - the largest
in the world - with an independent judiciary whose
contribution to the jurisprudence of the rights of the
individual is likely to have few equals, we find it
difficult to accept an outside authority purporting to sit
in judgement upon the actions of our troops. Quite
apart from the exemplary discipline and commitment to
the cause of peace displayed by them, we see them as
answerable for their behaviour to authorities within the
established hierarchy of command and to our own
established institutions, not to institutions whose
jurisdiction we do not recognize.

Notwithstanding that, we understand the dilemma
of the countries that have signed the Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and have taken
upon themselves certain specific obligations
thereunder. We recognize that they are free to submit
their nationals, including their troops, to the
jurisdiction of the ICC as a national decision.

The Council's decision on this issue will have
broad ramifications for United Nations peacekeeping
operations as well as for troop-contributing countries.
India is not a signatory to the ICC Statute for reasons
that are well known. We would urge the Council to
give careful consideration to the views of major troop-
contributing countries that are not party to the ICC
before taking a decision. The Council should not allow
United Nations peacekeeping operations, an important
tool for the maintenance of international peace and
security in its hands, to be undermined by its own
decisions.

