Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
Mr. President, I am happy once again to welcome you to
this important meeting of the Security Council initiated by
the Canadian delegation.

The Russian Federation attaches great importance to
the discussion in the Security Council of the entire range of
questions relating to the problems of sanctions. Recently
there has been much greater interest in this subject both in
the United Nations and in international academic, social and
political circles. Various forums, one of which was the
seminar organized today under the aegis of the International
Peace Academy, are actively considering questions relating
to the implementation of the sanctions restrictions decided
upon by the Council, and new mechanisms are being
proposed to make sanctions truly "smart", supremely
targeted and aimed precisely against those responsible for
creating a threat to peace and security.

In this connection, we welcome the establishment of
an informal working group of the Security Council whose
mandate includes analysing the entire range of the problems
of United Nations sanctions. On the basis of this analysis,
practical recommendations can be elaborated for the
Council to enhance the effectiveness of sanctions, to
monitor their implementation and to reduce the
humanitarian and other undesirable consequences of their
impact.

Sanctions remain a powerful weapon of the United
Nations in its efforts to maintain international peace and
security. This instrument requires extremely careful
handling and must have a solid legal basis.

Sanctions are the final step when all other peaceful
means of settlement have been exhausted. An absolute
condition for their imposition is a determination by the
Security Council of the existence of a threat to the peace,
a breach of the peace or an act of aggression. Sanctions
must have clear goals and a clear time-frame. They must
be regularly reviewed, and they must be accompanied by
concrete, clear conditions for their termination or their
suspension as United Nations decisions are complied with.
When imposing sanctions, the humanitarian limits must be
outlined and the likely consequences calculated for third
countries and the civilian populations of the targeted
State, above all for the most vulnerable groups.

It is important that the restrictions established be
commensurate with the magnitude of the threat or the
breach of international security. Any sanctions must be
subordinate to the search for a long-term political
settlement and must reflect strategic goals in the area of
maintaining peace and security. What is inadmissible is
the use of sanctions to overthrow or change the legitimate
Government or existing political regime in the targeted
country. Sanctions must be imposed not to punish a State,
but to compel it to change its conduct and to encourage
it to comply with the demands of the Security Council.

Today's realities require, as a matter of urgency, that
we take into account factors such as the link between
sanctions and the observance of human rights, the views
of international humanitarian, including non-
governmental, organizations and the need to adjust
sanctions regimes according to the humanitarian situation
in the targeted State, the elaboration of practical ways and
means to prevent negative side effects of sanctions for
third countries, including within the context of Article 50
of the Charter.

Unfortunately, quite often when imposing and
implementing or lifting sanctions, biased approaches
prevail. Partly this is demonstrated in attempts to give a
broad interpretation of the language of certain previous
positions taken by the Security Council. In a number of
cases, the urgent lifting of sanctions is delayed, new
criteria are artificially introduced by setting various
additional trial periods and control periods, and complex
mechanisms for monitoring and accountability are
established. In other cases, these mechanisms either do
not work and no attention is paid to this, or they are not
even created. This practice of double standards, apart
from its negative impact on the fate of millions of entirely
innocent people, does serious damage to the authority of
the United Nations as well.

 

Within the work of the informal working group of the
Security Council, we will be strongly advocating an
unbiased evaluation of current experience and agreement on
recommendations that should enhance the effectiveness of
sanctions while at the same time eliminating the many
shortcomings of a host of current sanctions regimes. We
also will definitely try to see to it that members of the
group fully take into account the work that has already been
done and is still being done on this topic within the General
Assembly and in other United Nations bodies.

In this connection, we draw attention to a document
produced by the Russian Federation in the Special
Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization. That
document sets out the main conditions and standard criteria
for imposing and implementing sanctions and other coercive
measures. Its aim is to focus attention on concrete elements
of sanctions practice that require priority consideration.
Russia is prepared to work together on all of these
problems both in the Security Council and in other United
Nations bodies.

