Mr. Beasley: I thank you, Sir, for convening
this briefing on Yemen. It is good to be with my two
colleagues and friends, whom I highly respect.

I know that when appearing in this hallowed
Chamber, one is expectedto speak in measuredtones and
that points are to be made with caution. In diplomacy,
often that is the best and smoothest way, but today I am
not sure that is possible. I have just come from three
days on the ground in Yemen, and soft words will not
do justice to what is happening to the children, mothers,
fathers and families in that country. What I have seen
this week in Yemen is the stuff of nightmares, horror,
deprivation and misery. That country of some 28 to
29 million people has been suffering for years, but now,
as some would say, it is on the brink of catastrophe. But
it is not on the brink of catastrophe - it is actually a
catastrophe, and each and everyone of us has our own
selves to blame. The question is: What are we going to
do about it?

The conditions that everyday Yemenis endure are
presently only because of war. They would not exist at
all if stubborn men would just sit down and talk instead
of fighting. Yemen is perhaps the prime example of
why the Council went on record in May recognizing
the link between conflict and hunger. Let me put it in
true human terms, because Council members will hear
a lot about numbers today and tomorrow.

But that is just not about numbers; it is about real
people with names, like little Mohamed, whom I saw
just two days ago in a hospital in Sana'a. That little
eight-month old boy's parents had driven 300 kilometres
to the only hospital that had some support; they were
trying to save their little boy's life. He suffered from
acute malnutrition and weighed just 3.3 kilograms,
which is about one-third of what a child of that age
should weigh. Little Mohamed was not much more
than skin and bones. Council members have seen such
pictures in the news. Those are not isolated incidents;
they are the reality of children throughout the country.

I said that he was not much more than skin and
bones, because the sad part is that little Mohamed died
yesterday. It is hard to walk through a hospital. In room
after room, one sees these little children dying before
ones very eyes. I remember one little child whose feet
were sticking out of the blanket. As a father, I thought
it was cute and I went to tickle one little foot, hoping
for a smile. But there was no smile. It was like tickling
a ghost. There are no smiles, no laughter; the crying is
weak; they are sick, hungry and dying. The chief doctor
at the hospital told me they are getting about 50 cases a
day of severely malnourished children. They only have
room for 20. When I asked what they do about the other
30, he answered that they send them home to die. Four
years ago, the hospital did not even have an area for
malnourished children.

I will focus this briefing on three main elements:
first, the economic impact of the political and military
crisis; secondly, the deteriorating food security
situation; and thirdly, what the United Nations, the
World Food Programme and other actors must to do get
Yemen on its feet.

First, Yemen is in economic collapse. The people
of Yemen have endured war for years, but what is
dramatically changing the situation on the ground
today is economic collapse. The value of the Yemeni
rial has dropped by a staggering 235 per cent since
January 2015 - from 215 rial to the United States
dollar to 720, give or take. Imagine what that does to
a household - two-thirds of its purchasing power is
just gone. In many cases, the price of simple, basic
food staples has doubled in the past eight months.
That is happening while household incomes are going
in the other direction. Eight million livelihoods have
disappeared; 1.2 million civil servants are without pay
or have had little financial support in the past few years.
Those 1.2 million support households of about 8 million
people out of the entire population of 29 million.

There are massive currency problems, with
no incomes or access to cash. For a country that is
dependent on imports for the basic needs of life, that
is a disaster. Other countries that have experienced
hyperinflation, such as South Sudan and Zimbabwe,
can at least grow their own food, but Yemen cannot.
It relies on imports. That is the primary reason why
hunger is on a dramatic increase.

Second is the deteriorating food security. Based
on our latest assessment, we know for a fact that it is
extremely dire. Of 28 million Yemenis, we believe that
as many as 18 million are food insecure, but as many as
or more than 12 million Yemenis - almost half of the
entire country - are just one step away from famine.
They are on the brink of starvation; they do not know
when their next meal is coming from. As Mark said,
once you declare famine it is way too late.

Those are children and adults dying every day. They
may not be yet classified as dying of famine, but we are
marching towards disaster. The number has doubled in
the past year and a half, and it is getting worse, largely
because of the currency decline. Our monitoring
systems show that there are 3.6 million more hungry
people in Yemen than there were just three months ago.
In the past month alone, the number of hungry people
has risen by 1.6 million. I believe we do not need to
wait for formal declarations about famine or even a full
report to act.

We must act now. I believe that because of what I
saw with my very own eyes and heard this past week.
Children are already dying across the country. Right
now, the World Food Programme is helping about
8 million people a month in Yemen. We are especially
thankful for the generosity of our donors, the hard work
of about 500 staff members who put their lives on the
line every single day in that country, 30 cooperating
partner agencies and the support of other United
Nations agencies as well.

The World Food Programme currently has enough
food cereals in the country for two months of assistance
to help about 6.8 million people. As of early November,
we have several food shipments en route to various ports
in the country. We have even started to use the port
of Salalah, in neighbouring Oman, as a supplementary
route. We are anticipating any potential catastrophic
situation at any port to assure that we have alternatives
in place to minimize the impact of what is already a
dire situation. We are looking at alternative ports in
Saudi Arabia, as well as in Oman, as I mentioned, so
that the pipeline will not be broken should there be a
devastation of the port in Al-Hudaydah. Hostilities
must stop.

Not only did I go to Aden and Sana'a, but I also went
to Al-Hudaydah. Let me tell the Council about visiting
Al-Hudaydah. What normally is a three- or four-hour
simple, nice, beautiful drive is not so beautiful and
nice any more. It is double that amount of time going
through checkpoint after checkpoint; bridges have been
bombed and, whatever the case may be, because of the
war front we are having to move and go different routes.
It is quite a chore. Lise Grande and I went together.

Al-Hudaydah is like a ghost town. Representatives
will have seen those kind of movies where it is empty.
One sees a dog walking here or there, and that is about
the extent of it. The way we are doing food distribution
right now is to give people enough for a whole month
so we minimize their being on the streets, because
people do not want to walk out on the streets because
they are afraid they will get killed. One cannot imagine
the number of people coming up to me and wanting to
hug me and say "Thank you for being here". But then
they would say, "Please do not leave". Because while
we were there, there was no fighting. "Please do not
leave. Stay a few days. Give us peace. Give us some
hope." I said that I had to leave so that I could help
tell the world how bad it really is and that they deserve
better than this.

My third point concerns the humanitarian and
economic intervention is required. I agree with
absolutely everything that Mark was talking about.
This is not just one element. It is a package. We must
work together, but let me clear that starvation is on
the horizon unless circumstances change, and change
immediately. The war has taken its toll over four years,
but the economic crisis will accelerate that damage in a
just a matter of months. We must combine humanitarian
assistance with an all-out effort to restore the Yemeni
economy. Let me be crystal clear - humanitarian
assistance alone cannot reverse the dire situation. We
need a twin-track approach.

First, we need to put more hard currency into the
Yemeni economy and the hands of the Yemeni people,
as Mark referred to. The rial needs to be stabilized to at
least a 450-to-$1 ratio so people are able to buy essential
things again and to get the economy rolling again.
This would require a cash injection of approximately
$200 million per month.

Secondly, we need to scale up our assistance in
order to help 12 million people per month. As I said
earlier, we are helping about 8 million. We need to
scale up to approximately 12 million, give or take 1
or 2 million. That would require about $150 million
to $160 million a month just for food and assistance,
versus the approximately $100 million a month that we
are spending at the World Food Programme. If we are
able to raise the funds of $150 million to $160 million
a month just for the food assistance alone, we hope and
believe that about $50 million of that could be used as
cash-based assistance for the most food-insecure people,
and that cash-based assistance would not only save
lives, but would also help inject much-needed liquidity
into the economy. We work with store owners, family-
owned businesses to help them provide the liquidity
to stimulate the economy in these communities and to
get that engine going again, which is critical for the
stability of this country.

But as we begin this work, the warring parties must
guarantee access, especially in and out of Al-Hudaydah
port. If Al-Hudaydah port shuts down without
alternatives, it will be a devastation beyond our furthest
imagination. Little boys and little girls will die. We
cannot truly meet the need unless we have much more
improved access throughout the country - for logistics
corridors, ports and the ability to monitor and assess.
We need expedited clearances for our shipments, visas,
equipment requests and personnel.

Yemen is on the brink so, together, we must act. The
international community must use all its power to stop
this war and rescue the Yemen economy and the Yemeni
people. Humanitarian organizations, like World Food
Programme, must get the resources and the access they
need to save the lives of innocent children and families.
Otherwise, at the World Food Programme and other
humanitarian agencies, we will be in the position of
deciding which children eat and which children do not
eat, which children live and which children die. How
would anyone in this Chamber like that job?

Every child deserves better. The words
"heartbreaking" and "tragic" do not do the situation in
Yemen justice. All of humankind should be ashamed of
what is happening in that country. With all the wealth
in the world today, all the intellectual knowledge, and
all the technology the world has today, there should not
be a single child going to bed hungry in Yemen, much
less anywhere else. It is long, oh so very long, past the
time to stop it.

