Mr. Al Towaiya (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, allow me, on behalf of the Group of Arab
States, to extend to you, Madam President, my sincere
thanks and appreciation for having convened this
important meeting. I wish also to congratulate you on
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council
for this month.

Although our Arab region is experiencing political
crises, the Palestinian question, which has been going
on for 70 years, remains the central issue in the region.
Resolving it in a fair and lasting way will bring security
and stability to that region.

The Charter of the United Nations prohibits
and rejects the conquest of land by force. That is the
principle on which the Arab countries based themselves
when, during their summit held in Beirut in 2002, they
adopted the Arab Peace Initiative, which is underpinned
by the principle of land for peace and the withdrawal
of Israel from all Arab territories occupied since
1967. In addition, the Arab countries have spared no
effort in international and regional forums to mobilize
support for achieving the two-State solution, within the
borders of 4 June 1967, and to ensure that a just peace
prevails, in which no inequitable solution is imposed
on the Palestinian people, who are under the yoke
of occupation.

However, Israeli intransigence, procrastination and
evasion have not led to the desired solution to this issue or
to ending the conflict. Israel offers only one alternative,
namely, continue with the occupation, consolidate
colonization and violate Palestinian sovereignty.

We reiterate that resolution 2334 (2016) represents
a step in the right direction for ending the Israeli
occupation and its settlement project, rejecting violence
and establishing peace based on the two-State solution.
That is why the international community must now
undertake efforts and take the measures necessary
to implement that resolution. The international
community must also bring pressure to bear on the
Israeli Government to abandon its settlement project.

We underscore the Arab position calling for the full
lifting ofthe Israeli blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip,
while promptly achieving Palestinian reconciliation in
line with the document signed in Cairo last year. In that
connection, we reaffirm our support for the efforts of
our brothers in the Arab Republic of Egypt to ensure
Palestinian reconciliation.

In keeping with the provisions of international
law and United Nations resolutions on the Palestinian
question, the Arab Group calls on the Security Council
and its member States to take the following measures:
first, to not recognize any unilateral action aimed at
undermining the two-State solution, including any
action affecting the character, status or demographic
composition of Jerusalem, and to ensure that such
actions are null and void and have no legal impact;
secondly, to call once again on States to refrain from
setting up diplomatic missions in Jerusalem, in line with
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions; thirdly, to reiterate that the questions of
Jerusalem and refugees are final-status issues that must
be addressed through negotiations between the parties
on the basis of international legitimacy resolutions;
and, fourthly, to step up international and regional
efforts to bring about a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East by creating an independent
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in line with international
legitimacy resolutions.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
is currently facing a critical situation. That is why I
take this opportunity to highly commend the lofty
humanitarian work done by UNRWA to assist more
than 5.4 million Palestinian refugees, including
children, women and young people, by providing relief
and development services in the areas of health care,
nutrition, infrastructure and education.

The Arab Group rejects any attempts to
nullify the refugee issue or to remove it from the
international agenda.

In conclusion, let me say that there can be no
stability and peace in the region as long as the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories continues. We must assist
the Palestinians and save them from despair, because
the international Organization is unable to end their
suffering and ensure them their rights so that they can
realize their legitimate aspirations.
