Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to thank the Turkish presidency of the
Security Council for allowing what is for me a very
welcome debate on peacekeeping. This meeting
follows on the discussions on peacekeeping that were
launched earlier this year during the French presidency
of the Council. Indeed, I would like to thank all the
Member States that have pursued discussions on
peacekeeping in different forums in recent months. It is
proof that we have a shared interest in supporting
United Nations peacekeeping to meet current demands,
build on its strengths, address its weaknesses and,
finally, prepare for the challenges of the future.

The theme of today's meeting - the relationship
between the Security Council and the troop- and
police-contributing countries- reflects the fact that
United Nations peacekeeping is a global partnership. It
brings together the Council, with its legal and political
authority, and the Member States, which are the only
parties with the means to provide operations with the
personnel, materiel and finances they need. It also
draws together the Secretariat, which must plan and
manage the operations as the entity responsible for
their professionalism and efficiency, and the leaders
and people of host countries, whose ongoing
commitment to peace is perhaps the single most
important factor for the success of peacekeeping. And
lastly, this partnership draws together the United
Nations as a whole with the broad range of regional
and multilateral organizations that work alongside us to
address conflict and build peace around the world.
09-38504

Each one of the partners brings a vital
contribution to peacekeeping. Each depends on the
other. Together, this partnership gives United Nations
peacekeeping its strengths of legitimacy, burden-
sharing and adaptability. When all the partners are
strongly united behind a peacekeeping operation, they
send an unequivocal signal of international
commitment that reinforces the authority of the
Security Council and the credibility and effectiveness
of each individual operation.

And of course, if one element of the partnership
is weak, the whole project is weakened. Therefore,
efforts to strengthen peacekeeping must be
comprehensive. For example, we cannot focus on the
military elements that provide security, without
considering the equally the civilian elements, which
support the troops. We cannot promote new policing
concepts, such as the formed police units, without an
ongoing dialogue with contributing countries as to the
tasks expected and the standards linked to them. There
are critical connections between mandates, planning,
budgets and force generation, which are addressed in
different forums of the United Nations. Commitments
in one forum need to be translated into resources in
others, as well as support on the ground.

This interdependency means that we need strong
frameworks for dialogue in order to reach a shared
assessment of the challenges as well as the potential
for peacekeeping. That was perhaps the most valuable
contribution of the Brahimi report (S/2000/ 809) almost
10 years ago. That report made it possible to build a
consensus on the nature and direction of peacekeeping
and to put it on a new and firmer footing. As the
Council knows, peacekeeping involves 115,000
peacekeepers, or some five times as many since the
time of the Brahimi report. We think it is time today to
take stock together and to ensure that the partnership is
ready for the new challenges we will have to face.

Mandates, as Council members know, are more
complex than ever, and there remains a lack of
consensus on how certain mandate tasks should be
fulfilled. Political differences exist as to the overall
goals and direction of a number of missions, and
limited consent from key parties hampers a number of
our missions. Needed capabilities, such as those well-
known helicopters, are not always available in
sufficient quantity to the United Nations, considerably
hindering mandate implementation in certain missions.
Our logistical and administrative systems are
3
overstretched by the scale and tempo of operations on
some of the world's most difficult terrain. And
overarching all of that is the reality that in the current
global environment, financial constraints press us to
review the basic models of peacekeeping. Costs, troop
numbers and capability requirements cannot all
continue to rise indefinitely.

Unfortunately, there is little sign that
peacekeeping demand is decreasing. On the contrary,
factors such as environmental changes, economic
shocks, transborder organized crime and extremism
may well contribute to political and security instability
and lead to new demands for peacekeepers. That means
the peacekeeping partnership has to be broad and
strong - in terms of the participants and their
contributions, as well as in terms of consensus and
unity on goals and actions. This also means that the full
spectrum of tools and responses besides peacekeeping
must be available to the international community,
including conflict prevention, mediation and
multinational force deployments.

(spoke in English)

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations/
Department of Field Support (DPKO/DFS) New
Horizon initiative is our contribution to forming a new
partnership agenda for peacekeeping. The Council has
already received an executive brief of a non-paper
which will be released in July. The brief contains the
main themes we are reflecting upon and the areas in
which we will propose some recommended follow-up
actions. I should stress that we consider that we are at
the start of a process of discussion with the Council.
We would see a need to follow up with an intensified
in-depth dialogue on thematic issues both in New York
and outside. Many of the issues before us are not new.
The objective is to arrive at a set of achievable
immediate, medium- and long-term goals to help
configure United Nations peacekeeping to better meet
today's and tomorrow's challenges.

With that in mind, the non-paper will focus on
four main points: first, critical peacekeeping tasks and
functions that require a renewed consensus; secondly,
measures to improve mission design, resourcing and
deployment; thirdly, proposals on assessing and
building the capacities needed for future peacekeeping;
and fourthly, a strategy to create a stronger, more
flexible support system.
I will not go through all the proposals we make in
each area, since the brief is before the Council. I would
rather wish to focus my remarks on a few of the issues
which, on the basis of my first year in charge of
DPKO, I think are top priorities.

With regard to the first key area, we would argue
that there is a need for clearer consensus on the role of
peacekeepers in delivering, for example, on the
protection-of-civilians mandate. We also need to
establish a better common understanding of the
political, strategic and operational aspects of robust
peacekeeping, building on discussions currently under
way with Member States.

As mandates grow more demanding, robust and
dangerous, it is essential that there be a strong sense of
common purpose and close linkage between the
Council's intent and what TCCs and PCCs are ready to
deliver. As the number of mandated tasks grows, we
also need greater clarity on the extent of peacebuilding
that peacekeeping missions should carry out and on the
resources required for this. Security sector reform and
strengthened rule of law are essential to help develop
national capacity in the host country. That is extremely
important both as part of the exit strategy of the
mission that we all wish to achieve and in order to
allow host countries to rebuild the institutions that
allow them to effectively exercise their own
sovereignty.

Broader peacebuilding also entails beginning
early recovery, infrastructure and employment creation,
and peacekeeping operations must rely on other
peacebuilding partners to help deliver these. Kick-
starting that sort of sustainable development is
essential in Liberia, in Timor-Leste and in Haiti. The
forthcoming report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding will highlight the key areas of
peacebuilding in which United Nations capability
needs to be strengthened.

With regard to the second key area - the design,
resourcing and deployment of missions - I would
highlight the following as priority issues. First, there is
a need to ensure sustained political support for the
missions. We underscore the critical importance of an
active, functional political process to address the
conflict. Where our peacekeeping operations are
struggling, it is usually the case that there is a lack of
an inclusive peace process. Darfur clearly illustrates
that point.

No matter how well trained and specialized our
peacekeepers are, they cannot be successful without a
viable peace process. Achievable mandates with clear
political goals accompanied by continued political
support from troop- and police-contributing countries
and the Security Council is key. One way of
contributing to that sustained political support is
through informal coalitions of Member States focused
on individual missions to assist in providing political
and materiel support throughout the life of a mission.

The non-paper also argues that the Security
Council should play a role to help ensure that critical
capabilities are found. As one option, it recalls the
Brahimi recommendation for a two-stage mandating
process to help generate the necessary resources to
ensure that a mandate is achievable before it is
finalized.

There is a need to improve Secretariat planning
processes and enhance dialogue with the Security
Council and troop- and police-contributors on
planning. We will look for ways to enhance dialogue
on the Secretariat's planning process with the Council
and TCCS, in particular those countries contributing
significant capabilities and volunteering for complex
tasks. We will also make proposals for faster, more
focused mission start-ups and a better sequencing of
deployment, to prioritize earlier deployment of critical
capabilities that will advance mandate implementation
and credibility. It is also important that we resolve the
issue of rapidly deployable contingency reserves for
missions that face significant risk of security crises.

Too many of our missions are lacking in critical
capabilities. Troops in dangerous environments lack
the information and mobility critical for force
protection and mandate implementation. I believe a
priority will be to agree on the nature of the
capabilities required for modern peacekeeping. There
must also be sufficient incentives to allow United
Nations peacekeeping to obtain them We operate
simultaneously in the jungles of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in the desert of Chad and
Darfur and in urban centres such as Port-au-Prince. It
is clear that different capabilities are needed in each
setting. We believe there is a need to review the
procedure for reimbursement of contingent-owned
equipment to make sure they reflect today's reality.
High-tech equipment cannot be reimbursed at the level
of an armoured personnel carrier.

Out of necessity, we have focused our force
generation on numbers rather than on what capabilities
have been needed to fulfil the mandate of a given
mission. Darfur is, again, a vivid example of this. We
must together shift our focus to operational
requirements and on how to better generate capabilities
not just numbers. We need to jointly identify the type
of capacity required, including agreed minimum
standards for troops and police carrying out United
Nations peacekeeping while also delivering essential
improvements to the United Nations training system.
And we must facilitate linkage of bilateral training
capacities with potential new or existing troop- and
police-contributing countries in need of specialized
training to fulfil the requirements of United Nations
peacekeeping.

I believe one critical goal of our overall strategy
to ensure that peacekeeping has the capacities it needs
must be to expand the base of troop- and police-
contributors. There must be more equal burden-sharing
in the United Nations system.

The Secretariat must also ensure that it addresses
any outstanding questions regarding command and
control that potential TCCs or PCCs may have. We also
need to increase our interoperability with regional
organizations, including, of course, the African Union,
the European Union and subregional organizations. It
is clear that supporting the African Union in building
its capacity remains a very high priority.

Finally, I hold as a priority the articulation of the
new field support strategy that the DPS is leading.
Under-Secretary-General Malcorra will comment
further on that, but I would just say that it is clear to
me that United Nations peacekeeping today is the
instrument of a hyperoperational United Nations. Yet,
our support systems have not caught up with that new
reality. We have to make adjustments in how we
support our missions to increase flexibility and
efficiency, but I will leave it to Ms. Malcorra to
elaborate on that issue.

To conclude my remarks, I would like to say that
the new partnership agenda that we have put forward is
one that we will need to work on together. Together, we
must set the agenda for the peacekeeping of tomorrow.
We are looking forward to an intense dialogue with the
Council on the way forward. I look forward to hearing
more from the members of the Security Council, troop-
contributing countries and financial contributors, and I
will endeavour to take account of their perspectives
and concerns in the process of finalizing the
DPKO/DFS non-paper.

We hope to continue this dialogue with the
Council in the weeks and months to come. As we
approach 10 years since the seminal reforms of the
Brahimi report (S/2009/809), I believe that is the best
way in which we can honour and protect the
achievements of that report and build on it for the
future.

I would also like to close by taking this
opportunity to thank the Council for its critical role in
guiding United Nations peacekeeping, and, of course,
the TCCs and PCCs gathered here for their
contributions to our current and past missions.

