I thank all our briefers this morning for their statements and for their hard work in carrying out their respective functions. Allow me also to thank the Secretary- General and the Secretariat team for their continued professionalism in providing a well-researched and comprehensive report (S/2020/531). I will start by expressing Estonia's support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The Plan is a key element in the global nuclear non-proliferation architecture and crucial for regional and wider international security. As the Plan is currently the only assurance for the international community regarding Iran's nuclear programme, we do not want to see it collapse. Nevertheless, Iran's announcement, in May 2019, to reduce its nuclear- related commitments under the Plan and the subsequent steps taken are extremely concerning and worrisome, as they indicate a serious threat of nuclear proliferation. Although we commend that Iran continues to cooperate with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) under the JCPOA, we note with concern Iran's recent lack of cooperation with the Agency's investigations under is Safeguards Agreement. Since cooperation with the IAEA is crucial in order to provide the necessary assurances of the absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities, Estonia supported the resolution adopted at the latest [AEA Board of Governors meeting. Estonia welcomes our European partners' efforts to address and find a viable solution to the issues of non-compliance with the JCPOA within its framework, and notes the triggering of the dispute resolution mechanism by France, Germany and the United Kingdom in January this year. We hope that other participants in the JCPOA will engage constructively and substantively in this process. The preservation and full implementation of the JCPOA also includes compliance with all the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015), including the restrictive measures set out in annex B to the resolution. The Secretary-General's report outlines Iran's continued non-compliance with several of the provisions relating to its ballistic missile-related activities and transfer of various arms to other actors in the Middle East. The report therefore gives rise to serious concerns. The Secretary-General's report offers a detailed examination of the weapons seized by the United States in November 2019 and February 2020, and concludes that they were of Iranian origin and may have been transferred in a manner inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015). Moreover, some of the items were similar or identical to those used in the attacks against Saudi Arabia's oil facilities and its international airport. We also note with concern the information provided in the report regarding the launches by Iran of space-launch vehicles, in two instances. In undertaking such activity, Iran is not providing confidence that it is not developing technology capable of serving as a means of delivery for nuclear weapons. Such weapons-proliferation activities have a highly destabilizing effect on the region and only feed into the escalation of tensions. These very concerning activities do not lend any support to the planned expiry of the conventional arms restrictions this October, as established by resolution 2231 (2015). To conclude, Estonia calls all parties to remain committed to the full and effective implementation of the JCPOA and of resolution 2231 (2015). It is our* common responsibility as members of the international community to work together to preserve the nuclear agreement and reach a diplomatic settlement through constructive dialogue and in good faith. We fully support efforts that are conducive to international peace and security. 16/38 *
