Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French):
France aligns itself with the statement that will be
made later on behalf of the European Union by the
Permanent Representative of Germany. I should also
like to thank you for having taken the initiative to
organize this open debate, the first the Council has
dedicated to the implementation of that document since
the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) some three
years ago.

We believe that the approach that you have
chosen for this debate, that is, cooperation between the
Security Council and international organizations, is
particularly appropriate. The Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), which has now reconstituted its group of
experts, must step up its efforts to implement the
workplan that it adopted some five months ago.
Moreover, it has only 14 months left under resolution
1673 (2006) to report to the Security Council on States'
conformity with resolution 1540 (2004) in completing
the implementation of the provisions of that resolution.
That ambitious task cannot be carried out without
enhanced cooperation with other international
organizations. The purpose of my statement is to make
a few specific suggestions to that end.

First, the Security Council needs to develop its
cooperation with international organizations in order to
help States to report on the measures that they are
undertaking. In that regard, the most useful cooperation
concerns regional and subregional organizations. The
States that find it difficult to report to the Committee
are essentially developing countries in the Pacific,
Africa and the Caribbean. The example provided by
New Zealand, which has utilized regional and
subregional frameworks that link it with Pacific States
to help them report to the Committee, is exemplary.
The Accra and Lima workshops showed the interest
that that example has aroused in other regions.

Such action can go hand in hand with cooperation
between organizations: one regional organization can
assist the action of another. The statement to be made
shortly by the representative of Germany will attest to
the experience of the European Union in this area.
However, beyond providing information, the
cooperation between the Security Council and
international organizations is necessary, and now
urgent, to ensure that States adopt appropriate
measures. With regard to the implementation of
physical protection measures for installations
containing sensitive materials, as stipulated in
paragraph 3 of resolution 1540 (2004), there are
technical competences that we have not utilized to date
within the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
and the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW).

We must not mix up competences: the IAEA will
not make judgements on States" conformity with the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004). On the other
hand, it has elaborated principles and instruments that
it can promote to members, such as the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the
Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of
Radioactive Sources. Indeed, these are mentioned in
resolution 1540 (2004). In addition, the IAEA has
cooperation programmes in the area of security and
safety, which provide it with opportunities to raise
States' awareness as to whether the security measures
they are taking meet the requirements of resolution
1540 (2004). Other organizations could play a similar
awareness-raising role. That is the case with the World
Customs Organization - whose participation I
welcome in this debate - and the World Health
Organization. What I said about the IAEA and the
OPCW applies to those organizations.

Finally, there are multilateral arrangements
whose activities are relevant to non-proliferation, such
as the Nuclear Suppliers Group, which has already had
contacts with the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), or the
Missile Technology Control Regime, which will soon
meet with the Committee.

There can only be advantages as a result of the
involvement of such groups in information activities
that reach beyond their membership and raise other
States' awareness of their activities as regards export
controls. I recall that resolution 1540 (2004)
establishes no norm regarding such controls and
merely requests States to implement them. The
Security Council is not in a position to promote the
standards of these groups, but it can encourage them to
provide States with ideas about how to implement their
own national controls.
In conclusion, I wish to say that cooperation with
international organizations aimed at implementing
resolution 1540 (2004) should be guided not only by a
concern for pragmatism, but also by a certain sense of
urgency. Pragmatism can only encourage the Security
Council to welcome all the goodwill that is shown and
to make use of all competences available. During the
nearly three years since it was established, the 1540
Committee has not had substantial cooperation with the
IAEA. It is clearly necessary to respect the mandates of
the Council and the Agency, but not to the point of
never asking for the opinions of those who are in the
nuclear profession.

Urgency demands that we accelerate our pace. I
am not talking about the urgency resulting from the
tight deadline that we have set ourselves for making
judgements as to full implementation of the resolution.
Rather, I am talking about the urgency of filling the
gaps that traffickers and terrorists can still take
advantage of in order to procure dangerous materials or
contribute to proliferation. France supports the idea of
cooperative action to implement resolution 1540
(2004). That must go hand in hand with the Security
Council's concern to shoulder its responsibility by
effectively addressing the risk to international peace
and security posed by the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery.

