The President (spoke in Chinese): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

At the outset, I would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev, the three Police
Commissioners and Ms. Reitano for their briefings. I
also want to thank all United Nations police officers for
their contribution to the maintenance of international
peace and security. I would particularly like to pay a
heartfelt tribute to the United Nations police officers
who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the cause of
peace, including the Chinese police officers who lost
their lives in Haiti, and to their families.

The United Nations Police is an important
component of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and has played an indispensable role in assisting host
countries in maintaining security and stability, as well
as capacity-building. Given the increasingly complex
and daunting security challenges and operational
environments we are seeing, we must strengthen United
Nations policing. To that end, China would like to offer
three recommendations.

First, the United Nations Police should uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and abide by the basic principles of United
Nations peacekeeping - the consent of the parties,
impartiality and refraining from the use of force
except in self-defence or defence of the mandate. It
is vital to fully respect host countries' sovereignty
and aspirations, and to heed their views and the input
of police-contributing countries regarding mandate
adjustment, performance assessment and day-to-
day management.

Secondly, the main task should be enhancing the
security capacity of host countries. The United Nations
Police should support host countries through measures
such as systematic training and equipment transfer in
order to ensure that they are capable of safeguarding
their own security and stability and of achieving
sustainable peace after peacekeeping operations
have withdrawn.

Thirdly, we must work constantly to improve the
professionalism and capacity of the United Nations
Police, who must strictly implement their selection
criteria for personnel and equipment, strengthen
management and performance evaluations, and
improve operational efficiency so as to enhance their
reputation and achieve better results. Priority must
be given to the safety and security of United Nations
police officers, and stronger protection measures and
emergency medical response capacities are also needed.
China supports Secretary-General Guterres' Action
for Peacekeeping initiative and the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. We hope that synergy can be achieved in
the implementation of the Declaration, on the one hand,
and the Secretariat's peace and security architecture
and management reform, on the other, with the aim
of ensuring that all those endeavours contribute to
improving the development of United Nations policing
and United Nations peacekeeping as a whole.

China is a significant contributor of police to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Since 2000,
we have contributed more than 2,600 police officers
to United Nations missions. In active fulfilment of
the commitments made by President Xi Jinping at the
2015 Summit on United Nations Peacekeeping, China
has established and trained two standby formed police
units consisting of 330 officers and has trained more
than 400 peacekeeping police officers from other
countries. We are in favour of organizing a new summit
on United Nations policing and will continue to fulfil
our commitments to United Nations peacekeeping
activities and make an even greater contribution to
moving United Nations policing forward.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The members of the Council have expressed
their views, in addition to asking some specific
questions. I would now like to turn the floor over to
the briefers to respond to the questions posed or make
further comments.

I give the floor to Mr. Zouev.
