Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Madame President,
I would first like to thank you for your presence here
today and for your personal commitment to the issues
that we are dealing with. I should also like to express
my sympathy and solidarity in regard to the epidemic
that your country is currently experiencing, an
epidemic that has, in the meantime, spread to other
countries, including to European countries such as my
own.

We are grateful to you, Madame President, for the
determination that you have shown in this matter today,
and you can certainly count on our full cooperation in
this issue. I would like to thank Mexico and the
Permanent Representative of Mexico here in New York
for the excellent work that has been done in the
preparation of this meeting and in the Working Group
that deals with this matter.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union.

We are grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Coomaraswamy, Executive
Director Veneman and Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy for their statements. In particular, as others have,
we also welcome the presence of Ms. Grace Akallo and
thank her for her thought-provoking and moving
remarks. It is very important to us that the Council
listen to the voices of the victims of the very crimes
that we strive to prevent. I can assure Ms. Akallo that
we will learn from her thoughts and experiences and
that they will carry us forward in our work.

The new report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/ 158) provides an excellent overview and
assessment of the developments that have taken place
since late 2007. We appreciate the ongoing
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism in new country situations. The signing of
two additional formal action plans and the de-Iisting of
one party are welcome developments.

Nevertheless, the Secretary-General's report
makes it very clear that less than 10 per cent of all
parties listed in the annexes have entered into formal
action plans. The vast majority of those parties are
non-State actors. We agree with the Secretary-General
that direct contact between the United Nations country
teams and non-State actors is of great importance to
ensure the effective protection of children and we call
on the concerned Member States to allow such contact
in the framework of resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612
(2005).

According to the report, 19 parties to conflicts
have been listed in the annexes for the past four years.
We believe that, for the sake of the children, the
Council must ensure respect for its resolutions and
should make better use of the tools available to it.
More systematic communication needs to be
established between the Security Council Working
Group and the relevant sanctions committees. We
welcome the fact that this idea is reflected in the draft
presidential statement that will be adopted at the end of
this debate. We also wish to encourage Member States
to provide sanctions committees with additional
information with a view to listing individuals or
entities committing violations and abuses against
children.

More has to be done, too, to end impunity and to
bring to justice individuals who commit crimes against
children. Concerned Member States must take decisive
action to strengthen the rule of law and must ensure
that those responsible are brought to justice either
through national justice systems or international justice
mechanisms. The International Criminal Court - and I
wish to stress this point - can play an important role
in ending impunity in this area also.

Furthermore, it is important to ensure that
provisions for the protection of children continue to be
included in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and political missions. The
protection of children must also be systematically
considered in peace agreements. We recognize the
important work done by child protection advisers and
welcome their increasing deployment over the past few
years. Austria was honoured to support the ongoing
efforts within the United Nations system to develop
guidance for mainstreaming the protection of children
within United Nations peacekeeping by hosting a child
protection workshop organized by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations at the European University
Center for Peace Studies of Stadtschlaining, Austria, in
March 2009. The workshop brought together - for the
first time, as far as I know - child protection advisers
from all United Nations peace operations and
peacebuilding support offices.

We particularly welcome the special focus in the
Secretary-General's report on the issue of rape and
sexual violence against children. They are horrendous
crimes that have far-reaching implications for the
development of the affected societies. Unlike the other
six grave violations, those crimes have no obvious link
to warfare, and yet sexual and gender-based violence
against children has reached appalling levels in many
situations of conflict.

It will be difficult to ensure the effectiveness and
credibility of our work if the recruitment and use of
child soldiers remain the only gateway to listing parties
to armed conflict in the annexes to the Secretary-
General's reports. We therefore support the Secretary-
General's recommendation to add the crime of rape and
grave sexual violence as an additional element to
trigger the monitoring and reporting mechanism. We
are also open to including the crime of killing and
maiming of children in violation of applicable
international law.

Also, we welcome and encourage the ongoing
efforts within the United Nations to devise a strategy to
improve data collection and reporting on sexual
violence. We must ensure an effective response to these
violations. We also believe that the special situation of
children with disabilities should be given thought. We
fully support the view that resolutions 1612 (2005) and
1820 (2008) should be mutually reinforcing and that
complementary processes for the documentation of
and/or reporting on those resolutions should be
explored. The participation of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and other relevant
actors in United Nations country task forces is a
positive step.

It is significant that we have achieved some
progress, important progress, during the negotiations in
the past days, but we regret that the Council was not
yet ready to take action on these pressing concerns. We
have noted that the members of the Security Council
are prepared to and will continue their considerations
on this very important matter. You can rest assured,
Madame President, that Austria remains committed to a
more effective and efficient framework for the
protection of children. We will continue to work with
others in order to allow for a more balanced and
credible response to the very real issues that children
are confronted with on the ground.

