Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to reflect on the impact of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), 20 years after the Council's
establishment of the ICTY. We are disappointed that
the Council could not agree to hold an open debate, but
we would like to thank the Tribunal Presidents, Judges
Meron and Joensen, and Prosecutors Brammertz and
Jallow for their briefings today. We would also like
to thank Guatemala for its leadership of the Informal
Working Group on the International Tribunals.

I would like to make a number of broader comments.
The establishment of the ICTY was a watershed
moment in recognizing the relationship between justice
and peace. The establishment of the ICTR a year later
cemented that link. Of course, the investigation and
prosecution of serious international crimes cannot
by itself bring about peace or reconciliation. But
both historical experience and expert analysis have
established that, while timing is important, without
justice it is difficult, and ultimately maybe impossible,
to establish inclusive and lasting reconciliation and
peace.

We all know that both Tribunals have faced
challenges. They began their work in the context of an
ongoing conflict, in the case of the ICTY, and a fragile
peace, in the case of the ICTR. At the outset, they had
only skeletal jurisprudence to guide their efforts. With
no enforcement powers, they were dependent on States
to arrest and surrender indictees, and they had to grapple
with vast amounts of evidence. Their achievements in
the face of those challenges are truly impressive. All
161 persons indicted by the ICTY and all but nine of
the 90 indicted by the ICTR have been accounted for.
Together the Tribunals have dealt with 1,627 charges
of crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide.
In doing so, they have produced rich international
criminal law jurisprudence. Legal aid systems have
been established, protective measures for witnesses
developed and innovations made in forensic, ballistic
and re-enactment evidence. Assistance has been
provided to national judiciaries dealing with serious
international crimes. And at all times the Tribunals
have maintained their independence and provided fair
trials in accordance with international standards.

We welcome the considerable progress that the
Tribunals have made during the reporting period
towards the completion of their mandates, but their
work is not yet done. Some of the ICTY's most high-
profile cases are still ongoing. The ICTR's trials may
have been concluded, but appeals continue, including
under the Residual Mechanism. The 10 people acquitted
and released in the care of the ICTR in Tanzania
must be relocated. States must assist the Residual
Mechanism track and apprehend the fugitives from the
ICTR. Australia encourages the Tribunals to continue
their efforts to implement their completion strategies
and calls on all States to continue to cooperate with
and support both Tribunals, as well as the Residual
Mechanism.

As the Tribunals near the conclusion of their work,
we should pay tribute to the thousands of dedicated
Tribunal staff and officials, the national Governments
of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the host States,
international organizations, the members of civil
society and, most especially, the victims and witnesses,
who have courageously stood up and said that we will
not tolerate impunity for serious international crimes.

Just as a democracy is not a democracy unless it
protects the most vulnerable, international criminal
justice is not justice unless it serves the victims. We
still have a long way to go to end impunity. But our
responsibility to do so must be a continuous touchstone
in the Council's work and must guide our interaction
with all international criminal justice institutions,
including pre-eminently, of course, the International
Criminal Court.

