Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful for the convening of today's
briefing. We thank Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx for
their detailed analysis of the situation with regard to
combating the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS).
We note the active efforts of the bodies that they head
in preparing the most recent report of the Secretary-
General on the issue (S/2018/770). We listened with
interest to the briefing by Ms. Cook.

Amid the military and territorial losses, the
destruction of the economic infrastructure, the
weakening of the propaganda machine and the
demoralization of the fighters, the group's leadership
seeks any opportunity to maintain its influence. The
global terrorist Tower of Babel has collapsed. However,
ISIS cells continue to speak with one voice and to
successfully coordinate among themselves. Following
the destruction of the hydrocarbon smuggling network,
terrorists have turned to new sources of financial and
logistical support.

There have been reported incidents of speculation
on stock markets, and the terrorists strive to invest
funds in the legal sectors of the economies of a wide
range of countries. The supporters of ISIS actively
invest in tourism, hospitality, industry, agriculture,
fish farms, pharmacology and construction companies.
The group also continues to fight for control of
drug-smuggling routes, including in Afghanistan.
Furthermore, ISIS continues to receive funds from
foreign sponsors cooperating under the cover of
philanthropic foundations, religious groups and other
non-governmental organizations.

We note with satisfaction that the starting point of
the report presented today was an acknowledgement of
the success of the Syrian army in combating terrorism.
That was evident in the intense fight against ISIS in
the suburbs of Damascus. At the same time, there has
been progress far beyond the boundaries of the Syrian
capital. With the support of the Russian armed forces,
more than 1,400 towns and cities have been liberated
from the presence of terrorists. More than 96 per cent
of the Syrian territory has now been brought under the
control of Government forces and the people's militia
units. As a result, more than 1.5 million Syrian refugees
have already been able to return to their homes. At the
same time, we do not overlook the possibility of an
increasing number of terrorist sleeper cells in Syria.
The supporters of ISIS are doing their utmost. They
actively recruit minors, including children under the
age of 12 years, to carry out terrorist attacks. It is
entirely possible that terrorist attacks will become more
frequent, in particular in the area of Idlib. Furthermore,
there is an increasing likelihood of the threat of ISIS in
Afghanistan, where, according to various reports, there
are 4,000 to 10,000 active members of that group, a
significant number of whom are in the areas bordering
the Central Asian States.

In parallel with the military defeat of ISIS, it is
necessary to most effectively address the issue ofholding
radical elements to account. In that context, it behoves
us to raise the issue of the inadmissibility of attempts
to supplant the functions of Syrian Government's
counter-terrorism bodies. As stated in the report of the
Secretary-General, in parallel with Government forces,
arrests of ISIS members are also being carried out by
certain armed entities. We would like to receive more
detailed information. Who specifically is undertaking
such tasks and on what basis? What is the fate of the
detainees? Are there plans to hand them over to the
authorities? We trust that we will receive answers from
the specialized Security Council committees without
having to await the issuance of the next report.

I would reiterate that, ultimately, all those who
provide direct or indirect assistance to terrorists,
not to mention the fighters themselves, must be held
to account. However, the collection, processing and
transfer of evidence to judicial bodies must be done
strictly in accordance with international law and with
full respect for the sovereignty of the States where ISIS
perpetrated the crimes. If that factor is not taken into
account, not a single initiative to investigate terrorist
crimes can claim to be legitimate. For our part, Russian
investigative bodies actively participate in such efforts
on Syrian soil with the consent of, and in cooperation
with, Damascus officials.

During the discussion of the sixth report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/80) in February (see S/PV.8178), the Russian delegation drew attention to the
blatant breach of the arms embargo with regard to ISIS.
What remains unresolved is the question of how that
gang of thugs put together an arsenal of weapons, which
for seven years has enabled it essentially to resist the
world's largest armies. The current report depicts the
situation as if the ISIS fighters are content with merely
what happens to come their way, robbing storage sites
in the territories under their control and manufacturing
improvised explosive devices. In reality, those terrorists
are able to manufacture only a small proportion of the
weapons using an improvised method and only their
most primitive models. There is increasing evidence of
arms being provided from abroad, including through
semi-legal structures or even with the support of the
intelligence services of certain countries. We trust
that there will be a detailed discussion on ways to
address that issue during the international conference
on countering illegal arms supplies in the context
of combating international terrorism, to be held in
Moscow on 3 and 4 September.

ISIS activity has decreased, which has enabled
Al-Qaida to appear once again, with financing to
the tune of $20 million to $40 million a month. That
group is strengthening its ties with affiliated groups in
North Africa. It strives to take control of local criminal
businesses and to invest in the agro-industrial holdings
of African countries. According to available reports, as
ISIS is displaced Al-Qaida and its allies may take on
the role of countering international efforts to peacefully
resolve the conflict in Syria.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
the only way to eliminate the threat posed by ISIS,
Al-Qaida and affiliated groups is on a genuinely
collective basis. In that regard, we are studying with
interest the initiative by the Secretariat leadership
to set up a network of counter-terrorist coordinators.
We are convinced that strengthening the practical
cooperation of the specialized agencies of Member
States represents an important factor in establishing a
single United Nations-led counter-terrorism coalition
on a non-ideological basis, which is something for
which we have long called.

The meeting rose at 5.20 pm.
