The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Slovenia.

Recent developments in Angola have brought the
country to the brink of an abyss. Active military
preparations are under way, and both the Government and
UNITA are engaged in forced-recruitment drives. The
laying of new mines in the country is pervasive, and the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)
has witnessed an increasing number of attacks on remote
villages and police stations.

The situation is particularly grim as over 1 million
people are now internally displaced due to the derailment
of the peace process. There is little doubt that UNITA
bears the brunt of the responsibility for this lamentable
state of affairs. On 1 July, in response to the still-
unresolved status of Andulo, Bailundo, N'Harea and
Mungo, this Council imposed additional sanctions on
UNITA, with a view to eliciting its cooperation.

Rather than handing over the central highland
strongholds, however, UNITA has since then embarked
on what appears to be a carefully orchestrated campaign
to retake areas previously ceded to the Government. This
deplorable course of action has also confirmed the
suspicions that UNITA has kept in reserve its elite
combat units and their modern equipment, despite all the
assurances to the contrary. Needless to say, such
behaviour represents a brazen contravention of the Lusaka
Protocol.

For its part, the Government has helped to deepen
the climate of mistrust and insecurity in the country by
intensifying what the Secretary-General described in his
latest report as "hostile propaganda". This development is
all the more regrettable in the light of the fact that

 

UNITA ceased its anti-Government transmissions on 1
April, when it closed down the Vorgan radio station and
took a major step towards full compliance with the peace
process.

The situation in Angola thus calls for a renewed
mediation effort by the international community. It is
indicative that the disturbing spiral of violence came on the
heels of the tragic death of the Secretary-Generals Special
Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, on 26 June. It
is equally noteworthy, however, that the recent presence in
Angola of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Mr.
Lakhdar Brahimi, has helped to stabilize the situation and
has resulted in a return to Luanda of the head of the
UNITA delegation, Mr. Isaias Samakuva. Slovenia therefore
welcomes the appointment of Mr. Issa Diallo as the new
Special Representative for Angola. We encourage him to
continue the legacy of Mr. Blondin Beye and put the peace
process back on track as soon as possible.

In this context, we would like to appeal to the
Government and to UNITA to refrain from actions that
could undermine the longest period of peace Angola has
known in decades. We urge them to continue to search,
with the assistance of the international community, for a
non-military solution to their differences.

In conclusion, let me say that implementing a peace
agreement following a prolonged and destructive civil war
is inevitably a difficult balancing act. The years of
internecine conflict have left a tragic mark on the psyche of
an entire generation of Angolans, for whom violence,
hunger and the rule of the gun have become a way of life.
The one-month extension of MONUA's mandate, as
proposed by the Secretary-General, is therefore necessary.
Indeed, it is imperative that a solution to the current
impasse be found and that the Lusaka Protocol be
preserved. Slovenia will therefore join all the other
members of the Security Council in voting in favour of
the draft resolution.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1998/749.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1190 (1998).

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage

of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter

The meeting rose at 6.35 pm.

