Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, I
should like to welcome you, Madam President, and to
thank you and your delegation for the commitment
shown in this very important matter. I should also like
to thank Ambassador Heller and the Mission here for
their excellent work in preparing for this important
debate.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later on behalf of the European Union. As a
member of the Human Security Network, as well as of
the Group of Friends on Children and Armed Conflict,
Austria also supports the joint statement of the
Network to be delivered by Costa Rica and the first-
ever joint statement of the Group of Friends, to be
delivered by Canada.

I should like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Coomaraswamy, Deputy
Executive Director Johnson and Assistant Secretary-
General Khare for their presentations. We greatly
appreciate the work of the Special Representative and
of all of those who contribute to implementing the
children and armed conflict agenda within the
Secretariat and UNICEF.

My delegation and I personally also wish to
extend a warm welcome and a word of thanks to
Ms. Manju Gurung from Nepal. We thank her for
having shared her thoughts and her very moving
experiences, which serve as a stark reminder of why
we are here today. In this context and in view of what
she said, we welcome the signing of an action plan by
the parties in Nepal and the swift completion of the
discharge process. The successful mission of Special
Representative Coomaraswamy to Nepal last December
underlines the importance of her field visits for
effective follow-up on the recommendations of the
Security Council and its Working Group.

Progress has also been made in the past year in
other parts of the world also, as set out in the
Secretary-General's most recent annual report
(S/2010/181). We welcome the signing of action plans
to halt and prevent the recruitment and use of children
with parties in the Philippines and the Sudan, as well
as the positive developments in Burundi, which
allowed for the de-listing of the armed groups formerly
listed under that country situation.

At the same time, the fact that parties to armed
conflicts have continued to commit grave violations
and abuses against children in conflict situations
around the world is deeply worrying. We take note of
new listings of parties that recruit and use children and
engage in patterns of killing and maiming or sexual
Violence. We call on all parties listed in the annexes
immediately to halt those violations and to prepare and
implement concrete, time-bound action plans to ensure
the effective protection of children. We agree with the
Secretary-General that direct contact between the
United Nations country teams and non-State actors is
important in this context. We therefore support his call
on Member States to allow for such contacts in the
framework of resolutions 1539 (2004), 1612 (2005)
and 1882 (2009).

The reported increase in attacks against
schools - to which others have already referred - as
well as against teachers and students, and the specific
targeting of girl students in certain country situations
constitute a deeply worrying development. We strongly
condemn such heinous acts, which violate international
humanitarian law and deprive the children concerned
of any meaningful prospects for a better future.
We wish to acknowledge the detailed information
provided in the Secretary-General's report on the
criteria and procedures used for listing and de-listing
parties to armed conflict, as well as on the ongoing
development of templates for action plans to address
and prevent patterns of killing and maiming and/or
rape and other sexual violence against children. We
agree with the Secretary-General's understanding of
the notion of a "pattern", which involves a "multiple
commission of acts being perpetrated in the same
context" (see S/2010/181, para. 175), but we also wish
to stress that, from our point of View, this should not
necessarily imply a high quantitative threshold.

With the introduction of new listing criteria in
resolution 1882 (2009) the provision of timely,
accurate, reliable and verifiable information to the
Council, and thus an increased monitoring and
reporting capacity of the United Nations system, has
become even more important. We call, therefore, on all
relevant United Nations entities to cooperate and
coordinate in order to create synergies and to allow for
the systematic exchange of information. We also
believe that in certain situations - such as the case of
the Lord's Resistance Army - regional cooperation
among United Nations actors in the field needs to be
strengthened.

The report of the Secretary-General rightly draws
our attention to those parties to conflict that continue to
commit crimes against children despite repeated calls
of the Council. The Council must be determined to
ensure respect for its resolutions, and it needs to be
prepared to take vigorous measures against persistent
perpetrators.

In order to increase the coherence of the
Council's work, provisions pertaining to violations of
international law committed against children should be
included in the mandates of the relevant sanctions
committees. Interaction of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict with sanctions
committees and their expert groups should be
enhanced. The recent briefing by Special
Representative Coomaraswamy to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which included provision of specific
information on individuals recruiting and using
children, was an important first step that will enable
the Committee to take action. In this context, we also
support the Secretary-General's recommendation to
incorporate child protection expertise in sanctions
committees' expert groups. At the same time, the
Council must also consider specific recommendations
from its Working Group on parties committing
violations and abuses against children, in order to take
direct action in particularly serious situations where no
sanctions committee is in place.

We welcome the fact that the presidential
statement to be adopted at the end of this debate
addresses these issues in a forward-looking manner.

In closing, let me express my country's sincere
appreciation for the excellent work that has been
carried out by the Mexican Chair of the Working
Group over the past one and a half years. The Group
has been doing important work in developing concrete
recommendations on various situations on the basis of
country-specific reports of the Secretary-General and
exchanges with the Member States concerned. In view
of the considerable workload, as well as the urgent
need to build up a historical memory - and here I am
also repeating something that has already been said
today - Austria strongly supports the repeated request
to the Secretary-General to provide administrative
support to the Group. This could also enable the Group
further to improve its working methods and the follow-
up of its conclusions and recommendations, as well as
to proceed to a more effective use of its toolkit, in
particular through the timely realization of a field visit.

