Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Special
Representative Nicholas Haysom for presenting the
Secretary-General's report (S/2015/684) on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
We also thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for
his briefing, and the Ambassador of Afghanistan, for
taking part in this debate. We wish Ambassador Tanin
every success in his new assignment and all the best to
his country.

We commend the work of UNAMA in helping
Afghanistan to turn the page on its turbulent past and
to open a new chapter in the country's life - one that
we hope will bring reconciliation, peace and progress.
In that regard, we support the review of the role,
structure and activities of all United Nations agencies,
the international donor community and UNAMA and
its improved alignment of work and structure. This
debate provides the Security Council once again with
an opportunity to assess the situation in the country
and take stock of recent developments. We note with
some hope that during the past three months, despite
difficulties, the Government ofAfghanistan has pursued
efforts to handle its increasing political, economic
and security challenges. That is a positive sign of the
National Unity Government's commitment to peace
and national reconciliation. The direct negotiations
between representatives of the Afghan Government
and the Taliban are encouraging steps towards an
inclusive dialogue, in spite of the terrorist attacks that
have occurred in the wake of the appointment of a new
Taliban leader. We strongly encourage the parties to
resume direct negotiations in a constructive way, with
a view to reaching a permanent peace settlement.
Despite the political progress described in the
Secretary-General's report (S/20l5/684), the armed
conflict has grown in intensity and scope, resulting in
a significant number of casualties and the increased
displacement ofcivilians. The report issued by UNAMA
in August on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict for the period from January to June of this year
cites a figure of almost 5,000 civilian casualties, mainly
victims of improvised explosive devices, suicide attacks
and targeted killings. We reiterate our condemnation of
any violence against civilians and call on all parties to
refrain from such criminal actions.

We are also concerned about the conflict between
the Government forces and rebels linked to international
terrorist networks, which is producing significant
displacement of the population. The clashes in eastern
Afghanistan between the Taliban and other groups
loyal to the Islamic State, both because of the resulting
huge displacement of people and for their security
implications, are also matters of great concern. The
expansion of the conflict to the south, south-east and
northern parts of the country, along with the ongoing
hostilities and difficulty of access to the affected
areas, has been a challenge to humanitarian and United
Nations personnel trying to provide assistance to people
in need and help the country attain greater stability and
security.

We welcome President Ghani's launch, on 30 June,
of Afghanistan's national action plan on Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security, for 2015 to 2022. The action plan, based
on the Government's pledges for increasing the role
of women in society, marks the culmination of a year-
long technical process and period of consultation,
supported by the United Nations, aimed at establishing
a framework that can ensure women's participation
in the ongoing peace and reconciliation processes.
Another positive development, despite some setbacks,
is the continued engagement on critical issues between
the Governments of Pakistan and Afghanistan. We hope
fervently that the two countries will be able to reinforce
mutual trust and redouble their efforts to find common
ground on issues of security coordination and support
for an Afghan-led peace process. Such a relationship
is a critical element in the attainment of stability and
peace in the region.

The information from the Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime - on
the fact that last year Afghanistan accounted for an
estimated 85 per cent of global opium production and
70 per cent of global heroin production, that the export
value of those drugs accounts for some 13 per cent of
its gross domestic product and exceeds the value of the
export of any legal goods and services, and that illicit
drugs are supporting instability, insurgency, corruption
and organized crime, weakening State institutions and
the country's overall ability to promote peace and good
governance - calls for renewed effort on the part of
the Government and the international community to
address such negative issues in Afghan national life.

Finally, we would like to pay tribute to the efforts of
the Special Electoral Reform Commission in presenting
an initial package of recommendations to President
Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah. We
encourage the Commission to continue its work to
ensure a transparent and inclusive commitment on the
part of all parties involved to moving forward with the
aim of restoring the confidence of the Afghan people in
their institutions.

In conclusion, despite the remarkable progress
that the Afghan people have made in recent years, the
challenges they face are immense, and they must work
to reach new levels of cooperation and understanding if
the country is to succeed in overcoming its bloody and
painful past. It is also imperative that the international
community keep to its commitment to Afghanistan by
continuing to assist it in laying the foundations for a
better and more prosperous future.

