Mr. Fowler (Canada): I join you, Sir, and others who
have expressed profound sorrow at the passing of His
Majesty King Hassan II of Morocco. His long and
courageous leadership of his people and his contribution
to the search for peace in his troubled region will long be
remembered. The success of that peace process, with
which both King Hassan and the late King Hussein of
Jordan were so closely associated, would constitute a
fitting and lasting memorial to their enlightened vision.
(spoke in French)

Allow me to thank the High Commissioner,
Mrs. Ogata, for her briefing which, as usual, was both
thoughtful and thorough. As Mrs. Ogata quite rightly
noted, conflicts and the flows of refugees and displaced
peoples fleeing for their lives continue to be very
common phenomena in Africa, as, indeed, they have
continued to be elsewhere. These conflicts, many of
which are civil and guerrilla wars, are very different from
those that raged 30 years ago when the Organization of
African Unity Refugee Convention was adopted. Often
they are more brutal and more intractable than wars
between States, with high human costs and destabilizing
consequences.

In many African conflicts, the movement of
desperate people across borders in short periods of time
overwhelms the infrastructure of host countries, leading
to serious social problems in States which often already
face other domestic challenges. I recall visiting the
Bamaco camp in western Tanzania in late May 1994 and
being told of the arrival in a single day, 25 April I
believe, of 210,000 refugees from Rwanda. Ambassador
Tiirk has reminded us that Tanzania is always the host
country for a large number of refugees from the Great
Lakes area, this time from Burundi, and that this situation
always threatens broader regional destabilization.

Sometimes, the movement of displaced people
constitutes a deliberate tactic of war. In Angola, for
example, where some 1.7 million people are displaced out
of a population roughly estimated at 11 million, UNITA
herds large numbers of civilians from the countryside into
cities. The result is the ebb and flow of vast numbers of
frightened and desperate people across battle lines and,
often, through mine fields laid by both sides.

(spoke in English)

Refugee situations have a serious regional dimension
which can spread disputes over national borders, drawing
more countries into these conflicts. The Council has
repeatedly witnessed this phenomenon, including, for

 

example, with regard to the turmoil in Rwanda, the former
Zaire, Liberia and Sierra Leone. In Central Africa, the
arrival last week of over 5,000 refugees, many armed, from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo into the Central
African Republic, joining the 11,000 already there,
threatens to destabilize the fragile situation in Bangui and
throughout the country. Some claim that such a source of
instability was not foreseen in the United Nations force's
original mandate and thus ought to be of no concern to the
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINURCA) and should not affect the Secretary-General's
recommendations for a modest increase in the size of that
force. We do not take this View.

As Mrs. Ogata has pointed out, 30,000 refugees left
Congo (Brazzaville) for Gabon just last week. While this
too may have been somewhat foreseen, the implications for
the spread of the conflict into Gabon remain no less
serious. We might usefully ask ourselves whether the
international community would still be grappling with
interlocking conflicts in Central Africa if we, the Security
Council and the States Members of the United Nations, had
responded more effectively and more expeditiously to the
crisis in eastern Zaire almost three years ago.

The 30-year-old struggle in the Sudan has driven
refugees and displaced people from their homes and has led
to the establishment of a large presence of United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations in southern
Sudan, in neighbouring Kenya and in Uganda. Warring
parties within the Sudan and Uganda raid across the borders
with regularity and engage in horrible tactics such as
capturing school-age children and incorporating them into
armies as child soldiers, sex slaves and, often, as mere
cannon fodder.

Such circumstances, like recent experiences in Guinea,
demonstrate the need to enhance the security of refugee
camps and settlements. Following on the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa (S/1998/318), the Council addressed this question
last year in its resolution 1208 (1998) which, in
unequivocal terms, called on all concerned to respect the
civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps and
condemned the use of such camps by combatants for the
furtherance of military aims. Given the continued
importance of this matter, I would like to ask Mrs. Ogata
how the development of her ladder of options regarding
refugee camp security is progressing, what reactions she has
received from other Governments and how UNHCR is
applying the lessons in the field.

Canada continues to be profoundly concerned about
the well-being of refugees and internally displaced
persons in Africa. We see the twin issues of protection
and access as paramount. In many war-torn African
countries, humanitarian access to the displaced is
frequently obstructed or denied by warring factions, and
humanitarian principles are ignored with impunity. This
is an especially difficult challenge for those conflicts
which involve rebel groups, whose accountability is at
best limited. Furthermore, humanitarian workers - both
local and expatriate staff - continue to find themselves
under serious and chronic threat. As we have noted
elsewhere, such violations of human security are
unacceptable, and creative means must be pursued by the
international community and the Governments and the
peoples of Africa to redress them.

Canada regards the ministerial workshop organized
by UNHCR in conjunction with the Organization of
African Unity in Kampala last May as a good example of
an initiative aimed at addressing just these challenges. We
believe the workshop provided an important opportunity
to engage African leaders on questions of refugee
protection and security, and we wonder whether
Mrs. Ogata could comment on whether efforts have been
made to follow up on this meeting. We would likewise
welcome comments from the High Commissioner on
recent experiences in gaining and maintaining access to
populations of concern in Africa and ask whether she has
identified any lessons learned in this regard.

In terms of creative approaches which the Council
might take to enhance refugee protection, we should recall
that, in February, the Security Council requested the
Secretary-General to prepare a report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. This report is expected shortly,
and we trust it will offer practical suggestions for the
Council that might enhance protection for civilian
populations caught up in African struggles. We look
forward to the Council's taking up the Secretary-
General's recommendations under the presidency of the
Netherlands in September.

While we demand greater efforts in protection and
assistance for the displaced, we must also recognize that
refugees and internally displaced persons are only a
symptom of more profound political crises. The
humanitarian community will of course continue to
respond to humanitarian crises and meet the immediate
needs of the displaced, albeit with increasing difficulty.
However, without political action to resolve the causes of

 

such displacements, humanitarian assistance can only act as
a palliative.

We must, therefore, be more creative and more
proactive in addressing the causes of humanitarian
emergencies, both in Africa and elsewhere. It is critical that
efforts increase to help find political solutions to what are
too often simply written off as intractable conflicts. This is
especially true for so-called forgotten wars. Furthermore,
once political settlements are found, the international
community must sustain its attention beyond the dictates of
the six o'clock news to help nurture effective reconstruction
and reconciliation so that sustainable peace can be
established, including through the development of national
and regional capacity in conflict-prevention activities.

The role of the Security Council and regional
organizations is absolutely critical in this regard. Canada
has long believed it essential that the Council accord equal
attention to security concerns irrespective of where they
occur. I am well aware that some believe that Africa's
conflicts are neglected in favour of those in Europe. That
perception must never be allowed to take root or the very
premise of this Organization will be called into question.

Indeed, while much of the Council's time is absorbed
by African issues, we need to focus more on both the
equality and the impact of this attention. The Council's
willingness to engage innovatively and effectively in new
African challenges and to redress a perceived bias towards
other regions will be tested in its response to calls for more
robust United Nations roles in Sierra Leone, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia/Eritrea and Angola.
Canada continues to be supportive of both the new Council
roles which these situations have invited and of sustained
effort where we have already made significant investments
in peace, such as in the Central African Republic and in
Angola.

