Ms. Apio: On behalfofmy organization, Facilitation
for Peace and Development, in collaboration with the
Centre for Family and Human Rights, I would like to
thank the Malaysian presidency for the invitation to
address the Security Council in today's open debate.
Ours is a typical grassroots organization, and our work
contributes to improving respect for people's rights and
promoting sustainable livelihoods. Our participation
here today is an illustration of how even-handed the
Council can be in fulfilling its mandate.

In my statement I will focus particularly on the
challenges that continue to face individuals, and their
families and communities, affected by abduction and
other activities perpetrated by the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) in northern Uganda. I do this in the hope
that the information may inform further interventions
in northern Uganda, but also, and more important,
that it may influence efforts to achieve disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) in zones of
war and armed conflict where children still remain
extremely vulnerable to abduction and recruitment by
insurgent groups.

Between 1986 and 2008, Ugandans, in particular
children in northern Uganda, had experiences very
comparable to what other children are now experiencing
in war and conflict zones, and their impact is still
Visible today. Of the more than 65,000 civilians who
were abducted by the LRA, at least 53 per cent were
children, some as young as nine years old. They
became forced labourers in the LRA. In addition to
soldiering, girls were subjected to systematic rape and
sexual violence, which among other things resulted
in exposure to sexually transmitted diseases and the
birth of thousands of children. Many of those abducted
children were killed or maimed during the course of the
war, and many still remain unaccounted for. Those who
returned were shadows of themselves, broken in body
and spirit, just like the families and communities they
had left behind, most of whom lived for many years in
camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs) and in
deplorable living conditions. But others came back to
no family at all.

For years, those communities lost their entire
livelihoods, and those who could be reached later had to
survive on food and non-food items distributed mostly
by the World Food Programme and its partners, for which
we remain grateful. As happens during most wars, all
of the region's infrastructure, including schools, health
centres and roads, broke down and ceased to function.
All of those things became priorities that competed
with the need for direct support to the psycho-social
well-being of the children and their families. Their
lives have never been the same again.

We should not downplay the fact that the DDR
efforts were often fragmented, uncoordinated,
experimental and even incomplete - understandably,
since we had very little to learn from. While they
met many children's emergency and short-term
needs - keeping them alive and relatively safe from
often enraged and desperate civilians and from looming
rejection by their families - those efforts were not a
foolproof solution to the long-term effects of war on the
children and their families and communities. What was
done in the name of reintegration consisted mainly of
transferring individuals from point A to point B. Most
children moved directly from the LRA to squalid IDP
camps. Some, but not all, received basic counselling at
reception centres in between.

Years after the war, the northern region has the
highest rate of mental-health-related illnesses in the
country, with soaring rates of suicides and alcohol
and substance abuse. It has even affected some of the
economic and social rehabilitation efforts. Between
July 2012 and June 2013, in Gulu hospital, in the north,
alone 10,736 psychiatric cases with severe symptoms
of post-traumatic stress disorder and depression were
documented, an average of 75 cases a day.

Actors in other war zones can learn from us and
act early to ensure that individuals and families, along
with returning children, receive adequate psychological
support. In our context, post-traumatic stress disorder
and depression, among other afflictions, are widespread
and speak to the need to integrate mental health into
primary health care. To cite a recent illustrative case,
in 1991, at the age ofjust nine years, a boy I will call
Omona was forced to burn down his house while his
parents and two brothers were trapped inside. Shortly
after that, as they made their way into the bushes, the
group leader ordered him to kill his own brothers for
trying to escape. He defected from the LRA in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo in 2012, and returned
to his home with his partner, who was also a former
child soldier, and their three children. Sometimes he
and his wife have subjected their children to severe
beatings and chased them away to live on the streets in
Gqu. The entire family has been diagnosed with severe
post-traumatic stress disorder and depression.

The reintegration of such children has been made
more difficult because the receiving communities also
suffered the effects of war and trauma. For example, in
November 2013, a 58 year-old woman, whom I will call
Akelo, was referred to us by a mental-health clinic in
Gulu hospital to help her sort out a land-dispute case.
I am recounting her story because it is typical of the
general population into which ex-combatant children
return. In 1996, the LRA raided her compound and cut
off her husband's head, ordering her to laugh as she
carried it around. At the same time, they killed her son
and his family and ordered her to bury the bodies. Now
a widow and without a son, her brothers-in-law have
ordered her to leave their land under threat of death.
They then razed her house to the ground. It was then
that she began fearing the setting of the sun, because,
she explained, her nights were haunted by thoughts of
having had to carry the head of her husband and watch
her son and his family killed all over again.

The point here is that, although attention has been
accorded to the psychological wounds that children
have faced, however short-term, we have largely not
addressed those of people like Akelo, who may not have
been abducted but still bear the brunt of the war. Yet
we have expected people like Akelo, who made up the
majority in the communities, to embrace and support
the reintegration of formerly abducted children like
Omona.

The region is also experiencing extremely high
incidences of land conflicts, often leading to violent
behaviour and the victimization of children and women,
and triggering severe symptoms of mental-health
illnesses. As a matter of concern, we have also not
extended adequate support for demobilizing and
reintegrating IDPs, so that they could come to terms
with their experiences and make a more organized
resettlement, while protecting the most vulnerable like
Akelo. In the process, war orphans, especially those
who had been born in IDP camps, found it difficult to
identify or even claim their parents' old land. I would
like also to draw the attention of the Council to the fact
that female ex-combatants who had children found it
extremely difficult to re-integrate iftheir children born
of war could not integrate, mainly owing to stigma and
discrimination.

We also note with concern that, besides recruiting
children from mainstream society, groups like the LRA
are now increasingly filling positions in their leadership
hierarchy with children who were born in the group.
As long as they remain in the LRA, those children are
also susceptible to being perpetrators of the abduction
of other children from mainstream society. They also
remain likely to perpetuate sexual violence on other
recruits, including on girls born in the group, thereby
defeating the very purpose of our attempts to end the
use of child soldiers and prevent sexualized violence
in war.

We commend the Council for the strong statements
and actions that, over the course of the years, have
encouraged the fighters in the LRA to defect and
embrace DDR. In order not to leave a segment of such
groups behind, we suggest that the Council consider
other innovative ways that might also appeal to children
who are born in and are growing up in the system.
While international covenants talk about the protection
of all children affected by war, children conceived after
sexual violence fall through the cracks in the protection
framework. Those children, born of war, especially
when older or left parentless in the group, may have no
idea how to disassociate from the group.

I am also compelled to state here that I and other
scholars within the International Network for Children
Born of War - which has its hub at the University of
Birmingham in the United Kingdom - are undertaking
a series of studies to better understand the phenomenon
of being born as a result of sexualized violence in
war zones and how that might inform prospects for
integration and reintegration across time and space.
The contribution of civil society organizations like
mine can be made more effective when Governments
take the lead in DDR. The effects of armed conflict
stay with children for a lifetime. We urge Governments
to integrate DDR into long-term national development
priorities.

