Mr. Diab (Lebanon): Allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Council and to express our usual confidence in you and
your team.

Not long ago, on 19 April 2002, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 1405 (2002),
welcoming the initiative of the Secretary-General to
develop accurate information regarding recent events
in Jenin through a fact-finding team. Furthermore, the
Council explained that it unanimously adopted that
resolution to voice its concern over the dire
humanitarian situation of the Palestinian civilian
population, and it called for further lifting of
restrictions imposed, in particular on the Jenin refugee
camp and on the operations of humanitarian
organizations. It emphasized the urgency of access for
medical and humanitarian organizations to the
Palestinian civilian population.

Let us recall whom the Security Council was
answering when it adopted resolution 1405 (2002) on
19 April. The cry that was voiced by top United
Nations aid officials on Monday, 8 April, at the
beginning of the Israeli massacres in the refugee camp
in Jenin says it all. Mr. Peter Hansen, head of the
United Nations agency assisting Palestinian refugees in
the region, issued a strong statement that day, calling
for the Israeli military to cease what he described as
"the bloody assault" on camps in the West Bank. He
further said that "the Israeli Defence Force has made a
hellish battleground among the civilians in the Balata
and Jenin refugee camps". He continued, saying,

"We are getting reports of pure horror -
that helicopters are strafing civilian residential
areas; that systematic shelling by tanks has
created hundreds of wounded; that bulldozers are
razing refugee homes to the ground; and that food
and medicine will soon run out. In the name of
human decency, the Israeli military must allow
our ambulances safe passage to help evacuate the
wounded and deliver emergency supplies of
medicines and food."

On Israel's disrespect for international
humanitarian law, the chief of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees
(UNRWA) noted that Israel was a signatory of
international conventions that protect non-combatants
in times of conflict. He said:

"Those conventions are worthless if they are
not adhered to precisely at times of the greatest
blood-letting. The world is watching, and Israel
needs to end this pitiless assault on civilian
refugee camps."

The Director of UNRWA operations in the West
Bank, Richard Cook, warned that "a humanitarian
disaster is in the making in Jenin". UNRWA further
reported on that same day that bodies were piling up in
the corridors of the Jenin hospital, where 30 people
were reported to have died in the previous 36 hours.

These Israeli breaches of the human dignity of the
Palestinian population, of all international covenants,
international law, international humanitarian law and
the Fourth Geneva Convention and its Protocol will be
repeated on a daily basis. The same calls for Israel to
end these atrocities will be voiced by many other top
officials of the United Nations and humanitarian
agencies.

For instance, on Friday, 12 April, afraid to reveal
its war crimes, Israel denied entrance to the camp to
the visiting commission led by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mrs. Mary
Robinson, who was entrusted with carrying out tasks
mandated by the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights. Ms. Asma Jahangir, the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, expressed clearly what happened
that day when she pointed out that continued denial of
access to the Jenin refugee camp by Israel would only
lend further credibility to the allegations made by
independent sources and said it was now urgent that the
mission be allowed to enter Jenin.

The list goes on and on. But Secretary-General
Kofi Annan summed it up on Thursday, 18 April, when
he said that he was deeply disturbed by the report he
described as being of horrific devastation, which he
received from two top United Nations officials in the
Middle East who had visited parts of the Jenin refugee
camps earlier that day. It was to these voices that the
Security Council responded on 19 April by endorsing
the Secretary-General's initiative to dispatch a fact-
finding team to develop accurate information regarding
recent events in the Jenin refugee camp.

On 24 April, one week after the initiation of the
team, the President of the Council, speaking on behalf
of the Council, said that the lS-member body fully
"supported the Secretary-General's efforts", that is, to
implement resolution 1405 (2002), adopted the
previous week and which welcomed the Secretary-
General's Jenin initiative.

The Jenin refugee camp lies within the municipal
boundaries of the Palestinian city of Jenin, with a
population of almost 13,000 persons who are registered
with the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestinian Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). They
live on 373 dunums, the area of one square kilometre.
The camp's residents were pushed out of their villages,
which were occupied by Israel. Many of the refugees
still have relatives in the occupied villages, which can
be seen from the camp. It was not enough for Israel to
deprive the Palestinian refugees in Jenin of their basic
rights; after more than half a decade, the Israelis
followed them into the camp to bulldoze it over their
heads, depriving them even of their right to live.

A report on the human rights situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, released by Mary
Robinson, on 24 April, said that "UNRWA estimates
that in the Jenin camp 800 dwellings have been
destroyed and many more damaged, leaving 4,000 to
5,000 people homeless." Putting it in actual figures
means that almost one third of the population of the
camp has been displaced. We ask, does it sound like an
investigation by the Council is urgent? How many of a
population of 13,000 Palestinian refugees have been
massacred in the Israeli invasion of the camp? How
many dunums have been razed in this 1 square
kilometre refugee camp? How many civilians have
been buried under the rubble? Are we ever going to be
allowed to find out?

It is imperative that the Security Council answer
the calls of the international community and United
Nations agencies, which are commended for their
impartiality, and not bow under the pressure of the
Israeli occupying forces who are accused of these
crimes that we are asking the Council to investigate.

Mrs. Robinson sums it up best when she
emphasized 10 days ago that "there is a need for
accountability on all sides for what has happened". She
further warned that failure to investigate widespread
allegations of serious human rights abuses "risks
undermining the integrity of the international human
rights system".

Let us ask, is the urgency that has been voiced
since 8 April any less today? The Secretary-General
says "no". He provided the answer after the meeting of
the "quartet" yesterday, 2 May, in Washington, DC,
when he responded to a question asked by the press.
The press asked in Madrid three weeks ago: "You said
that you thought that the international community
would be appalled by what it discovered there. Have
you changed your evaluation on the basis of what you
know now?" The Secretary-General replied to the
question saying, "I think that we have all seen the
reports and the pictures that are coming out of Jenin,
and I think my description then was not exaggerated."

The reasons given by the occupying Power -
Israel, the accused of these war crimes - and its
questioning of the team's fairness should be rejected
for the sake of preserving the credibility of the
Secretary-General and this body and respecting its
resolutions.

Let us not forget the criteria for the selection of
the team members, as expressed by the Secretary-
General at the time of its dispatch. The Secretary-
General said,

"I have tried to put together a team with
considerable experience. the members of the
team are highly respected and independent. I
hope I have put together a team that everyone
would accept as being competent and the best that
we could have put together."

Israeli allegations in order to disrupt the team's mission
should be rejected outright.

Finally, my delegation joins the majority of
United Nations Members, declaring our outrage at and
condemnation of Israeli practices, the wilful killing, the
vast destruction and other atrocities committed by the
Israeli occupying forces against the Palestinian people,
especially since the start of the Israeli military assault
on Palestinian cities and the Palestinian Authority on
29 March 2002.

We join the Security Council and the Secretary-
General in expressing our grave concern at reports on
war crimes and of a massacre committed in the Jenin
refugee camp and in other Palestinian cities. We
condemn what has become an Israeli culture of acting
with impunity and in disregard of Security Council
resolutions. The Council needs to reiterate support for
its resolution 1405 (2002) and to provide full
accountability for what happened in the Jenin refugee
camp in order to put an end to the application of double
standards in the implementation of its resolutions.

The Security Council is still responsible for the
full implementation of resolutions 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002) and for ensuring the end of the Israeli
military siege of the Church of the Nativity in
Bethlehem.

