The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.

I wish to first thank the United States and all
Council members for their constructive engagement
throughout the difficult negotiations on resolution 2304
(2016), which wasjust adopted. While Council members

may have divergent views and shades of opinions, the
adoption of this important resolution demonstrates the
Council's resolve to address the multifaceted challenges
faced by South Sudan.

We were gratified by the early and promising
successes, such as the conclusions of the agreement for
conflict resolution in South Sudan and the subsequent
establishment of the Transitional Government of
National Unity of South Sudan. It is however unfortunate
and troubling that the recent progress was not sustained
and has been rolled back, which further imperils South
Sudan's path to peace, security and prosperity.

In that respect, we call on the leaders of South
Sudan to urgently prioritize the welfare, safety and
security of all the people of South Sudan, regardless of
their ethnicity or political affiliations. The population
has suffered too long and too much from violence and
conflict. It is with that in mind that Malaysia associates
itself with resolution 2304 (2016), as it believes that the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
working in close cooperation and coordination with the
Transitional Government of National Unity of South
Sudan, will henceforth be better equipped to continue
playing a pivotal and effective role in ensuring the
safety and security of the people of South Sudan. We
believe that it is in the interest of all that the necessary
enabling environment conducive to the resumption of
dialogue be established.

Therefore, Malaysia's support for resolution 2304
(2016) is grounded in our principled position on the
need to resolve conflicts through peaceful means, as
well as our firm commitment and support for United
Nations peacekeeping operations as a tool for the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
supporting the resolution, we have paid considerable
attention to the views and requests from the regional
partners, including those of the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. We
commend their leadership role and the solidarity shown
by these regional partners to immediate dialogue and
to work together with the Transitional Government to
restore peace in South Sudan.

Five years ago, South Sudan made history by
becoming the youngest member of the United Nations.
It was a remarkable achievement made possible by
the unwavering belief of the South Sudanese people
in peaceful negotiations over conflict and adversity.
Our interest and desire are to see that the same spirit
will again prevail among the South Sudanese leaders
and that they will master the courage and will to reject
violence and conflict and recommit themselves to
peaceful negotiations.

Finally, while we recognize that serious attempts
have been made to address the concerns of Council
members, we should not lose sight of the fact that
the adoption of this resolution marks an important
step forward in our collective endeavour to adopt a
more proactive approach to addressing the worsening
situation that the Secretary-General has described in
his letter of 10 August.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.

