Mr. Miiftiioglu (Turkey): We join others in
warmly welcoming High Representative Inzko and we
thank him for his insightful briefing and for sharing
with us his candid assessment of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which we fully share.

We believe that the Balkans continue to represent
the essential test case for lasting peace and stability on
the European continent. Sovereign, democratic, stable
and functional States in the Balkans are indispensable
for a free and integrated Europe, and we are
encouraged by the developments in many parts of the
Balkans towards that end. However, we are greatly
concerned by the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which faces its worst crisis and most serious risk of
instability since 1995. While the international
community anticipates ever more steadfast and
ambitious steps towards the consolidation of an
effective, stable and viable State within its
internationally recognized borders, as foreseen in the
Dayton Peace Accords, we are faced with a political
system that is deadlocked, with a disturbing increase in
nationalist and divisive rhetoric, including calls for the
establishment of a third entity.

It has been seven months since the holding of the
general elections, but a State-level Government has
still not been formed. Unfortunately, due to the
uncompromising positions of political leaders, there is
not much room for hope that that will be done soon. At
the level of the Federation, it has only recently been
possible to form the new Government and assemble the
Federation Parliament. While we regret that the
Government and the Federation may not be optimally
representative, despite local and international efforts,
we welcome the fact that there is finally a Government.
We hope that all stakeholders will now act responsibly
and avoid blocking the functioning of the institutions
or attempting to form parallel ones.

The main focus must now be on the formation of
the State-level Government. Without Governments and
parliaments, there can be no progress in the reform
process and thus no progress towards European Union
or NATO membership. It is of crucial importance that
the State-level Government be formed as a broad-
based, inclusive and representative administrative
structure that is strong enough to lead the country
towards Euro-Atlantic integration and materialize
much-needed reforms. We therefore call on all political
stakeholders to be flexible and look for compromises
in order to achieve a breakthrough.

Most worrisome in the general deterioration of
the political climate in Bosnia and Herzegovina are the
outright challenges of the Republika Srpska to the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, its State institutions and its
constitutional order. Calls such as those of the
Republika Srpska's President for the dissolution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina or the conclusions by the
Republika Srpska National Assembly to hold a
referendum questioning the authority and powers of the
High Representative, the Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Prosecutor's Office are
unacceptable. These types of calls and unilateral
actions amount to clear violations of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, are the most
dangerous steps for the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and thus must be absolutely avoided. It is
our expectation that a way will be found to repeal the
conclusions and the referendum decision. Any
legitimate concern must be expressed through
appropriate mechanisms, and compromise solutions
must be sought.

Turkey is a member of the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board and thus feels a special
responsibility towards the Office of the High
Representative. It has been more than three years since
the Steering Board set five objectives and two
conditions for the transition of the Office of the High
Representative. While we are encouraged by the
important progress made on some issues, we regret that
the political stalemate in the country prevents progress
on the outstanding ones. We firmly believe that the full
implementation of the "5-1-2" agenda is absolutely
necessary for the closure of the Office and for Bosnia
and Herzegovina's Euro-Atlantic integration.

In this context, let me also underline that we are
firm and resolute in our support for the High
Representative. We ask him to continue his efforts. We
expect him to make the decisions that he believes are
required and to use the powers granted to him by the
Council as needed to enforce those decisions. We do
not agree that the actions of the High Representative
and the personnel of his Office are unlawful, and we do
not see such claims as helpful.

Turkey considers itself a good friend of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We have excellent bilateral ties and
maintain close relations with all stakeholders in the
country. In this vein, our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Davutoglu, visited Bosnia and Herzegovina twice
after the elections, and during his most recent visit he
met with Bosniak leaders in Sarajevo, Mr. Dodik in
Banja Luka and Croat leaders in Mostar.

Believing also that regional cooperation is an
essential tool for normalizing relations between
countries, we have established trilateral consultation
mechanisms among Turkey, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Serbia, and Turkey, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Croatia; these have proven to be effective and resilient
cooperation schemes. The second Trilateral Balkan
Summit among Turkey, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia was held in Karadordevo, Serbia, on 26 April
and provided the leaders of the three countries with the
opportunity to discuss all issues of common interest
and look for joint solutions.

We believe in the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and are doing our utmost to assist it in
taking its rightful place in the European family of
nations. For that reason, we call on all political leaders
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to act with the long-term
interests of the country in mind. What is needed is
common vision and joint action, not the pursuit of
narrow ethnic interests.

