Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Mr. Peter Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross; and Ms. Joanne Liu, International President of
Medecins Sans Frontieres, for their very comprehensive
briefings. We pay tribute to the role of those two
organizations in conflict areas. We appreciate the work
of all medical personnel and practitioners and thank
them for their sacrifice, especially in the light of the
dangers they face on a daily basis.

Early in the Egyptian presidency, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2286 (2016),
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Its
elected members wanted the Security Council to rise
to that challenge and confront the problems faced
by health-care personnel in armed conflict. The
obstruction of the delivery of assistance to those in
need poses an unprecedented challenge that threatens
the very foundations of international law, international
humanitarian law and, of course, the principle of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Resolution 2286 (2016) enjoyed broad consensus,
backed by nearly 85 States. However, it did not change
a great deal in terms of the reality on the ground. It has
not at all alleviated the horrors experienced by health-
care personnel working in conflict zones throughout the
world. We take note of the recommendations made by
the Secretary-General (S/2016/722, annex) concerning
measures to be taken to strengthen the protection ofthe
wounded and sick, health-care personnel, hospitals and
other medical facilities, in keeping with paragraph 13
of resolution 2286 (2016).

At the same time, however, we affirm once more
that those recommendations must be implemented
impartially and in a depoliticized way. It is also
important to avoid any divisive initiatives that did not
enjoy consensus during the negotiations that resulted
in resolution 2286 (2016). Egypt strongly supports the
very noble values of international humanitarian law,
which aim to strengthen the protection of medical
facilities and health-care personnel, especially in light
of the current challenges facing the medical sector in
conflict areas.

Egyptthereforebacksthethreemainaxesuponwhich
the Secretary-General has based his recommendations
regarding the protection of the injured, the sick and
health-care personnel, as well as that of hospitals
and other medical facilities. We also support his
recommendations regarding the responsibility of those
who perpetrate attacks against the aforementioned
individuals. We believe that it is necessary to prevent
further attacks and will spare no effort to ensure that
we achieve the objectives of resolution 2286 (2016), in
order to provide greater security to the sick, the injured
and health-care personnel in areas of armed conflict.

