Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would first like to thank
High Representative Kim Won-soo for his briefing
and to express our appreciation to you, Madam
President, for your leadership in navigating this year's
difficult and crucial issues related to the international
security architecture.

Italy is shocked by the chemical-weapon attack
that is once again alleged to have been perpetrated in
Syria, and by the additional bombardments of hospitals
where the wounded were being treated. What happened
in Khan Shaykhun is sickening and despicable, and we
condemn it in the strongest possible terms, just as we
would condemn the use of chemical weapons by anyone,
anywhere and in any circumstances. Such attacks
not only confirm the Syrian regime's utter contempt
for its own people but are also a tragic reminder
that international law, including Security Council
resolutions and the international non-proliferation
architecture, continue to be blatantly violated.

We welcome the commitment of the Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic ofthe Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to
gathering information from all available resources,
and we look forward to its findings. In that regard, we
supported the draft resolution (S/2017/170) submitted
by the United Kingdom, the United States and France
and aimed at condemning the attack and ensuring that
the investigations are as effective as possible.

As long as nobody is being held accountable for
these war crimes and crimes against humanity, there
will still be an incentive to continue carrying them
out. That is why fighting impunity, identifying the
perpetrators and holding them accountable must be
a shared priority for the Council, one that unifies
rather than divides us. Italy encouraged action by the
Security Council for ensuring the accountability of
those responsible and the imposition of sanctions on
them, as a follow-up to the activities of the OPCW-
United Nations Joint Investigation Mechanism. After
that pathway in the Council was blocked, on 20 March
Italy backed new restrictive measures imposed by the
European Union on four high-ranking Syrian military
officials for their role in the use of chemical weapons
against their civilian population.

Italy also supports the mechanism set up by the
General Assembly to gather evidence and assist future
prosecutions of crimes committed in Syria. Moreover,
as a subscriber to the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group's code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes, and to the initiative of
France and Mexico on veto restraints in cases of mass
atrocities, we once again reiterate our call to the Council
to act. In our view, those crimes should also warrant
the attention of the International Criminal Court.
Indiscriminate violence against civilians continues to
be seen as a tool for winning this war militarily. That
approach is not only morally unacceptable, it is wrong-
headed and delusional. A solution will never be found
through military means, however appealing that may
seem to one of the parties at the moment. The only
way out of the crisis is through an inclusive political
settlement, arrived at in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015), that addresses the plight and aspirations
of the Syrian people and drains the quagmire of
violence and instability where terrorism flourishes and
endangers the whole world.

Furthermore, we should emphasize that the attacks
were cynically perpetrated just at the end of the most
recent round of talks in Geneva, which, under the
leadership of United Nations Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura, whom we support, attempted to inject new life
into the political process. The attacks cast serious new
doubt on the commitment to a political solution.

The attacks also cast new doubt on the regime's
willingness to abide by the terms ofthe ceasefire. They
do not represent an isolated case but are just one of
the repeated violations of the ceasefire that have been
carried out, particularly by the regime, over the past
few months. Such behaviour destroys the possibility
of any confidence between the parties on the ground,
just as the deliberate restrictions on the provision of aid
that continue to worsen an already tragic humanitarian
situation have been doing. A strengthened cessation
of hostilities is our best hope to move on from
the military phase and ensure safe and complete
humanitarian access. In that regard, and in conclusion,
all of us - particularly the guarantors of the Astana
process - have a special responsibility to live up to
our commitments and ensure that the ceasefire is fully
implemented and can thus provide a basis for a concrete
political process.

