Mr. Amorim (Brazil): "Africa civilizes America".
These words by a Brazilian political thinker of the
nineteenth century are true in more than one sense. In few
places has African influence been more greatly felt than in
Brazil. Our culture, our beliefs, our values - the very ways
in which our creativity expresses itself - were shaped to
a large extent by African contributions. It is thus only
natural that Brazil has become actively involved in a
number of multilateral and bilateral initiatives that aim at
stimulating the forces of peace and conciliation in Africa.
Such is the case of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South
Atlantic and the effort towards the formation of a southern
hemisphere free from nuclear weapons - apart from our
strong participation in peace efforts in Angola and
Mozambique. We followed with great interest the debates
that took place last September during the unprecedented
Security Council ministerial meeting on Africa and are
happy to take part in today's deliberations.

Africa is at once unique in its cultural and historical
legacy and a rich and profound repository of our common
humanity. In dealing with Africa as a separate issue we
must not lose sight of the universal dimension of its
individual character. The attribution of the Nobel Prize
for Literature to no fewer than three prominent African
writers in the last decade or so represents both a
recognition of the enduring value of its specific traditions
and a tribute to brilliant reflection on the plight of
humankind as a whole.

In the recent and not so recent past the fate of Africa
was subject to what President Mugabe has termed, in
generous understatement, "undue and often disruptive
foreign interference". The trauma of slavery and brutal
manipulation by outside forces will probably never be
completely wiped from the African collective memory.
However, as a growing number of enlightened African
leaders have come to stress, it is by dealing creatively and
effectively with the deprivations of the present that the
horrors of the past will be overcome and the prospects for
the future will become brighter. This process implies
coming to grips with tragic episodes of self-inflicted
devastation, from which Africa can learn to extricate itself
by drawing on paradigms derived from its own ancient
civilizations. Let us not forget that long before conflict
resolution was taken up by think-tanks in the developed
world, it flourished in the councils of elders of pre-
colonial African societies.

Within the cyclic image of the Yoruba existential
concepts, the healing and reconstruction required at this
important stage in Africa's evolution might symbolically
be placed under the auspices of Obatala - or Oxala -
the God who represents the crescent of the human psyche
in which the virtues of social and individual
accommodation are stored: patience, compassion and
peacefulness. The successful struggle against
institutionalized racism in South Africa stands as a
portentous example of redemptive transformation through
peaceful means, which places its leader, President Nelson
Mandela, in an unparalleled category in today's world. In
our own United Nations context, the leadership displayed
by a Secretary-General who has been capable of
demonstrating the powers of diplomacy even to the most
sceptical is a source of invaluable inspiration.

 

We are indeed grateful to Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for having provided the Security Council with a
focused report on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa. Its
objective analysis and recommendations call for careful
examination not only by the Security Council, but also by
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and other components of the United Nations system. In the
weeks and months ahead, it will be incumbent upon us to
deal in the most efficient manner with the suggestions made
by the Secretary-General so that our increased awareness of
the challenges facing Africa may be quickly translated into
tangible progress.

Africa need not be defined as a continent mired in
conflict. As is widely recognized, there are many parts of
Africa where peace and economic growth are taking root.
If we concentrate our remarks today on those segments of
the Secretary-General's report that deal with conflict, it is
because this is the unquestioned area of responsibility of the
Security Council.

Let us reflect on the need for consistency in the search
for solutions regarding areas in crisis. The eruption of inter-
communal or other forms of violence that we have
witnessed in recent years in Somalia, the Great Lakes
region and Liberia are not intrinsically distinct from the
situations in other parts of the world.

The Secretary-General declares in one of the
concluding paragraphs of his report that
"Africa must demonstrate the will to rely upon
political rather than military responses to problems."
[S/1998/31 8, para. 105]

We believe that this is a postulate that applies worldwide.
Most importantly, it should also apply to the United
Nations efforts in promoting peace and security.

We appreciate the lessons-learned approach taken by
the Secretary-General in looking at the United Nations
recent experience in peacekeeping in Africa. But certain
mistakes of the past merit additional highlighting. If the
memories of Somalia are so disturbing to us, this is
undoubtedly because of the negative impact for United
Nations credibility that resulted from the phenomenon that
came to be known as "crossing the Mogadishu line", or was
described as "mission creep" in the former Yugoslavia -
in other words, confusing peacekeeping with enforcement.
We would have serious conceptual difficulties with a
United Nations agenda that would seem to give priority to
diplomacy and dialogue at the local level while assuming
a militaristic attitude with respect to multilateral efforts.
Although the deployment of operations with "credible
deterrent capacity" may be necessary in situations of
extreme gravity, we must guard ourselves against the
temptation to seek predominantly military solutions to
problems that require dialogue and diplomacy above all
else.

We commend the Secretary-General for including a
sub-chapter on the proliferation of arms in Africa in his
report. We agree with his conclusion that the Security
Council should address this issue as a matter of urgency.
To give operational meaning to this recommendation, an
appropriate mechanism should be devised to propose and
implement ways of combating the flow of illicit arms to
areas in conflict. Greater adherence by African countries
to the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms
would also contribute to building confidence in unstable
areas. We also agree with the report's general outlook on
sanctions, in particular when it suggests that, whereas
effective arms embargoes diminish the capacity of
belligerents to sustain prolonged fights, indiscriminate
economic sanctions tend to affect the civilian population
more directly than those responsible for threats to peace.

We see merit in distinguishing between the internal
and the external causes of conflict in Africa, as proposed
in the report. But it is worth bearing in mind that even
internal causes often have an external component. It is
impossible to dissociate the proliferation of dictatorships
during the initial decades of the post-colonial period from
the bipolar rivalry of the cold war. The arsenals
accumulated by some of the most repressive regimes in
Africa in previous decades, with either ostensible or
covert support from external Powers, had particularly
deleterious consequences that stretched well into the
nineties.

While recent years have often been marked by
violence, disintegration and even genocide, the winds of
change that have swept Africa have also brought hope.
But in order for the positive forces of change and reform
in Africa to advance, a new and more enlightened spirit
of cooperation is required on the part of those
international actors capable of making a difference.
Moreover, given the historic framework of the past few
centuries, during which traditional African societies were
subjected to systematic exploitation and destabilization, to
address African issues with the slightest hint of moral
superiority is simply inconceivable. The international
community should respond creatively to the positive

 

developments in Africa and react to the less positive ones
through a constructive and attentive dialogue with Africans
themselves. The objective of such a dialogue should not be
to impose conclusions unilaterally arrived at but to assist
Africans themselves, when such assistance is required, to
come up with appropriate solutions and make them work.

We agree with the need for a principled and
coordinated approach to humanitarian assistance. Two
important concerns should be borne in mind in this
connection. First, taking into account that other United
Nations organs are also responsible for addressing
humanitarian problems, it will be necessary to develop the
appropriate mechanisms for efficient coordination. The
humanitarian segment of the Economic and Social Council,
to which the Secretary-General referred in his reform
proposals, could play such a role. Secondly, and with the
lessons learned in the past in mind, the Security Council
should be careful not to allow humanitarian action to
become a disguised pretext for the advancement of the
individual political agendas of any given State. Regarding
the plight of refugees and displaced persons, the proposal
for the establishment of a mechanism to assist host
Governments in maintaining the security and neutrality of
refugee camps is one that deserves positive in-depth
consideration.

We welcome the remarks in the report which relate
emergency assistance to reconstruction and development.
We believe that there is an urgent need for devising
appropriate ways for dealing, at the intergovemmental level,
with the channelling of relief and development assistance to
areas coming out of conflict situations. The Secretary-
General seems to have fully grasped an essential aspect of
this concern when he states, in paragraph 67 of the report,
that we must

"avoid situations in which conditionalities are imposed
that are antithetical to a peace process".

In the search for adequate intergovemmental bodies
for dealing with the transition from peacekeeping to
reconstruction, the United Nations Charter can provide
some guidance. My delegation would be particularly
interested in looking at ways to activate Article 65, which
deals with assistance from the Economic and Social
Council to the Security Council.

The United Nations has been instrumental in bringing
peace and relief to many areas of Africa either through
peacekeeping or through the manifold programmes directed
at improving the lives of the neediest. Unfortunately,
however, these efforts remain insufficient.

The problem is one of resources, but it is not only
one of resources. There is a qualitative dimension to be
kept in mind. Technical assistance, for instance, cannot be
supply-oriented, but must be targeted at the specific needs
of the recipient countries and should make full use of
their resources and potentialities. In areas such as the
protection of human rights and the promotion of
democratic governance, it would probably be beneficial to
foster interaction among different African countries as
well as between Africa and other regions of the
developing world where progress has been made
recently - in Central America, for example, as the
Ambassador of Costa Rica eloquently explained. This
would be an innovative and in our View promising form
of extending South-South cooperation to the political and
juridical fields. Since I am speaking about South-South
cooperation, let me illustrate my comments: Brazil is
taking the necessary legislative measures to participate in
the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative. The
amount of debt to be pardoned is about $1 billion - not
an insignificant figure for a developing country.

Today's debate cannot possibly exhaust the complex
issues before us. We will therefore reserve further
comments for subsequent opportunities in this and other
forums. Let me conclude at this stage by supporting the
Secretary-General' s proposal for reconvening a ministerial
meeting on Africa on a biennial basis and for convening
a summit within five years. Sustained international
attention at the highest political levels over a period of
years can certainly help improve our understanding of the
problems and contribute to the identification of realistic
solutions. Brazil is confident that an intensified
international dialogue on Africa, both within and outside
the Security Council, which takes the African point of
View fully into account and builds upon recent experience
in a balanced way, will have a lasting impact for peace in
this vast and generous continent.

