Mr. Rinkevics (Latvia): Latvia aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered shortly on behalf of the
European Union. I should like to make the following
remarks in my national capacity.

First of all, allow me to congratulate Lithuania
on its first-ever assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and for its initiative in organizing this
timely debate on the important topic of the rule of law.

History shows that a strong multilateral, inclusive,
rules-based international order is essential for the
maintenance of global peace and security. The rule of
law is one of the key elements of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
The United Nations plays an important role in each of
those processes, as do all its States Members, having
committed to implementing principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.

There is an undeniable link between the rule of law
and the maintenance of peace and security. We welcome
the fact that the Security Council has already identified
strengthening rule-of-law institutions as a key part of
the mandate of United Nations missions. We urge the
Council to continue to integrate the rule-of-law aspect
in mission mandates in future.

In the Declaration of the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels (General Assembly resolution 67/1) in 2012, we all stressed the necessity
for greater coordination among United Nations entities
and with other international and regional partners in
order to improve the effectiveness of capacity-building
activities in the field of the rule of law.

Latvia welcomes the reforms of institutional
arrangements undertaken by the Secretary-General in
that regard. Strengthened responsibilities for United
Nations field leadership, joint efforts by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme as a global focal point on
the rule of law, as well as the development of a United
Nations strategy on the rule of law, are certainly steps
in the right direction.

In its resolutions, the Council has already explicitly
recognized that the support of peacekeeping missions
to strengthening rule-of-law institutions in the host
country would be a vital contribution to building
peace and to ending impunity. To further improve the
effectiveness ofmissions, several steps should be taken,
namely, the adoption of an integrated and comprehensive
approach to the rule of law in peacekeeping mandates,
the development of a tailor-made approach to the
specific needs of a host country and the establishment
of an efficient reporting and information-collection
system to allow a smooth transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding.

The developments in Mali and the Central African
Republic are the most recent examples where we clearly
can see that the re-establishment of the rule of law is
a primary precondition to ensure definitive conflict
resolution and sustainable progress.

After the restoration of its independence, Latvia,
along with other Baltic States, undertook democratic
transitions, putting into practice the principles of
justice and the rule of law. Our experience shows
that political will and concerted efforts on the part of
both the national Government and the international
community are crucial in building a strong rule-of-law
framework. A sense of national ownership and strong
domestic support are also essential.

Latvia actively contributes to the strengthening of
the rule of law in the world. We assist countries in that
field and we will further step up those efforts in future.
Latvia also provides expertise and technical assistance
in the field of justice. It contributes to institutional
capacity-building and supports legislative reforms in
a number of countries, with a particular focus on the
optimization ofjudicial proceedings, including the use
of information and communication technology.

We cannot discuss the concept of the rule of law
without reflecting on current developments in Ukraine.
With alarm, I follow events in Ukraine, which started
as a peaceful protest requesting to respect free choice,
the rule of law and justice in Ukraine. Latvia condemns
the violence that has resulted in the deaths of more
than 20 people, among them women. We request the
Government of Ukraine to refrain from the use of
force against civilians. We appeal to both sides to
refrain from further violent actions, to step back from
the confrontation and to return to negotiations in
order to restore the rule of law. The President and the
Government of Ukraine bear the ultimate responsibility
for the situation in the country. The rule of law is not
about bullets and water cannon restoring order; it is
about the legitimacy of power and political dialogue
with the people.

Latvia is particularly concerned about the growth
in the number of intra-State conflicts. The failure of
national institutions and the international community
to prevent and stop violence and serious violations
of international law dramatically affects the most
vulnerable in society, especially women and children.
The Council should continue to address the issue
in accordance with its primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security.

Ending violence against women and preventing
discrimination, as well as addressing women's
justice and security concerns, are integral parts
of strengthening the rule of law. No efforts should
be spared to protect women and girls from sexual
and gender-based violence and to end impunity for
those crimes once and for all. As a member of the
UN-Women Executive Board, Latvia actively engages
in activities aimed at addressing women's justice and
security concerns worldwide. Latvia has taken part in
projects aimed at supporting and promoting the role of
women in Afghanistan, Iraq and other countries and
will continue its activities in that regard.

The Security Council has a unique role in the fight
against impunity. Accountability is an integral aspect
of the rule of law and offers effective means for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Latvia
believes that the establishment of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) represents an outstanding
achievement by the international community in
the struggle to end impunity. If the State's primary
responsibility to protect the population from massive
and widespread violations of human rights cannot be
met, the fight against impunity has to be strengthened
at the international level. It should be done through
the work of the ICC, through ad hoc and mixed
tribunals and through other justice and accountability
mechanisms. Coherence in their respective approaches
through closer cooperation will send a clear signal that
the international community will not tolerate impunity.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Latvia's
commitment to the promotion and protection of the rule
of law, as well as our readiness to share our experience
and expertise. The rule of law plays a central role in
addressing current political, security and humanitarian
challenges. Restoring the rule of law is a long-term
process that requires the cooperation of all United
Nations States Members and agencies as well as other
actors in that regard. The Security Council's continued
attention to the issue of the rule of law will be essential
in our view to reinforce international peace and security.

