Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno
for a very comprehensive briefing. We would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2002/1126). We would like to
reiterate Norway's full support for the priorities set
forth by Special Representative Steiner and our
appreciation for his substantial efforts, as well as for
those of UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government in ensuring the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

Norway welcomes the largely peaceful conduct of
the recent municipal elections. We strongly condemn,
however, the killing of three persons the day after the
elections, including the Democratic League of Kosovo
leader, in Suva Reka. That incident casts a dark and
ominous shadow over an otherwise well organized
election process. Norway urges the responsible
authorities to do their utmost to bring the perpetrators
to justice. Norway welcomes the prompt
condemnations of this act by political leaders in
Kosovo.

Norway regrets the generally low turnout in the
municipal elections. The very limited participation in
some Kosovo Serb areas was most disappointing, as it
unfortunately will create additional obstacles to the full
integration of that community in Kosovo. However, in
some of the Serb majority municipalities the turnout
was very high. Zubin Potok, for instance, had a
70-per-cent turnout, and in the mixed municipality of
Novo Brdo the participation was 80 per cent.

While understanding the rationale for postponing
the scheduled conference on decentralization, Norway
nonetheless believes that it would be unfortunate if that
work were not followed up. Dialogue between UNMIK
and Belgrade will be important in that respect.

Norway welcomes Special Representative
Steiner's seven-point plan for the integration of the city
of Mitrovica. It is important that measures be taken to
increase Kosovo Serb confidence in UNMIK in
particular, and in the international community in
Kosovo in general. We welcome the plan outlined by
Special Representative Steiner, and look forward to
seeing the results of its implementation.

Kosovo's 13 municipalities now have newly
elected municipal assemblies. It will be of the utmost
importance that all political parties respect the results
of the election and that the implementation of those
results takes place in a democratic and peaceful
manner. Previous experience has shown the many
difficulties that can be encountered in the
implementation of election results. Kosovo's political
parties must fully recognize that elections are more
than a technical exercise; their very essence is about
representation in political structures, thereby achieving
the benchmark of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the realization of effective,
representative and functional institutions.

Elected representatives and local administrations
must assume responsibility on all levels. They must
demonstrate their accountability, focusing on the tasks
mandated to them. At the municipal level that pertains,
first and foremost, to the delivery of public services to
their respective local communities. Moreover,
allocations of resources must be done in a transparent
way. Corruption and nepotism must be combated.

All elected members of the municipal assemblies
must now demonstrate their ability to cooperate across
political and ethnic divisions. A spirit of compromise
will be crucial in order to solve the many tasks and
challenges awaiting them. The municipal assemblies
and their administrations must promote civil society
structures and human rights. Members of ethnic
minorities and women must be secured proportionate
representation in the local governments, as well as
access to meaningful participation as civil servants.
Only by fulfilling their responsibility as municipal
assemblies and local administrations throughout
Kosovo can the benchmark of effective, representative
and functioning institutions be achieved.

The Council has decided to send a mission to
Kosovo in support of UNMIK's work, and I have
accepted to lead that mission. My delegation, supported
by the Secretariat and in close consultations with all
members of the Council, is currently working out the
practical arrangements for such a mission.

