Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): The
United States will join consensus to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINURCA) for a three-month period.

Since its establishment two years ago, MINURCA
has helped create a much improved security situation in
the Central African Republic. This, in turn, allowed the
Government to conduct a peaceful presidential election on
19 September and to begin implementing much needed
reforms. In this regard, we commend the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Ambassador
Adeniji, and the men and women of MINURCA for their
outstanding efforts.

Much work, however, remains to be done in the
Central African Republic - not by MINURCA, but by
the Government and people themselves. MINURCA's job
is essentially completed and it is now time for the people
of the Central African Republic and their elected
representatives to continue the process of military and
economic reform. Specifically, we would encourage
further military restructuring, demobilization and strict
adherence to the International Monetary Fund programme,
which includes the regular payment of salaries to soldiers
and other Government employees.

MINURCA will end on 15 February 2000. The need
for a smooth transition to non-assessed post-conflict
institution-building is paramount, in our View.
MINURCA'S troops must begin to withdraw immediately.
Departure cannot be delayed until the end of this
extension. It is also vital that the United Nations take
steps as soon as possible to formulate a programme for
the United Nations and other international donors to
support reform after MINURCA departs. It is similarly
important that the Government of the Central African
Republic should use the next three months to complete
the implementation of stabilizing reforms. The future of
the Central African Republic is in the hands of the
Government and its people.

My Government has opposed extensions of
MINURCA's mandate in the past. We are joining the
consensus today, however, because we are committed to
promoting peace and security throughout Africa as a
means for enhancing development and economic growth.
We hope that the President and the people of the Central

 

African Republic can continue to make the necessary
changes that will lead to lasting peace and stability.

