Mr. Farah (Djibouti) (spoke in French): First of
all, may I congratulate Ambassador Danforth most
warmly on his assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of November. I would also like
once more to congratulate him on the crucial role he
played in the Security Council's decision to hold these
special meetings in the region and to take up a matter
that is of considerable importance not only to the
region and to Africa, but also to the international
community as a whole. We are particularly grateful to
all the members of the Council, who agreed to include
on the agenda of these historic meetings the important
issue of Somalia.

This special meeting of the Security Council is
taking place just a little more than a month after the
Somalis, the region, the African continent and the
whole world celebrated the swearing in of the new
transitional President of Somalia, His Excellency
Mr. Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, who is here with us
today. That happy event was welcomed by Somalis and
by the international community. It was a tremendous
achievement, made possible thanks to the
determination of the Somali people, who, enduring
many long and dark years, never stopped hoping and
working for real change in their lives. They understood
that, within the context of the peace process begun by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the opportunity was provided to put an end to
the deep gloom of night and to lay the foundations for
institutions that would enable Somalia to be reborn.

This achievement was made possible also by the
perseverance of IGAD member States, which
committed themselves to developing a consistent,
agreed and collective approach, guided by a sincere
desire to act together in solidarity with the people of
Somalia.

I should like to take this opportunity to extend
our sincere thanks to the Government of Kenya and to
our Kenyan brothers and sisters, whose sacrifices and
commitment should be acknowledged. We also thank
the international community for its constant financial
and political support for our joint efforts, which was
decisive in enabling the process to be successful.

I cannot mention all those who contributed to this
success, but there are some I must mention because of
the crucial part they played and continue to play. The
African Union has been unfailingly committed to us
and has given momentum to efforts to prepare for the
deployment of a peacekeeping force in Somalia. We
pay tribute to the European Union for its political and
financial support; we are counting on it to help Somalia
jump start its economy, with a view to attaining
sustainable development. We are particularly
encouraged by the constant support of the United
States in this process. The contribution of the League
of Arab States was decisive at a critical stage of the
process, and it goes without saying that its material and
financial support will also be essential in the future.
And, of course, we must stress in particular the
constant commitment of the United Nations and the
resolve of the Secretary-General. We pay particular
tribute to the Security Council's very significant
decision to come to the region to learn more about the
situation and to better understand the scope of the
challenges facing the new Somali Government.

The results of the Somali National Reconciliation
Conference, held at Mbagathi, must enable us to assess
the changes that have taken place and the prospects
they offer in terms of the emergence of an era of
stability, security and freedom in Somalia, the
beneficial impact of which will be felt throughout the
region. But much remains to be done before that
promise is realized. The road is fraught with pitfalls.
The challenges are huge. Continued support from
Africa and from the international community will
determine our success. Among those challenges, one
cannot emphasize enough the urgent need to find a
lasting solution to the problem of the mass circulation
of weapons in Somalia and to its grave security
consequences.

The negative effects that weapons have had at the
economic, social and political levels are immeasurable.
They have contributed to the emergence of a weapons
culture and to the establishment of an atmosphere of
fear. Those who possess them have a false feeling of
security, because they have the capacity to defend
themselves in case they are attacked by hostile forces.
Accordingly, the pressure to acquire weapons is even
greater on those who do not possess them. The result is
an arms race whose devastating effects - including
disease and poverty - are felt at many levels because
the resources mobilized to that end are immense and
could be allocated instead to vital sectors.
In particular, weapons proliferation poses a
serious threat to the results of the Conference -
particularly during the first six months, when the new
Government, to establish its legitimacy, must respond
to the immense expectations of the Somali population
and must promote visible and significant change. The
IGAD peace process is aimed at identifying the
underlying causes of the conflict in Somalia; finding,
to the extent possible, adequate responses to them;
signing a declaration on the cessation of hostilities; and
including all essential actors, including the significant

components of civil society - because it controls a
large quantity of weapons and militias - and
businessmen.

Thus, the transitional parliament is the institution
within which all clans, factions and interest groups are
represented, which is a first. However, the many
initiatives we have undertaken will be seen as weak
and poorly supported attempts unless they are
accompanied by a serious, viable and well-performing
programme aimed at disarming, demobilizing and
reintegrating the militias. The new Government cannot
carry out that task alone. It will need assistance from
the Security Council and the international community
in the form of the deployment of peacekeeping troops
to ensure a peaceful transition, which will permit the
emergence of a lasting peace, security and stability in
Somalia.

In that regard, we welcome the preparation efforts
of the African Union Commission, which has sent
several observation missions to Somalia. We note with
satisfaction the initiative of the African Union - in
partnership with IGAD, the Federal Transitional
Government of Somalia and all international actors
with expertise in this area - to organize a meeting of
military and political experts mandated with assessing
the security situation in order to complete the process
of preparing for the deployment of troops. It goes
without saying that such an initiative will require
immense resources. Experience justifies and reinforces
the basic premise that investment in peace is always
less costly than war.

Our common objective remains preventing the
outbreak of conflict through mechanisms of preventive
diplomacy. Many regions throughout the world
continue to be devastated by endless cycles of conflict
aggravated by a lack of serious attention on the part of
the international community. The consequences are
disastrous - the collapse of State institutions, poverty,
instability, social disintegration - and provide a
framework where one can freely mobilize allegiances
in terrorist networks and other Mafia-like structures
involved in transnational organized crime.

Therefore, it seems obvious that the Council must
demonstrate greater sensitivity towards poor countries
engaged in deadly and devastating conflicts. In that
regard, we encourage the Council to significantly and
decisively recommit itself in Somalia and to make
every effort to ensure that the great progress achieved
is not lost.

As we urge the Somalis to be vigilant and to
strive to consolidate the success achieved, we must
seize the opportunity offered to the international
community - particularly in the post-9/ll context -
to help the Somalis rebuild their nation and put
development programmes in place. We cannot allow
our many decisions and valiant efforts to lead to
lukewarm results, because that would undoubtedly be a
historic setback.

I am convinced that the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, will devote all due
attention to this issue so that Somalia can once again
find its place in the international community.

