Mr. Salim (Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity): I wish first of all to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of September, and to say how
honoured I am to address the Security Council once again
on behalf of the Organization of African Unity (OAU). The
initiative you have taken to convene this ministerial meeting
on the situation in Africa, on the eve of the year 2000, is a
welcome initiative and clear testimony to the continuing
interest of the Netherlands in Africa. I would also like to
express the appreciation of the OAU for the support that
your country, the Netherlands, has been extending and
continues to extend to Africa, particularly in the areas of
economic development and in our efforts at promoting
peace, security and stability in our continent.

This initiative happily coincides with the momentous
decisions taken by African leaders themselves at the Algiers
summit in July this year and subsequently at the summit
held in Sirte, Libya, in September, aimed at strengthening
Africa's capacity to deal with continental and global
challenges. These decisions relate, inter alia, to Africa's
resolve and its determined effort to make the year 2000 a
year of peace and stability in our continent.

Our objective and our determination is to move from
an era of conflict resolution to an era of security and
stability. and from an era of economic stagnation to one of
greater integration of African economies and of economic
development. In so doing, we shall start the process of
putting an end to the current plethora of conflicts that
continue to frustrate Africa's aspirations and expectations,
and of creating better conditions for the well-being of
African peoples.

I see the present session as a follow-up: first, to the
Ministerial meeting of the Security Council on 25
September 1997 (S/PV.3819), which discussed the
situation in Africa and, second, to the discussions last
year of the Secretary-General's report on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa (S/1998/318). This
present initiative therefore constitutes a manifestation of
the international community's continuing interest in Africa
and its concern over the conflicts which continue to cause
immense suffering for our people and destruction of life
and property, apart from its serious negative impact on
the socio-economic development of our continent.
Two years ago, when I addressed the Ministerial
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in Africa
I drew the Council's attention to the many problems
facing that continent and the challenges they posed -
and continue to pose - for our peoples and leaders. The
issues of democratization, good governance,
accountability, respect for human rights and the rule of
law continue to preoccupy African governments and
peoples. The very healthy and frank discussions that took
place in Algiers on these issues and in particular the
decision, effective from the next summit, not to accept
those who usurp power through the overthrow of
constitutionally elected governments in OAU, bear
witness to Africa's resolve and seriousness on these
issues.

As we revisit the situation in Africa since the time
of our last debate on this subject, I should like to pay a
well-deserved tribute to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations for his insightful progress report before us
today. We note, in that regard, the important role of the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, particularly their holistic
approach in the implementation of the important
recommendations in the report.

We at OAU also attach great importance to
enhanced cooperation between OAU and the United
Nations, convinced as we are that the partnership between
the two institutions is mutually reinforcing.

Since the last Ministerial meeting on the situation in
Africa, there have been significant developments in our
continued and collective efforts for the peaceful resolution
of the conflicts there. The signing of the Agreement on a
Ceasefire in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/ 1999/815) and the Lome Peace Agreement
(S/ 1999/777) on the peace process in Sierra Leone are
especially noteworthy. In this regard, we welcome the
recent proposal of the United Nations Secretary-General

 

for the deployment of a 6,000-strong United Nations force
for Sierra Leone and the positive reaction to it by the
Security Council contained in the resolution currently under
consideration. We believe that sending such a force will
help stabilize the situation and assist in the implementation
of the Lome Peace Agreement. It is also proper to
emphasize here the urgent need to provide the Government
and people of Sierra Leone with humanitarian assistance as
well as assistance for rehabilitation and reconstruction.

As we meet today, a number of conflicts remain a
source of grave concern to us: in Angola; in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; and between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
We are concerned also by the crisis in the Comoros, the
fragile and fluid situation in the Republic of the Congo and
the situation in Burundi. In almost all these conflicts, it is
significant that it has been mainly Africans themselves who
have been in the forefront in finding solutions.

In the tragic and unfortunate conflict between Ethiopia
and Eritrea, Africa - through its continental
organization - has been seriously and deeply engaged in
finding a peaceful settlement. These efforts were carried out
by the High-Level Delegation of heads of State and
Government comprising the then Chairman of OAU,
President Blaise Compaore of Burkina Faso, President
Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe and former President Hassan
Gouled Aptidon of Djibouti, as well as the new head of
State of that country, President Ismail Omar Guelleh,
together with the OAU Secretary-General. These efforts
continue to be pursued today by OAU and more particularly
by the current Chairman of OAU, President Abdelaziz
Bouteflika of Algeria, working closely with the Secretary-
General of OAU. Since the Algiers summit in July this
year, intensive consultations have been pursued with a view
to seeking an early solution to the conflict. OAU has
continued these efforts in close cooperation with the United
Nations and the Government of the United States of
America.

In the case of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-
Bissau, it has again been Africa, more particularly the
heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which has
worked assiduously towards the restoration of peace and the
restoration of constitutional order. Currently, Africa is
engaged in yet another effort to advance the cause of peace
in Burundi, under the auspices of the former President of
Tanzania, Mwalimu Julius Nyerere. Within the context of
the letter and spirit of the Algiers summit, we are
determined to do our utmost to promote efforts to put an
end to the bloody death and destruction taking place in
Angola essentially as a result of the intransigence of the
UNITA leadership. We also hope to intensify efforts to
resolve the conflicts in Somalia and southern Sudan.

The situation in the Comoros also continues to be of
serious concern. We have spared no effort in our common
resolve to restore peace, security and constitutional order
to the archipelago. OAU and the countries of the region
have explored all peaceful avenues for a lasting solution
to the crisis in that country. It was under OAU auspices
that the Addis Ababa and Antananarivo Agreements were
fostered. Regrettably, the Antananarivo Agreement -
which was welcomed by all people of goodwill as a
serious attempt to address the concerns of all the
inhabitants of the Comoros, particularly on the island of
Anjouan, while maintaining the unity and territorial
integrity of the country and the cohesion of its people -
was undermined by the intransigence of hard-line
elements within the Anjouanese party. Furthermore, the
military takeover in the Comoros has further complicated
the situation.

I wish to stress at this point that in all its peace
endeavours OAU has never found the United Nations
unwilling to help. Indeed, the United Nations has proved
to be our main partner for peace. I wish, therefore, to take
this opportunity to pay a tribute to the United Nations, its
Security Council and its Secretary-General for their
support and cooperation. Our appreciation also goes to
individual States Members of the United Nations which
are accompanying and supporting OAU in its efforts to
promote peace, security and stability in Africa. I wish
also to emphasize that OAU has endeavoured to work
closely with and to support the regional economic
communities in their collective efforts to resolve conflicts
there. OAU takes pride in the partnership we have
succeeded in building with the United Nations and the
regional economic communities in Africa, and we
definitely look forward to strengthening and consolidating
this partnership for peace, particularly as we prepare to
enter the new century.

I wish to take this opportunity also to stress the
importance of timely action by the international
community, the United Nations and its Security Council,
in particular, to support peace agreements promoted by
OAU or by the regional economic communities in
cooperation with OAU. In saying this, I have in mind our
experience in the past when critical time and opportunities
for peace were lost because of a lack of timely action by
the Council.

 

The sad experience of United Nations inaction with
respect to the situation in the Republic of the Congo is still
very fresh in our mind. There is no doubt that the signing
of a peace agreement, even though significant by itself, is
but the beginning of a long and arduous path to peace,
strewn with dangers and alive with the potential for a
renewal of conflict if the components for a successful
peacemaking and peacekeeping process are not adequate,
timely and appropriate.

As we meet today, I must point out that serious
difficulties have been faced by OAU and the regional
economic communities - ECOWAS and the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) - involved in
the implementation of the Agreements for Sierra Leone and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. These Agreements
have been duly signed by the parties concerned and what is
required is speedy action for their implementation. Yet the
required determination and resources are not forthcoming:
it is a fact that we lack the necessary and adequate
resources to ensure the full and successful implementation
of the Agreements which have so far been signed much less
those yet to be agreed by the parties to these conflicts.

I have already expressed our full support for some of
the proposals made by the Secretary-General in his recent
report on the situation in Sierra Leone, proposals aimed at
enhancing United Nations support for the implementation
of the Lome Peace Agreement. I would now like to urge
the Security Council to also take speedy action with respect
to the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
through the deployment of a peacekeeping force. I wish to
reiterate the call made by President Chiluba of Zambia in
his Council briefing on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on 21 September and to appeal once again to this
body to ensure that Africa is provided with the much-
needed financial and logistical assistance for the successful
implementation of the Agreement signed. Such early action
by the Security Council is vital in view of the fragile peace
prevailing in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
believe that such determined action by the Security Council
is also consistent with its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In pleading for speedy action by the Security Council,
I emphasize the partnership for peace that I mentioned
earlier and that we are seeking to consolidate between our
universal body, our continental organization and our
regional economic communities. This partnership needs to
be based on a rational division of work and fair sharing of
the burden, bearing in mind the global responsibility
entrusted to the United Nations and its Security Council
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

As the Council deliberates on the situation in Africa,
I am confident that it will take into account the realities
in our continent and the steadfast efforts of African
countries in dealing with their problems as well as events
that impinge on the continent from outside.

The Abuja Treaty broke new ground in Africa's
strategies for the greater integration of the economies of
its States. But in order for Africa to embark on this Vital
course of integration it should be given a chance to assert
itself in this direction. As indicated by the numerous
appeals made by African leaders - not only at the fifty-
fourth session of the General Assembly, on the eve of the
new millennium, but also at other forums - the
cancellation of debt in respect of African countries has
become all the more urgent. Likewise, in the very
progress report before us today, the Secretary-General has
argued that, despite the many pitfalls and impediments on
the continent, African countries have already embarked on
the much-required economic reforms.

Recently in Sirte, Libya, African leaders, among
other things, also decided to establish an African Union
in conformity with the ultimate objectives of the Charter
of our continental organization and the provisions of the
Treaty establishing the African Economic Community;
accelerate the process of implementing the Treaty; and
strengthen and consolidate the regional economic
communities as the pillars for achieving the objectives of
the African Economic Community to realize the
envisaged Union.

I am sure the Council members now realize that
African countries are clearly not shying away from their
responsibilities. While we recognize that some of our
problems are part of colonial legacies and injustices done
to our people, at the same time we remain mindful that
many of our problems are of our own making.

We believe that these serious and imaginative efforts
deployed by our people and our leaders in confronting
many of our problems and challenges deserve
international understanding and solidarity. We need an
element of fairness and objectivity in reviewing African
problems.

Africa, for example, has the misfortune of having
some 7 million refugees and more than double that
number of internally displaced persons. In their

 

generosity, African countries have provided shelter and
support. Yet for Africans to be able to assist effectively
their brethren who have been forced to vote with their feet,
international support and solidarity - which unfortunately,
have been diminishing - are vital.

I need not remind Council that in dealing with African
refugees, as compared to some others in other parts of the
world, the element of proportionality is lacking.

As I conclude, I would like to reiterate that Africa is
undertaking a process of reform and renewal. This process
is all-embracing - political, economic and social - and is,
in my View, an irreversible process. But for the process to
remain meaningful and sustainable, Africa needs the active
support of the international community. As we prepare to
enter a new century, and believing, as I believe all the
Council members do, in our collective humanity, I trust that
the Council and the international community at large will
respond positively and constructively to Africa's own quiet
revolution.
