Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We appreciate the
opportunity to take part in this open debate on this
very important topic. We thank you, Sir, for the very
interesting concept note provided in preparation for
this debate (S/2015/87, annex). Albania aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
the European Union. I shall add some remarks in my
national capacity.

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations. Nothing could
have been nobler in 1945, nor today, than the common
ideals enshrined in the Charter of the Organization,
including, notably, "to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime
has brought untold sorrow to mankind". There has
been immense progress during the seven decades of the
United Nations existence. Let me briefly mention some
of the areas where the United Nations, by introducing
and developing new concepts, has brought real change.

The concept ofpeacekeeping as a wholly new means
of conflict management invented was under the United
Nations. The vast issue of human rights - enshrined in
the Preamble of the Charter objective to reaffirm faith
in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth
of the human person, in the equal rights of men and
women and of nations large and small - was almost
inexistent before the founding of the United Nations.
It managed the decolonization process. The immense
progress made with respect to the new and challenging
agendas on women, girls, children and the elderly,
among other areas, and the drastic reduction of poverty
worldwide have thoroughly transformed nations,
empowered societies and contributed significantly to
peace and security.

Undeniably, the United Nations has contributed
greatly to the transformed world, indeed the better
world, we live in today. But disappointment and failure
have also been constantly present. Millions of people
across the world who have placed their trust on the
United Nations and the Security Council in particular
have had no other choice but to water down their
expectations when faced with wars, atrocities and
massive human rights breaches of the sort from which
the United Nations has solemnly pledged to save them.

In 2013, the number of refugees, asylum-seekers
and displaced people exceeded 50 million, half of
them children. The ongoing crises in various parts of
the world, including Syria and South Sudan, have left
the world with the immense and increasing cost of the
failure to prevent and/or resolve conflict. Important
recommendations on several situations from the General
Assembly and other United Nations mechanisms have,
most regrettably, not been referred to the International
Criminal Court. The solemn pledge of"never again" has
been repeated too often, and manmade tragedies keep
recurring, thereby challenging the belief in humanity's
capacity to learn from its failures.

Albania remains particularly and deeply concerned
about the soon-to-be one-year-long catastrophic
developments in Ukraine. General Assembly resolution
68/262, which supports the sovereignty, independence,
unity and the territorial integrity of Ukraine, remains
unimplemented, and the Security Council continues
to be deadlocked on the issue. We have welcomed the
latest peace agreement and we reiterate our call for the
serious and sincere engagement of the Council towards
a durable political solution there.

The Charter ofthe United Nations tasks the Security
Council, as the body responsible for peace and security,
to act swiftly and resolutely when States face situations
involving mass atrocities or grave human rights
violations, or are at risk from genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing. We know
only too well what happens when the Council fails to
live up to its responsibilities - innocent people, mostly
women and children, will pay the price. The credibility
and legitimacy of the Council and of the Organization
are seriously affected.
Worse, the use of the veto in such cases betrays the
trust of millions of people for whom the United Nations
is the only hope. It openly neglects and despises victims.
It empowers dictators and other serious human rights
offenders, and undermines international efforts to end
impunity. In that respect, Albania reiterates its strong
support for the French proposal and the efforts of ACT
for a code of conduct on refraining from the use of veto
in situations of genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and ethnic cleansing.

In concluding, I wish to recall that the core
mandate of our Organization is to maintain or restore
international peace and security. That is, in other words,
its raison d'etre. The authority and the legitimacy
vested in the Security Council to fulfil that pledge has
no precedent in international relations, and the Council
must live up to its responsibility and world confidence
and fully uphold the principles enshrined in the Charter.

