The President: I thank Ms. Ibrahim for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.

I am honoured to preside over today's debate on
climate-related security risks. I am a bit taken aback
by the previous speaker. Nevertheless, I thank all
the briefers for their statements this morning. Their
testimonies all say one thing, despite coming from
different perspectives: the security risks associated with
climate change are real. Minister Janabi spoke of how
Iraq is grappling with the harsh weather conditions and
intense droughts that will affect his country's fragile
security. Ms. Hindou Ibrahim just vividly described the
challenges facing pastoralists in the Lake Chad Basin,
as ecosystems - and old power structures - shift.
Let me also thank the speakers representing groups
of affected countries who will share their experiences
with us. Also, I extend special thanks to His Excellency
President Baron Waqa of Nauru for being here today.

Last week, we met men and women who are dealing
at first hand with the everyday consequences that a
changing climate is having on peace and security. They
are migrants and refugees displaced as aresult ofdrought
or floods. They are the breadwinners no longer able to
feed their families because, much like Lake Chad itself,
their traditional fishing or farming livelihoods have
evaporated, giving rise to tensions. They are women
leaders working in their communities to prevent youth
from becoming victims of radicalization by groups that
prey on the vulnerable. They do not have the choice of
ignoring those realities, and neither do we.

The link between climate and security continues
to be a priority for Sweden in the SecurityCouncil. It
is time for the Council to catch up with the changing
reality on the ground. It has been seven years since we
last debated climate and security (see S/PV.6587). It is
past time for us to deepen our understanding of how
climate change interacts with drivers of conflict.

I will be very practical, as I like to be. I believe
there are four areas that need to be addressed.

First, in order to properly address threats to
peace and security and to guarantee the Council's
future efficiency, we need a better understanding
of climate-related security risks. We have made an
important start over the last 18 months by recognizing
the adverse effects of climate change on stability in the
Lake Chad Basin, West Africa and the Sahel.

Secondly, we need improved tools, analysis and
reporting from the field to better address climate-related
security challenges. The presidential statement
on climate and security adopted seven years ago
(S/PRST/2011/15) asked for better reporting. However,
that knowledge and information gap still exists, and it
urgently needs to be filled.

To be able to make informed decisions on how best
to respond to the conflicts on our agenda, we must
have all the information on what is driving them. That
includes how a changing climate is contributing to those
conflicts. Climate-risk assessments should be part and
parcel of relevant reporting to the Security Council.
How climate risks interact with political, social and
economic factors, as well as gender dimensions, should
be taken into account. It is clear that climate risk has
the potential to play an ever-increasing role in driving
future conflicts. We need to invest in early warning
in order to better understand where those potential
vulnerabilities lie. To that end, we would welcome
regular, forward-looking regional and global reporting
from the Secretariat on climate-related security risks.

Thirdly, to deliver on all of that, an institutional
home for those issues within the United Nations system
is needed - we hope that Ms. Amina Mohammed
might be the mother of that home - maybe under
the leadership of a special representative, with
responsibility for bringing together information from
all relevant United Nations agencies. Reporting and
analysis should also draw on available research from
outside the United Nations system, perhaps through a
network of universities and other research institutes
that can provide us with that. I am pleased to announce
the launch of a Stockholm-based knowledge hub for
climate security later this summer. That hub will
increase the collective understanding of those issues
and will be available to the United Nations and other
actors by providing evidence-based analysis.

An enhanced understanding of climate-related
security risks and how to address them in the Security
Council should not, and will not, duplicate the
responsibilities ofthe General Assembly or other United
Nations bodies. Instead, it will ensure that all United
Nations bodies deliver on their respective mandates to
the best of their ability and that the system collectively
delivers more than the sum of its parts.

Fourthly and lastly, in framing our response, we
need to look to the countries on the front line and learn
from their experiences and from good practices. For
example, Nepal and the Sudan, with United Nations
support, are taking steps to address climate-related
risks through pilot projects that map such risks, with
the aim of identifying resilience-building interventions
and programming.

The Lake Chad Basin Governors' Forum was
established this year to enhance joint efforts towards
building peace and fostering sustainable development
across the region. It has confirmed the importance of
applying a holistic approach to complex and interlinked
security challenges, including climate change.

Led by the African Union Commission, the Great
Green Wall for the Sahara and Sahel Initiative is a truly
integrated project for climate, security and peace. It
aims to halt desertification, boost food security and
build resilience to climate change, while creating jobs.
That is conflict prevention and sustaining peace in
practice. We must capitalize on that knowledge on the
ground and integrate it into our efforts to end conflict
and sustain peace.

Regional organizations such as the African Union
and the European Union, as well as the Pacific small
island developing States, the Alliance of Small Island
States and the Caribbean Community, are already
providing momentum to the international response
to climate-related security risks. It is now imperative
that the United Nations catches up and takes the lead
in facilitating and coordinating global efforts, working
with regional partners and other stakeholders.

The Secretary-General's climate summit in
September 2019 represents a pivotal moment to make
progress on the issue. The concrete steps I have
mentioned today should work towards guaranteeing
that climate-related security risks are on the agenda at
that summit.

The threat that a changing climate presents to
our societies and to international peace and security
cannot be underestimated. It has already created a new
reality for the communities that we met in the Sahel.
To realistically and meaningfully respond to their
needs, address the conflicts of today, meet the call of
Hindou Ibrahim and others and prevent the conflicts of
tomorrow, we can no longer afford to ignore that threat.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the Prime Minister of Curacao, Kingdom
of the Netherlands.

