Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank Spain for
convening this very important meeting and join others
in thanking the briefers for their excellent briefings.
I welcome today's unanimous adoption of resolution
2325 (2016), which was co-sponsored by Japan. We
appreciate the strong leadership of Spain in this regard.

Bearing in mind today's agenda item,
"Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction", I
would like first to touch upon the most serious issue in
this field - nuclear and ballistic missile development
by North Korea. This is a blatant violation of Security
Council resolutions and represents a clear challenge
to the global non-proliferation regime. It is simply
not unacceptable. Japan strongly urges North Korea
to refrain from further provocations and to comply
fully and faithfully with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 2321 (2016) and 2270
(2016), as well as its other commitments. We must recall
that resolution 2321 (2016) notes the complementarity
of its obligations with those of resolution 1540 (2004).

In discussing how to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), we must
consider what is happening in the real world. The
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons/
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism reached
the clear conclusion that chemical weapons were in
fact used in Syria, which we strongly condemn. The
proliferation of WMDs is not a hypothetical threat. As
has been mentioned often today, we should not overlook
the danger of malicious actors benefitting from rapid
advances in science, technology and international
commerce for proliferation purposes. Strengthening the
global non-proliferation regime is an urgent and ongoing
task. Japan appreciates the adoption of resolution 2325
(2016), which contains important provisions that will
help strengthen the global non-proliferation regime. I
would like to focus here on two points in particular.

The first point concerns the development of national
control lists. Resolution 1540 (2004) prescribes various
mandatory domestic control measures, but it is essential
to specify which items are to be controlled in order for
those measures to be effective. The resolution adopted
today addresses this point by calling upon States that
have not done so to start developing effective national
control lists. I would like to take this opportunity to
urge all States to undertake effective measures as soon
as possible to actually intercept proliferation activities
whenever they are committed.
My second point involves a concrete description
in resolution 2325 (2016) of the role to be played by
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) in implementation assistance. Regrettably, the
Committee receives many assistance requests that fail
to specify actual needs, and the Committee's match-
making role is not functioning well. The new resolution
attempts to address that situation by directing the
Committee to help States formulate requests with
specific details of the necessary assistance. I would
like to invite States seeking assistance to utilize the
1540 Committee's expertise to better formulate their
requests. At the same time, the Committee should
intensify its efforts to elicit concrete responses from
donors, for example by proactively sharing specific
assistance needs with other donor communities, such
the G-7 Global Partnership against the Spread of
Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction.

To conclude, today's security environment requires
the international community to reinforce measures to
tackle the threat posed by the proliferation of WMDs.
Today's adoption of resolution 2325 (2016) is an
important step forward. Japan will continue to actively
support the strengthening of the global non-proliferation
regime, with resolution 1540 (2004) at its core.

