The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity as the representative of Italy.

I wish first to warmly welcome Special
Representative Ould Abdallah and to thank him for a
most focused presentation with an operational
approach. That is precisely what we need. I am glad
that we have been able to have this debate in
December, under the Italian presidency, given that
Somalia is a strong priority for Italy. I am also glad
that the public format has allowed the whole
membership to follow the meeting.

First of all, the scale of human suffering in
Somalia has become unacceptable. Effectively
addressing the humanitarian emergency dimension of
the Somali crisis has to be at the top of our agenda. The
words used by Under-Secretary-General Holmes a few
days ago still echo in this Chamber "increasingly
terrible things are now happening in Mogadishu, as it
descends into the nightmare of urban guerrilla warfare
and reciprocal atrocities" (S/PV.5 792, p. 6).

I wish to acknowledge the great work being
accomplished by the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the non-governmental organizations active
in Somalia and the humanitarian community in general to
alleviate this human suffering. But I also concur with the
Special Representative that without a consistent and
strong multidimensional strategy encompassing the
political, security and human rights dimension, the
humanitarian response alone cannot solve the crisis.

Secondly, the situation in Somalia is indeed a
very serious threat to international peace and security,
which requires an appropriate response by this
Council. Like many others before me, I fully agree
with the Special Representative's assessment of the
need to radically change our agenda for Somalia and
step up our efforts. "Business as usual", as has been
said, is not an option any more. I am glad to see a
strong awareness of this fact among Council members.
Now we have to translate this awareness into a
coherent, multidimensional strategy and draw the
necessary operational conclusions.
Our paramount goal should remain, more than
ever, the active promotion - at the appropriate time
and under the right conditions - of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Somalia. We note that

today's discussion has indicated that that is indeed the
View of many, if not all, Council members. A first step
in that direction was the technical meeting organized
by the United Kingdom in early December. We hope
that this dialogue with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) could be accelerated so that
concrete options within the contingency plan could be
presented to the Council soon. Let us remember that
the contingency plan was last requested in August in
resolution 1772 (2007). That is already four months
ago.

In particular, it is necessary - and this has been
said very clearly by other members who have spoken
before me - that the technical assessment mission that
was also requested in paragraph 16 of resolution 1772
(2007) be dispatched to the region as soon as possible
and, I would add, without delay. Keeping the United
Nations option alive will also encourage African troop-
contributing countries to participate in the African
Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia
(AMISON), whose strengthening remains our first
objective in the short term, as has been stated this
morning by all members. This is the first priority: to
strengthen AMISON, because what is at stake is the
credibility of the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations.

Italy has provided €10 million to AMISON and
invited other donors to contribute. I wish to underline,
however, that our support of AMISON should not
prevent us from actively pursuing all other options and,
in particular, from responding to the African Union
request that was very strongly expressed here by the
representative of Congo for a United Nations rehatting
as soon as possible.

Thirdly, the Special Representative has heard this
morning that there is wide support for his role, which
is indeed a very challenging one. His commitment and
proposal for a re-energized agenda and political
process for Somalia are most welcome, and he has our
strong and fullest support. I wish to add the full
support of my Government to that which has already
been expressed by others. I trust that the Special
Representative's action in the region and his position
vis-a-vis all interlocutors will be strengthened
following this debate.

We also need to strengthen the United Nations
political office in Mogadishu and provide a special
representative with the necessary means to carry on its
initiatives and to push the political process forward. I
also hope that the Council may soon express itself on
Somalia by means of a presidential statement, and I
look forward to receiving the proposal that the United
Kingdom will circulate in this regard. I would like to
express deep appreciation to the United Kingdom for
its efforts.

Somalia is a textbook case on the credibility of
this Organization and its ability to make a difference
on the ground. We cannot continue to pay lip service to
doing more for Somalia and then do nothing.

We need concrete - I repeat, concrete - steps
forward, and we need to move from goodwill to action
now.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Portugal.

