The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Austria, Belarus, Brazil, Bulgaria, Colombia, Egypt, India,
Norway, Pakistan, Portugal and South Africa, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pfanzelter
(Austria), Mr. Vantsevich (Belarus), Mr. Fonseca
(Brazil), Mr. Dimitrov (Bulgaria), Mr. Valdivieso
(Colombia), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Pal (India),
Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan), Mr.
Monteiro (Portugal) and Mr. Kumalo (South Africa)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council table.

The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, if I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation to the Permanent Observer of
Switzerland to the United Nations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council's prior consultations, if I hear no objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure
to the delegation of the European Commission to the United
Nations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting
in accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Now it is time to take up the theme of the open
debate. It is a great honour for me to be able to preside
over the open debate on the theme "Maintaining peace
and security: humanitarian aspects of the issues before the
Security Council". The subject of the debate is important
and topical.

The Charter of the United Nations confers upon the
Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
acquitting this function in today's world, a broad, more
proactive approach is needed. The reasons are not far to
seek. There are occasions of flagrant violations of
international law giving rise to a conflict. In many
instances, the situation slowly worsens and a humanitarian
crisis takes shape. Peace is difficult to achieve as,
alongside the factors causing the conflict, there are
humanitarian issues which need to be addressed.

In today's world, the rules of war seem to have
changed. We have seen in the recent past how massive
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights have complicated conflict scenarios. Civilians and
non-combatants - and, particularly, women, children and
the vulnerable - are not spared the most atrocious
criminal acts. Attacks on the personnel rendering much
needed humanitarian assistance are becoming
commonplace. These personnel have been denied access
to those who need assistance and their supplies have been
looted. As the human cost of war increases, the chances
of sustaining peace and security recede.

The Council has a responsibility to address these
humanitarian issues relating to situations of conflict and
to take appropriate action. The Council's consideration of
these issues lays the groundwork for such actions in the
area of peacekeeping and peace-building. Today's debate,
I understand, is an attempt to discuss the areas on which
the Council should focus its attention and the actions it
can take. The issue of access for United Nations and
associated and other humanitarian personnel, humanitarian
components in peace agreements and peacekeeping
operations, coordination between the different actors and
the question of resources could be some such areas. I am
confident that there will be a rich exchange of ideas and
that the Council will be able to sharpen its focus on the
areas of action required.

With these few words, I have the pleasure of inviting
the Secretary-General to make a statement.

 


