Mrs. Juul (Norway): Let me first thank the
Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2009/323)
and Mr. Kai Eide for his refreshingly frank and honest
remarks. I would also like to take this opportunity to
commend all the women and men of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
for their tireless efforts, and the Government and
people of Afghanistan for their unyielding commitment
to building a peaceful and stable Afghanistan. Norway
shares this commitment, and we remain fully dedicated
to doing our part financially, militarily and politically.
It was with great interest, therefore, that we read the
Secretary-General's report, in which a mixed picture of
progress, challenges and setbacks is painted.

In terms of progress, we are encouraged by the
positive developments of the past few months: the
expanded role of the Afghan National Army and the
Afghan National Police, the advancement in designated
priority areas, such as agriculture, as well as the
gradual alignment and improved coordination of
international contributions. We are also pleased to note
that the preparations for the upcoming elections
continue and have been carried out without any serious
incident so far.

We further welcome the observations on the
emergence of three interlinked strategic shifts in
Afghanistan: increased emphasis on civilian efforts,
focus on subnational governance and service-delivery,
and alignment of international efforts, that is, the aid
effectiveness agenda. These issues have been high on
the Norwegian agenda for some time, and we should
all join forces in further promoting these positive
developments, which are of great importance in
improving the overall situation in Afghanistan.

At the same time, we note with concern some
alarming setbacks during the same period, in particular
the deterioration of the security situation in some areas
of the country and the increase in civilian casualties
compared to the same months of 2008. In the light of
09-38734
the political progress achieved on the ground and with
a View to the elections in August, it is crucial to ensure
that military activity - now expected to increase over
the summer - does not serve to alienate the Afghan
population from the international community.

Let me turn the Council's attention to a question
of increasing importance - that of a regional approach
to the stabilization of Afghanistan. The situation in
Afghanistan is a challenge to all countries in the region.
It is therefore paramount that all of Afghanistan's
neighbours, as well as other major countries, be
engaged in a constructive political dialogue and
partnership in order to combat organized crime, drug
trafficking and terrorism, and to promote trade,
cooperation and the general integration of Afghanistan
into the region.

Allow me also briefly to comment on the
question of funding for UNAMA. Last year's increase
in the Mission's budget was significant and important,
yet in recent months we have seen the demand for
UNAMA's services grow faster than the increase in
resources. Grown, too, have the expectations to deliver,
both from within Afghanistan and from outside the
country. This points to a deeper question in need of
deliberation - if UNAMA succeeds in its role as an
enabler for political stability and development, then
how far would we, as donors, be willing to stretch in
order to maximize the Mission's impact? I will limit
myself to saying that Norway stands ready to engage
constructively with the Council and the international
community on the matter.

