Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession
to the presidency of the Security Council and to thank
you for having kindly acceded to the request of the
Group of Arab States to convene this debate on an
issue of paramount importance.

I should also like to congratulate Ambassador
Mekdad of Syria, whose presidency of the Council last
month was both effective and eventful.
My delegation is speaking before the Council
today to express its deep concern over the grave
deterioration of the political, security and humanitarian
situation in occupied Palestine, fraught with genuine
and serious threats to the existence and physical
integrity of the Palestinian people and to peace and
stability throughout the region.

Ten years after the signing of the Oslo
agreements, the peace process remains deadlocked,
despite the somewhat measured hopes raised by the
launching of the road map initiative by the Quartet
with a view to reinvigorating it. It is against the
yardstick of the primary objective of a just, lasting
settlement of the Middle East conflict - a key element
of our common goal of maintaining international peace
and security - that my country intends to measure this
latest incredible provocation by the occupying Power
in Palestine. This provocation has taken place - by
mere coincidence? - 10 years to the day after Oslo
and seeks to banish, in complete illegality and with
customary arrogance and contempt for law, President
Yasser Arafat of the Palestinian Authority,
democratically elected by his people with the necessary
legitimacy to negotiate on its behalf with the Israeli
enemy that is occupying its land and to reach a lasting
settlement leading to the implementation of its flouted
national rights.

Far more serious, by the admission of the Israeli
Vice Prime Minister, killing Yasser Arafat is one of the
options now open to the army to remove the President
of the Palestinian Authority, who is seen as an obstacle
to be done away with at all costs. This decision, if
implemented, will only strike the final blow to a peace
process that is already foundering and pull Palestine
and the entire region into a spiral of violence that
nothing and no one will be able to control. It will
further weaken an international order that has already
been subjected to tension and challenges of all sorts.

It seems clear that, since September 2000 and,
even more, since the launching of the road map, the
ongoing policy of the occupying Power has no other
objective than to thwart the very concept of a
Palestinian State and to prevent its establishment. All
of the illegal and criminal actions pursued daily by the
occupying Power - from its encouragement of illegal
settlements and its restriction of the basic freedoms of
the Palestinians and their leaders, all the way to
targeted assassinations of officials and activists of
various Palestinian organizations - are all part of a
strategy of creating ongoing tension in exclusive
service to the goal of all-out war.
Israel is pursuing the illusions of a peace won by
unrestrained warfare that will gain it total victory,
without concern for the fallout of this policy for
international peace and security. It clearly does not
seek a negotiated peace guaranteed by the international
community, which would of necessity entail the return
of lands conquered by force. Israel thereby intends to
benefit from the international situation to modify
realities on the Palestinian ground by borrowing from
the past a technique that has been conclusively rejected
by the international community: the building of
physical walls to shore up the wall of hatred and
mistrust thrown up by the ongoing wave of violence
between Israelis and Palestinians, whom history has
condemned to live side by side.

By threatening to expel the Nobel peace laureate,
it is peace itself that Israel is seeking to banish and the
hope of a negotiated solution to bury. Algeria, for its
part, will not fall into the trap set by Israel for the
international community of imposing itself on the
Palestinian people in substitution for the choice of
several generations of leaders who have been equally
sincere concerning the aspirations of their people and
who would seem most appropriate to negotiate on
behalf of the Palestinian people a just, definitive and
lasting settlement leading to the establishment of a
viable, democratic national Palestinian State, with
Jerusalem as its capital, and living in peace with all its
neighbours.

Algeria has firmly stood by the heroic Palestinian
people and its leadership and vigorously condemns
Israel's decision concerning President Arafat and
welcomes the international community's position,
voiced through the appeals of the Security Council on
12 September and the Secretary-General, as well as by
other Powers, to Israel not to carry out its threat.

Lastly, Algeria believes that the Security Council
must firmly support all such appeals by proceeding to
adopt the draft resolution submitted by Angola on
behalf of the Group of Non-Aligned States so that
legality may prevail.

