Mr. Dauth (Australia): We very much welcome
the focus on the theme of justice and the rule of law.
Such issues are central to the Council's work on peace
and security.

Our long experience in peace operations has
made us acutely aware of the importance of justice and
rule-of-law issues to societies in conflict, or emerging
from it. This was particularly the case in East Timor,
where the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET), as the administering
authority, was tasked with establishing the foundations
for a new State. Central to this was the establishment
of an effective system of justice and the rule of law.
There are a number of lessons that can now be drawn
from this recent and, on the whole, successful
experience.

First, justice and rule-of-law considerations must
be treated as core components of United Nations
missions. Rule-of-law strategies must be implemented
as soon as possible. The United Nations must remain
engaged throughout the continuum of peace operations,
from conflict prevention to peace-building.
Appropriate experts must be deployed quickly.
International actors must work with local actors, and
leave behind strong local institutions and capacity.

Much has been achieved in East Timor. But, as
the mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET) comes to an end, work to
consolidate the rule of law is still required there and
will need to be incorporated into a post-UNMISET
United Nations presence.

Earlier this year, the situation in the Solomon
Islands deteriorated markedly, and the rule of law
virtually collapsed. In July, at the request of the
Solomon Islands Government, and with the unanimous
support of all Pacific Islands Forum members,
Australia led the Regional Assistance Mission to the
Solomon Islands, a regional arrangement under
Chapter VIII of the Charter. The Mission is intended to
re-establish conditions in which justice and the rule of
law can operate. Police from across the region are now
working alongside Solomon Islands police, with the
support of military personnel. The Mission is restoring
hope. The Council could learn much from this
experience.

Significant progress has been made towards
incorporating considerations of justice and the rule of
law into peace operations. The report of the Task Force
of the Executive Committee on Peace and Security on
the rule of law in peace operations provides a valuable
guide to current work and future directions. We also
commend to the Council the outcomes of a conference
on the rule of law in peace operations, which we hosted
last year.

In some cases, international assistance to
domestic legal systems is required to ensure justice. In
this context, Australia calls upon Cambodia, with the
assistance of the United Nations and a number of
States, including Australia, to quickly establish
Extraordinary Chambers to try senior Khmer Rouge
leaders. This will enable justice within Cambodia,
which, as I am sure the Council knows, is long
overdue.

Finally, Australia would welcome a report from
the Secretary-General on justice and rule-of-law issues.
This should pull together past experience, draw on
work already done, set out lessons learned and provide
focused guidelines for future consideration of justice
and rule-of-law issues. It will be a valuable tool to
assist our collective efforts.

