Ms. Loj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The countries of
Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus,
Malta and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade
Association countries members of the European
Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein, align
themselves with this statement.

Let me begin by congratulating you, Mr. Minister,
as others who have spoken before me have done, on
Bulgaria's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of September.

I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi for his informative briefing on the latest
developments in Kosovo since the meeting of the
Council on 30 July. Allow me also at the outset to
welcome the recent appointment of Mr. Francesco
Bastagli as the deputy head of the United Nations
Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) in charge
of civil administration.

The European Union is satisfied that Kosovo
continues to move in the right direction towards the
full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). We
welcome the continuing progress in the preparations
for the municipal elections on 26 October, and we are
encouraged by the latest figures on the number of
political entities from all communities that have been
certified. The creation of a multi-ethnic coalition
following the recent municipal elections in southern
Serbia should serve as inspiration for the parties in
Kosovo.

At the same time, however, we are seriously
concerned by recent events that have increased
political tensions in Kosovo. In particular, the
European Union deeply regrets that the demonstrations
protesting the arrest of former members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army and others led to violent clashes
between demonstrators and UNMIK police and KFOR
and resulted in large numbers of injured. We also
deplore the statement of the Kosovo Government
which imputed a political motivation into efforts to
uphold the rule of law in Kosovo.

The European Union fully supports UNMIK's
efforts to maintain order and uphold the rule of law in
Kosovo. The authority of UNMIK in this respect is
clearly established by the Security Council in
resolution 1244 (1999). The European Union is
confident that recent arrests have taken place in
accordance with the established judicial process and
have been carried out regardless of the ethnic, national
or political affiliation of the suspects.

The European Union calls upon all politicians in
Kosovo to contribute to a society that respects the rule
of law and in which the judiciary performs its functions
without political interference. This is a basic
requirement for progress in Kosovo, as well as for
closer relations with the European Union.

The European Union expresses its strong concern
regarding recent events in the area of Fee, where
UNMIK police and KFOR came under fire from
several attackers while protecting Kosovo Serb
farmers. In particular, the European Union deplores
that these events took place in an area that is of great
importance for the implementation of the return
programme in Kosovo.

The European Union notes the recent progress
achieved in the return process with the assistance of
UNMIK and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and we reaffirm the
importance of continuing to work towards a more
favourable climate for the acceptance of returnees. We
encourage further collaboration between UNMIK and
the Kosovo provisional institutions to establish the
necessary conditions for the acceleration of the return
process. At the same time, it is important that the
returns take place in an orderly fashion to ensure the
sustainability of this process.

I shall conclude by underlining that the European
Union remains fully committed to supporting the
peaceful long-term development of Kosovo. We
encourage all parties to continue to work together in a
responsible manner towards achieving this common
objective.

