Mr. Idohou (Benin) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, my delegation would like to convey our
most earnest congratulations to you on this Security
Council ministerial meeting that has been convened in
order to take a decision on an issue of great importance
for international peace and security.

Since it began dealing with the first report of the
International Independent Investigation Commission
(IIIC), the Security Council has been trying to draw the
necessary consequences. In the light of the conclusions
of the report and its own analysis of the situation, the
Council has spared no effort to forge a consensus on
the steps to be taken in order to follow up on this
report.

The resolution we have just unanimously adopted
bears witness to this. Benin voted in favour of this
resolution in order to show its firm disapproval of a
terrorist attack of extreme seriousness that cost the life
of the former Prime Minister of Lebanon, the late
Rafik Hariri, and of 22 other people on 14 February
2005. By the same token, Benin would like to express
its agreement to extend the mandate of the Commission
that it might continue to help the Lebanese authorities,
as requested, to continue and conclude its
investigations.

This resolution, in our view, has no other goal but
to give the Commission the means to find out all the
details about the terrorist attack that we have
unanimously condemned. It is clear that we have to
identify those who were involved and bring them to
justice so that law may prevail.

The resolution just adopted shows, above all, the
determination of Council members to focus their action
on determining the individual responsibilities of those
who were implicated in this attack. With this in view, it
is of the utmost importance that the inquiry take place
with strict respect for the law. That is why Benin
welcomes the establishment of a Security Council
committee in order to ensure the managing of a list of
those persons who come within the purview of the
protective measures provided for under the resolution,
regarding both listing those persons and de-listing
them. This formula would guarantee the safeguarding
of the rights of the people concerned in this procedure,
while avoiding the stumbling block of putting the
investigative Commission into a situation where it
would appear to be both judge and jury in the
proceedings. It would be appropriate if those
suspected, whose responsibility has not been confirmed
by the inquiry, might fully and promptly regain their
rights. This is a step that would require the full
cooperation, both of the Lebanese authorities and of
the Syrian authorities among themselves, and their
cooperation with the Commission, in order to uncover
the truth.

This approach, which would consist of
determining the responsibility of the individuals
involved, has a certain advantage to it. It remains
within the framework of the law and avoids
politicizing the matter. Neither Lebanon nor Syria
would gain from the politicization of a crime of such
gravity that could involve the international community
in an uncontrollable spiral. Besides, the politicization
of this matter would, in the final analysis, only benefit
those responsible for the attack, because politicization
would result in rendering the search for the truth more
difficult. It would not help us at all in the major goals
pursued by the international community - that is, to
put an end to impunity and to combat terrorism
resolutely in all its forms.

We then exhort all of the parties to remain
faithful to this approach and to work in good faith with
the Commission. We renew here our firm support for
the Commission, and we hope that it will maintain the
high degree of professionalism that has thus far
characterized its work.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our great
sympathy for the families of those who died on 14
February, and we would like to pay tribute to the
memory of the Victims. We are convinced that the
international community will carry out its sacred duty
towards the Victims and their families, namely, to find
and punish those who are guilty of these crimes. This is
the very raison d'etre of the rigour that the Council has
shown, and will continue to show, in this matter.

This strictness must be maintained until the
conclusion of the matter. In that way the international
community can provide a disincentive for any political
assassinations in future. There is no doubt that this is
absolutely necessary in order to preserve human life,
democracy and freedom of opinion as a means of
governance.

