Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and wish you a successful term.

Our delegation also welcomes His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cote d'Ivoire to the
Chamber and congratulates his country on its election
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council.
We are looking forward to working with his delegation
and wish his country every success.

My delegation would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mindaoudou
for her final update on the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI). Ijoin others in congratulating
her for her outstanding and courageous leadership in
fulfilling the mission's mandate.

We welcome the successful termination of UNOCI
after 13 years of dedicated service for the cause of
peace. The success ofUNOCI in bringing stability to the
country is the shared achievement of the Government
and the people of Cote d'Ivoire, the United Nations, the
Security Council and the troop-contributing countries.
The role of regional organizations - especially the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the International Organization ofla
Francophonie i has also been significant in fulfilling
the mandate. Kazakhstan is proud to be part of that
process as a country that sent military observers to
Cote d'Ivoire.

We commend the Government of Cote d'Ivoire for
the remarkable progress we are seeing in the country,
which is a clear demonstration of its desire to fully
own the future course of its progress. UNOCI has
many lessons to teach future peacekeeping operations.
We acknowledge Cote d'Ivoire's positive steps towards
transferring its national institutional framework
and response against transnational organized crime
threats, including terrorism. The gains achieved must
continue to overcome the remaining challenges by
fostering national dialogue and political reconciliation.
Focus should be given to social cohesion, weapons
management, defence, capacity-building, security
and law enforcement, fighting sexual violence and
protecting children.

To reinforce all these measures means having
implementation partners and meeting resource
requirements for supporting the Government of Cote
d'Ivoire in delivering on expectations. We therefore
call for international assistance and necessary support
for the Government and the United Nations country
team. We look forward to a productive and fruitful
cooperation with Cote d'Ivoire as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council.

