First and foremost, Chile would like to thank the Permanent Mission of Estonia for convening this timely debate in the context of the protection of civilians week. We also take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for presenting to us the report on protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366). The protection of civilians has been a duty bestowed upon us that deserves the utmost scrutiny and commitment in the way we approach it. To that end, we recognize its centrality on the agenda of the Security Council, as it is reflected in both the thematic and the country-specific Council discussions and decisions. Nevertheless, as the Secretary-General rightly points out, while the normative framework for the protection of civilians has been expanded, enforcement remains insufficient. Challenges to ensuring the safety and security of civilians continue to become increasingly complex and interrelated. Civilians are vulnerable to intersecting factors for conflicts, such as the negative impacts of climate change, food insecurity and the adverse effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Despite international efforts to overcome these obstacles, the reality in the field keeps directing our attention towards women and girls, who are subject to appalling sexual and gender-based violence, civilian casualties by improvised explosive devices, ground engagements and air strikes, and the thousands of people who experience conflict-induced hunger caused by those who use starvation as a method of warfare. Just as troubling remains the situation of children in several areas, where tens of thousands of boys and girls no longer go to school but instead are forced to take part in hostilities, including on the front lines. It is true that the COVID-19 pandemic and its social and economic consequences are an aggravating factor for those challenges. However, it also presents an opportunity for us to step up to the challenge and, accordingly, move to strengthen the implementation of the international law framework, such as international humanitarian law and all relevant instruments, which shall be respected by all parties and actors in order to ensure effective protection for conflict-affected populations. Similarly, accountability measures should be enforced, while putting victims at the centre of all efforts, as the goal remains not only to protect, but to empower and support them, not as victims but as agents of their own stories.
