Mr. Al-Kadhe (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, on behalf of the
delegation ofIraq, for having convened this emergency
meeting ofthe Security Council. This meeting is being
held under very difficult international circumstances
resulting from the Zionist aggression against the
Palestinian people and its historic leadership.

Once again, the Zionist entity is showing its true
face. It is showing that it is a racist, terrorist and
intrinsically Nazi entity. It is an entity which, because
ofits actions and behaviour, embodies the very concept
of State terrorism. It continues to perpetuate acts that
flout the most basic rules of international law and
human rights, and carries out criminal acts of
aggression against civilians living in the occupied
Palestinian territories, shamelessly using missiles,
tanks and aircraft against the heroic Palestinian people,
who are fighting with their bare hands and whose
hearts are the only shields they have to defend their
honour and the integrity oftheir land.

The policy pursued by the Zionist entity seeks to
demoralize the Palestinian people and destroy the very
symbol of the Palestinian revolution, President Yasser
Arafat. It is a policy that seeks to fulfil its territorial
expansionist ambitions at the expense of the
Palestinian people.

The Security Council is being severely tested
again. Will it discharge its mandate? Will it be able to
maintain international peace and security? Will the
Council be able to carry out its mission as the
representative of the States of the world in seeking to
attain that goal?

Unfortunately, we have lost hope, because we
know that the Council is dominated by the State that
sponsors the Zionist entity - the State that continues
to use its privileges in the Security Council to obstruct
the adoption of resolutions by the Council or, at the
very least, to urge the adoption of a resolutions that are
weak and unjust and hardly act as a deterrent for the
Zionist entity.

That entity continues to flout Security Council
resolutions - and that is why the weakness of the
Council vis-a-vis that entity is the decisive factor that
has enabled it to continue its acts of aggression and to
continue to violate international law and the Charter
and to commit crimes against humanity. Such acts are
war crimes, committed by the Zionist entity against the
Palestinian people.

Will the international community be able to put
an end to the disregard shown by this entity? Will it be
able to prevent it from continuing to commit such ugly,
inhuman crimes? We appeal to the Security Council, to
the international community and to all freedom-loving
people throughout the world to condemn those acts
strongly and to use every measure available in order to
force that entity to act in accordance with international
jus cogens to ensure that it is forced to withdraw
immediately from the occupied Palestinian towns and
territories.

