Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to express my delegation's satisfaction at seeing you,
Sir, presiding over our meeting, and to thank the
Malaysian delegation for taking the initiative, during its
presidency of the Security Council this month, of
choosing the very important issue of the disarmament and
reintegration into society of ex-combatants.
There is no doubt that this initiative indicates the
importance that you attach to this issue, Mr. President,
and the importance of the role of the United Nations in
addressing it with a view to maintaining international
peace and security.

The international community suffers as a result of
the persistence of conflicts, which have led to
destabilization and insecurity in many parts of the world.
The major reason for the continuation of such conflicts is
illicit flows of arms, in particular light weapons, and their
distribution and storage. This is a matter that threatens
national, regional and international security; the lack of
stability has an impact on development in those regions.

Some stable parts of the world have begun to
achieve significant economic and political progress in the
past few years. But in other parts of the world, such
progress remains threatened by conflicts. Halting such
conflicts and their recurrence remains one of the major
concerns of the United Nations.

There is no doubt that States have a sovereign right
to self-defence, which requires procurement of defence
equipment and materiel. However, the interests of
humanity require that minimal of resources be allocated
to military purposes. It is therefore important that
countries work to reduce military expenditure and focus
on economic, social and human development.

We have noticed an increase in illegal weapons
flows in recent years. Halting that increase will require us
to determine the sources of such weapons flows. That is
a very important element in any effort to monitor that
trade. Weapons exporters are responsible, albeit indirectly,
for the exacerbation of conflicts, and particular
importance must be attached to the role of arms
merchants in exporting such weapons to conflict areas. In
this respect, we should consider the role of the sanctions
committees of the Security Council in studying these
issues so that we can deal with the problem effectively.

 

The Security Council should confront this issue as a matter
of urgency, including by examining the role that the United
Nations could play in collecting and disseminating relevant
information. We also welcome the contribution of the
Secretary-General with regard to concentrating on the
problem of the illegal trade in small arms and light
weapons, especially in Africa.

Peacekeeping missions have played a very important
role in the attempt to stop conflicts from being renewed,
and they have a very important role in building post-
conflict peace and security. This is a new and logical task
that has been given to them. The maintenance and
consolidation of peace after the end of a conflict requires
enormous effort. It has therefore become very important for
the international community to support such efforts for the
purpose of strengthening economic, social and security
structures in these regions. Therefore, we support the role
of the United Nations in bringing about and consolidating
peace in post-conflict situations. In this context, we must
coordinate the response to international conflicts with the
wishes of the party concerned, because without the political
will of that party it is impossible to achieve progress in the
peace process. The existence of a real commitment on the
part of the parties to the conflict is one of the preconditions
for the success of the peace process. In this context, we
support the intention of the United Nations to establish
peacekeeping forces in Haiti and in Guinea-Bissau. We
hope that this experiment will be expanded should it prove
successful.

The experience of the United Nations and other
international organizations over the last few years confirms
the content of "An Agenda for Peace", which was issued by
the Secretary-General in 1992. In that document the
Secretary-General observed that the multiplicity of tasks
required genuine cooperation among international agencies
and organizations, and at the regional level. It also requires
the active participation of United Nations Member States.

We now turn to major specific issues of today's
debate: the disarmament of ex-combatants and their
reintegration into society. This involves two separate but
complementary processes: first, the disarmament of ex-
combatants, and secondly, their reintegration into society.
It is important to explain the advantages of disarming ex-
combatants before becoming engaged in their reintegration.
If they are not first disarmed, the conflict will inevitably
resume as before. This problem has been observed in many
hot spots where crucial institutions and structures were not
given the necessary support to resume their natural tasks in
the country of conflict, without which, conflict inevitably
returns.

The media have provided many examples of naked,
barefoot children and young people carrying modern,
sophisticated weapons. In such cases how can we end
conflicts? It is no surprise that in such situations conflicts
have continued for more than 20 years. And there is
nothing on the horizon that suggests that these conflicts
will end any time soon.

The disarmament of combatants is a very important
matter, and despite the fact that today's debate deals with
ex-combatants, we need to be aware that in fact they will
not become ex-combatants unless we insist on their
disarming and on disarmament in general. Otherwise,
conflicts will continue interminably, and ongoing conflict
will become a fait accompli, as has happened in some
countries, which after many years have become known as
conflict zones.

If we are able to disarm combatants and make them
into ex-combatants, we can deal with the second part of
the problem: the reintegration of these people into society.
We believe that the reintegration of ex-combatants is
more difficult than disarmament. It is true that
disarmament is dangerous, in that combatants may refuse
to surrender their weapons. Anyone who undertakes this
disarmament work is endangered by those who do not
wish to surrender their weapons.

The reintegration process involves a number of
factors, the most important of which is the willingness of
the combatants to surrender their weapons, having grown
used to conflict and to the many forms of aggression,
pillaging and violence that accompany fighting.

If achieving disarmament assumes that all difficulties
can be overcome, the reintegration process assumes an
economic situation that facilitates this process, to include
the creation of appropriate jobs and the necessary social
and economic services. Let us be practical and ask
ourselves how many of the developing countries that are
in a state of peace have the capacity to provide for the
economic and social needs of their citizens. What then
can be expected from the economic and social situations
of countries in conflict? It is not news that refugee camps,
full of victims of conflict, have become centres for the
distribution of weapons, or that refugees, voluntarily or
otherwise, are participating in conflicts. Although the
disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants precede
the reintegration process, the latter is more complex,

 

owing to the enormous requirements and the difficulty of
fulfilling them.

Only rarely, has the United Nations, for all its efforts,
succeeded in these tasks of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration although it has succeeded in a number of
cases. We must be aware that this does not lie within the
capacity of the Organization. Despite the Charter's
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Organization is unable to deal with the
massive power of the arms trade to exacerbate existing
conflicts and incite new ones. This is particularly true in the
current climate of globalization, which has its good and evil
aspects, and given the ease of communications it has
provided.
Today's open debate in the Security Council is part of
an international effort to contribute to the study of this
issue. We hope that the views and opinions presented here
will lead to the active resolution of these problems. In
conclusion, I would like to stress my delegation's support
for the presidential statement proposed by the Malaysian
delegation for issuance at the end of this debate.

