Mr. Tesfay (Eritrea): I would like to thank the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in particular
Ambassador Rafael Dario Ramirez Carrefio, for
organizing today's important and timely debate on
the working methods of the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council.
Given the complex and dynamic global environment,
improving the working methods of the subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council is of paramount importance.
Eritrea strongly believes that a transparent and credible
process in the Security Council is not an option but
a necessity. For the sake of brevity, I would like to
highlight the following three points.

First, with respect to ensuring a comprehensive
assessment of the impact of sanctions regimes, once the
causes for sanctions are proved not to exist and their
implementation is negatively affecting regional and
international peace, security and development, as well
as people's lives, the Security Council is duty-bound to
immediately and unconditionally lift sanctions. Legal
and factual issues must be separated from politically
and diplomatically motivated agendas. Oranges and
apples should not be mixed.

It has been six years since the Security Council
imposed unjustified and politically motivated
sanctions against Eritrea. To continue to impose the
unjust sanctions against Eritrea despite the fact that
the Somalia/Eritrea Monitoring Group (SEMG) has
reported that the grounds for imposing sanctions do
not exist is not only a travesty ofjustice, iit constitutes
collective punishment against the people of Eritrea.
However, more important, with the current political
and security realities in the Horn of Africa and the Red
Sea region, maintaining unjustified sanctions against
Eritrea undermines and limits the capacity of a State
Member of the United Nations to implement Security
Council resolutions to combat global extremism and
terrorism or to meaningfully contribute to maintaining
regional and international peace and security.

Secondly, with respect to transparency and
information sharing, sanctions committees, especially
those dealing with country-specific sanctions, need to
regularly interact and share information and allegations
with the country concerned. Countries under sanctions
have every right to receive in a timely manner the
full contents of draft and final reports compiled
by experts and monitoring groups. That will allow
sanctions committees to hear the views of the country
concerned, which is consistent with the legal principles
of"equality of arms" and "the accused is innocent until
proven guilty". Such methods will definitely ensure
transparency. It must be underlined that Eritrea, as a
country concerned, continues to be denied access to the
monthly assessments and the draft and final reports of
the Monitoring Group.

Thirdly, with regard to rigorous examination by
experts and monitoring group reports, which is an
important aspect of the work of sanctions committees,
Eritrea strongly believes that sanctions committees
must ensure that the reports of experts and monitoring
groups meet the highest evidentiary standard, as
stipulated in the report of the Informal Working Group
of the Security Council on General Issues of Sanctions,
which, inter alia, underscores the need for expert
panels to rely on verified information and documents
and ensure that

"their assertions are corroborated by solid
information and that their findings are substantiated
by credible sources" (S/2006/997, annex, para. 23).

Furthermore, the sources of the reports must be
clearly identified and known. Sweeping statements
such as "information gathered from reliable sources"
or "information gathered from former officials" and so
on must be rejected and cannot be the basis upon which
the Security Council takes its decisions. Sanctions
committees must ensure that the contents of the reports
of panels of experts are within the purview of the
mandate and that experts strictly respect and adhere to
the mandate. Whenever experts overstep the mandate,
they should be instructed not to do so by the committee.
In the same vein, when information provided by experts
is found to be false, it must be corrected publicly and as
soon as possible.

Again, that has not been Eritrea's experience. In
addition to overstepping its mandate, the Somalia/
Eritrea Monitoring Group has been making baseless
allegations collected from nameless and faceless
sources. In the context of maintaining regional and
international peace and security, the Group is clearly
solely mandated to look into whether Eritrea supports
Al-Shabaab in Somalia and into how the border
dispute between Eritrea and Djibouti is being handled.
However, overstepping its mandate, the Somalia/ Eritrea
Monitoring Group continues to routinely deal with the
Eritrean-Ethiopian conflict, and does so in a manner
that ignores context and ramifications. Another equally
important aspect is, at least in Eritrea's experience, the
fact that the Monitoring Group has routinely reported
uncorroborated allegations and refused to rectify them
when those allegations were found not to be true.

As the Somalia/Eritrea Monitoring Group has
clearly stated that it has found no evidence of Eritrean
support for Al-Shabaab and as the Djibouti-Eritrea
issue is being handled by the Government of Qatar, with
Qatari forces being deployed at the common border
between Eritrea and Djibouti, there is no imagined
or real threat to international peace and security in
which Eritrea is involved. The Security Council must
therefore immediately and unconditionally lift the
sanctions against Eritrea.

Secondly, given the current fight against global
terrorism and extremism, lifting unjust sanctions will
enhance peace and security in the Horn of Africa and
the Red Sea region. On the other hand, we emphasize
that maintaining sanctions can only be a recipe for
disaster and chaos.

Thirdly, the unjust sanctions imposed against
Eritrea are not linked to the Eritrean-Ethiopian
conflict. However, in a manner that disregards context,
perspective and ramifications, and in violation of the
SEMG mandate and in an attempt to move the goal
post, the Somalia/Eritrea Monitoring Group has started
to deal with the Eritrean-Ethiopian conflict. Once
again, Eritrea underlines that the conflict between
Eritrea and Ethiopia is an issue between occupied and
occupier. Ethiopian officials' constant military threat
against Eritrea must be also taken into consideration.
For example, on 7 July 2015, the Prime Minister of
Ethiopia, speaking to his Parliament, said that,

"Ethiopia will be forced to take appropriate action
against Eritrea."

On 9 August 2014, during an interview with Ethiopian
Tsenat Radio, based in Washington, DC, the Prime
Minister of Ethiopia clearly stated that,

"The no-war/no-peace situation with Eritrea is
over. Ethiopia from now on is ready to take military
action against Eritrea."

On 17 April 2012, speaking to the Ethiopian Parliament,
the late Prime Minister of Ethiopia Meles Zenawi stated
that,

"The Ethiopian Government has now decided
to carry out a more active policy, taking actions
against Eritrea. The actions will involve using
all means at Ethiopia's disposal to change the
Eritrean Government. The other major area where
Ethiopia will further strengthen its activities is in
supporting Eritreans in their campaign to change
their Government."

In conclusion, the use or threat of force against any
country, big or small, is a violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and of international law that should
be condemned by the Security Council. If the Somalia/
Eritrea Monitoring Group and the Security Council
want to be involved on this issue under the current
agenda item, their option is one and only one: to urge
Ethiopia to unconditionally and immediately withdraw
from sovereign Eritrean territories, including the town
of Badme.

