Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing. I also thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, Mr. Timmermans,
for his briefing and his participation in our work.

Two months have passed since the tragedy of
Flight MH-17. The memory of the victims and their
shattered futures does not go away. Today I reiterate the
solidarity of France with the relatives of the passengers
in their ongoing ordeal. We join in their grief and we
offer them our full support. In the face of that disaster,
the international community had requested that
everything be done to shed light on the circumstances
of the tragedy. Through resolution 2166 (2014), the
Security Council has stressed the importance of quickly
conducting the investigation into the circumstances
of that abominable act. It was a first step towards
the elucidation of the tragedy, towards establishing
accountability and the need forjustice.

According to the Chicago Convention on
International Civil Aviation, it is up to Ukraine,
together with the support of all those affected by
the disaster and, in particular, experts from the
International Civil Aviation Organization, to conduct
the work of the international investigation. The
Ukrainian Government has diligently discharged that
responsibility. As early as 24 July, it had entered into
a memorandum of understanding with the Government
of the Netherlands entrusting the Dutch Safety Board
with task of conducting the investigation. Ukraine then
hosted in Kyiv a group of international experts who
offered their assistance.

We commend the Dutch Safety Board for the
quality of their experts' work. Their professionalism
in collecting information and their impartiality are
exemplary. We now eagerly await the publication of the
final report. Confident in the process and the results it
will produce, we fully support the investigation and we
urge all parties to cooperate fully with investigators.

The findings of the preliminary report are serious.
The investigating commission has excluded the
hypothesis of a technical error, saying that the disruption
of the aircraft is the result of contact with "a large
number ofhigh-energy objects". It thus clearly points to
the hypothesis that the destruction of Flight MH-17 was
by a surface-to-air missile, confirming the worst fears
that had already been expressed to the Council. A
surface-to-air missile pointed at a civilian airliner? From
that, we should draw all conclusions about those who
handled that weapon system and those who gave the
order to fire, but also those who allowed such weapons
to be used by criminals.

Resolution 2166 (2014) also required that everything
be done to enable the work of investigators. All the
parties and all the States in the region should guarantee
immediate and unhindered access to the disaster site,
the remains of the victims and material items useful for
the investigation. We are sadly off the mark. Separatists
have not cooperated with the Ukrainian authorities in
the searches. The safe, immediate and full access to
investigators was not granted. That is not only a violation
of the resolution 2166 (2014), but also of what had been
decided between the Contact Group - Ukraine, Russia
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe - and the separatist representatives
themselves. As proof, we cite the security detachments
from the Netherlands, Australia and Malaysia that were
to be deployed to the crash site to secure it but which
were unable to be deployed because of obstacles put
in place by the separatists. That lack of cooperation is
more powerful and evocative than any propagandistic
speech of separatists and their supporters.

This tragedy, as we have said, occurred against a
backdrop of chaos, but that chaos did not appear all
by itself. By the time the plane was shot down, the
Violent fighting in eastern Ukraine had intensified.
The separatists, who had been thoughtlessly armed,
were bringing about terror and desolation. Now, all
those responsible for abuses will be held accountable.
And let there be no mistake. Questioning the quality of
work done by the investigators and the findings of the
preliminary report would be a return to methods that we
hoped were long gone - denying the obvious, twisting
the facts - old tricks that no longer fool anyone. Such
manipulations move us away from the worthy debate
we want to have today.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the ceasefire

applied since Friday, 5 September should be respected.
We remain vigilant. But the silence of weapons is only
the prerequisite for the implementation of the settlement
plan for the Ukrainian crisis. To achieve a long-term
solution, the discussions in the Contact Group should
continue. The resolution of the conflict can only be
achieved by stopping shipments of weapons to the
separatists by Russia, the establishment of a lasting
and verified ceasefire, the control of the border and the
pursuit ofpolitical dialogue. Russia has a responsibility
in that regard that it cannot avoid. It is essential to move
quickly on those various issues.

