Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): 1
would like to welcome the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Angola, Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda and to thank
him for his statement. I would also like to thank
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, the Secretary-General's Adviser
for Special Assignments in Africa, for his briefing. The
upcoming visit that he will make is a sign of the United
Nations commitment to maintaining peace in Africa
and, particularly, to addressing the conflict in that
country, one of the longest lasting conflicts on the
continent.

The Council is exerting its full authority and its
capacity for action to contribute to peace in Angola,
using respect for the Lusaka Peace Accords and its
Protocol as a basis. The refusal of Jonas Savimbi and
his rebel group to comply with those agreements have
obliged us to impose international sanctions and to
ensure that they are properly complied with, in the trust
that the spirit of the agreements will prevail and in the
hope that the rebels will lay down their weapons so that
national reconciliation can be achieved.

Nevertheless, we have noted with concern how a
conflict which has already claimed half a million
victims can still continue to generate even more
victims, desolation and poverty among ordinary people.
In the course of this year, 380,000 more persons have
been added to the number of internally displaced
persons. The broad majority of the population still
cannot reap the benefits of the mineral richness of the
country, and many cannot even cultivate their land
because of the large number of anti-personnel mines
that have been sown throughout the rural areas.
My delegation is deeply concerned about this
situation, and we can extract at least three conclusions
from it. First, Angola must continue to receive a large
amount of humanitarian assistance in order to meet the
immediate needs of the people. Yet, we have heard the
various humanitarian organizations complaining that
the Government of Angola has been transferring the
burden of this responsibility on to the shoulders of the
international community. We want the Government of
Angola to take this comment into account.

The second conclusion is that in the efforts to
achieve peace in Angola greater participation must be
given to the spokespersons of civil society in the
country. They ought to have an opportunity to
articulate the needs of the sectors of the population
who are marginalized from the political process. We
are pleased that the spokespersons of the Catholic
Church have proposed playing a greater role in this
connection and that their proposals have been heeded.
We would also encourage Mr. Gambari to conduct
wide-ranging consultations in the course of his visit to
the country. We also think that the proposal that has
been made by the representative of the United
Kingdom, and supported by France, is most timely.
This proposal is that the Council meet, within the
context of the Arria formula, together with
representatives from the civil society.

The third and last conclusion is that, in the
absence of a political agreement or settlement in
Angola, the Security Council must continue to monitor
compliance with international sanctions against
UNITA, in particular those that are related to the arms
embargo, travel restrictions and monitoring financial
assets of that organization resulting from their illicit
diamond trade.

We would like to appeal to members of the
United Nations to support these measures, particularly
those countries that were identified in the recent report
of the Monitoring Mechanism on Sanctions against
UNITA as not entirely complying with the adoption of
domestic monitoring measures.

I should like to conclude by reiterating to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola my
Government's commitment to contribute from our
position on the Council to ensure that there will be
lasting peace for the people of Angola, based upon the
agreements that were signed and the resolutions
adopted by this Council.

