Mr. Hatoyama (Japan): At the outset, I would
like to express my sincere gratitude to President
Obama for his timely initiative to hold this meeting.

On 6 and 9 August this year, I visited Hiroshima
and Nagasaki and spoke in person with atomic bomb
survivors and their second- and third-generation
descendants. I cannot help feeling choked with emotion
at the fact that just two atomic bombs claimed more
than 200,000 lives, and at seeing people who still
suffer from the after-effects of radiation more than
60 years after the bombings. I would like to encourage
all leaders of the world to visit Hiroshima and
Nagasaki and absorb with their own eyes and ears the
cruelty of nuclear weapons.

As a matter of historical fact, Japan chose not to
possess nuclear weapons even after achieving its post-
war reconstruction. In 1970, Japan signed the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and
ratified it six years later. In 1996, Japan signed the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and
ratified it a year later.

Why has Japan chosen to walk a non-nuclear path
when it has the potential to develop nuclear arms?
Japan is the only country that has suffered from atomic
bombing. However, Japan has chosen this path to
prevent the vicious cycle of a nuclear arms race. Japan
made this choice because, as the only victim of nuclear
bombing, it saw moral responsibility in doing so.

Each time neighbouring countries take further
steps in nuclear development, some suspect that Japan
might want to go nuclear. That is only because they do
not understand our firm determination not to acquire
nuclear weapons and to fulfil our responsibility to act
as the State that has suffered from atomic bombing.

I hereby renew Japan's firm commitment to the
three non-nuclear principles. However, it is not
sufficient for Japan to just renounce the possession of
nuclear weapons. Despite our wish for the elimination
of nuclear weapons, nuclear-weapon-holding States
still possess large nuclear arsenals and the world
remains under the threat of nuclear proliferation.

It is a harsh reality that efforts for nuclear
non-proliferation have come to a critical moment in the
face of challenges such as the nuclear issue of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and Iran and
the risk of terrorists acquiring nuclear material and
technology. Thus, Japan should take the lead in the
pursuit of the elimination of nuclear weapons.

The vision of a world without nuclear weapons
proposed by President Obama this April has
encouraged and inspired people around the world. It is
high time for us to take action.

First, Japan calls upon nuclear weapon States to
reduce their nuclear arsenals. Progress in ensuring
transparency and in disclosing information will enable
confidence-building, thus creating a virtuous cycle for
further nuclear disarmament. The creation of a nuclear-
weapon-free zone, when coordinated between the five
nuclear weapon States - the Permanent Five - and
non-nuclear-weapon States in the region, would also
contribute to nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation and consequently to global and
regional peace and security, as stated in today's
resolution.

Secondly, Japan again strongly encourages the
early entry into force of the CTBT and the immediate
commencement of negotiations on a fissile material
cut-off treaty. I recall that a Japanese fishing boat
named "Daigo Fukuryu Maru" encountered the
hydrogen bomb testing at the Bikini atoll in the South
Pacific on 1 March 1954. Freezing the capability of
nuclear Powers to produce nuclear weapons by a fissile
material cut-off treaty would contribute to both nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation. It would also
constitute an indispensable measure towards making
the NPT regime more universally equitable. We have
no time to waste.

Thirdly, Japan itself will engage in active
diplomacy to lead international efforts in nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation. For example, Japan
will submit a draft resolution on nuclear disarmament
to the General Assembly, support the activities of the
International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation
and Disarmament co-chaired by Madam Kawaguchi of
Japan and Mr. Evans of Australia, and promote efforts
to strengthen the skills, expertise and resources of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

I wish to express my respect for the role played
by Director General ElBaradei of the IAEA. I also wish
to express my trust and confidence in and strong
support for the soon-to-be new Director General,
Ambassador Amano.
Fourthly, Japan will make a resolute response to
nuclear proliferation activities. The nuclear
development of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea poses a great threat to the peace and security of
Japan and the international community and must not be
tolerated. Japan will take necessary measures to
implement Security Council resolution 1874 (2009)
more effectively. Japan is also concerned about the
nuclear issue of Iran. In this regard, the Security
Council plays an increasingly important role, and
Japan calls for the strengthening of the Council.
Furthermore, Japan will contribute to the nuclear
security summit to be held next year.

Fifthly, as stated in the resolution adopted today,
it is necessary to reduce the risk of proliferation and to
adhere to the highest level of standards in each area of
nuclear safeguards, security and safety when using
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.

The period up to the NPT Review Conference in
May next year will be critically important in testing the
ability of the international community to take
pragmatic steps forward toward nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation. All the nations of the world,
with or without nuclear weapons, have the
responsibility to take action towards nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation.

