Mr. Komada (Slovakia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding and the review of the
peacebuilding architecture. I should also like to thank
the briefers - the Permanent Representatives of Sweden
and Kenya to the United Nations, and Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal - for their comprehensive presentations.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.
I will limit myself to a few remarks.

Advancing peace and security, and helping to build
peaceful and just societies around the world lie at the
heart of the work of the United Nations. Sustaining
peace requires continued engagement by and greater
coherence and coordination among the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, consistent with their mandates as set
out in the Charter of the United Nations.

Currently, we are in a critical period for global
peacebuilding, as demonstrated by our ongoing efforts
to reinforce the relevance and impact of United Nations
peacebuilding on a successful war-to-peace transition.
We hope that the current stocktaking and analytical
review of the peacebuilding architecture will result in
the strengthening of its added value to overall United
Nations peace efforts.

The peacebuilding architecture was established
10 years ago to prevent countries from relapsing into
violence, to mobilize resources and political will, and
to build national capacity for long-lasting peace and
development. It was established as an integrated field
that brings together different elements of conflict
resolution, with particular emphasis on holistic
United Nations action and the eschewal of fragmented
approaches.

Today peacebuilding activities have become
increasingly complex, multidisciplinary and
multifaceted. Post-conflict development programmes
are implemented in countries where the root

causes of conflict - underdevelopment, rising
inequality, denial of human rights and weak State
institutions - are intricately linked. More should

be done to better harmonize and adjust the mostly
standard development strategies and activities of
international organizations and bilateral donors to
the complex political, security and social realities in
conflict-affected countries. I would also underline the
need for gender mainstreaming in all United Nations
peacemaking and peacekeeping work. It is vitally
important to better understand and explore ways to
make peace more durable, and to deal with the root
causes and issues that drive conflict.

More than a decade after the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we still face the challenges
of how to more effectively measure, monitor and
evaluate progress in the context of peacebuilding.

Chronic wars and protracted conflicts prevented
the full achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals in many countries around the world. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) - the next generation of
development goals - acknowledges the role of violence
and fragility in cycles of poverty and the important
link between peace and development. The inclusion of
Goal 16 and its 12 related targets in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development reflects the growing
recognition of the importance of peace, safety and good
governance to the traditional development paradigm.
When countries transition out of conflict, Goal 16
should provide a platform for continuity of support to
reforms in all rule-of-law areas, which are critical to
sustaining peace.

Effective peacebuilding requires a thorough
reform of the security sector in societies emerging
from conflict, as the provision of security and the
rule of law are assumed to be core preconditions for
the achievement of sustainable peace. In unanimously
adopting resolution 2151 (2014), the Security Council
reaffirmed that reforming the security sector in post-
conflict environments is critical to consolidating peace
and stability, promoting poverty reduction, the rule of
law and good governance, extending legitimate State
authority and preventing countries from relapsing into
conflict.

The Security Council also recognized the
important role of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund in supporting security-sector
reform. Security-sector reform must remain a key
element in the political processes of States recovering
from conflict. Governments, regional organizations
and the United Nations must continue their assistance
in support of national efforts to develop security
institutions that are accountable, accessible and
responsive to the needs of their population.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that the
relevance of civil-society engagement, including
women's civil-society organizations, in peace and
security matters is emphasized in both the 2015
report of the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446) and the 2015 review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

