Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Mission of Turkey for
organizing this important and timely debate. I would
also like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy
and Malcorra for their presentations today, and for the
considered thought and analysis they have given to the
challenges facing peacekeeping and how to meet those
challenges.

For a decade or more, thoughtful observers have
lamented the strains on United Nations peacekeeping
and proposed solutions, modest or grand. Much of the
relevant machinery has been overhauled; significant
progress has been made. The time since the Brahimi
report (S/2000/809) has not been wasted, and most
important, the changes have helped the United Nations
to save lives.

The core logic of Lakhdar Brahimi and his
colleagues still obtains: United Nations missions are no
substitute for resolute effort by the international
community to seek and safeguard peace. Yet the
Brahimi principles have to be complemented by
concrete actions aimed at renewing the strategic
partnership among core peacekeeping partners: namely,
those who decide - that is, the Council; those who
pay - the financial contributors; those who do - the
troop- and police-contributors; and the Secretariat and
regional organizations. And the wider support of the
membership of the General Assembly is important as
well.

Indeed, much remains to be done. The present
renewed attention to peacekeeping is, in part, a
reflection of how much the circumstances of United
Nations peace operations have changed since 1999. In
this context, an intensive, inclusive consultation
process with Member States and partner organizations
is necessary. Canada welcomes a dialogue aimed at
reaching a common understanding of the critical
aspects of peacekeeping, as outlined in the summary
paper presented today.

As members of the Council know, Canada
recently launched an informal thematic series with the
aim of bringing together all the major actors in
peacekeeping to discuss the main challenges that are at
the heart of the New Horizon project. Our aim is to
complement the other important work now under
way- by Japan, as Chair of the Security Council
Working Group, by the United Kingdom and France
and, of course, by the Secretariat. Over the course of
the fall and winter, Canada will host a series of follow-
up events designed to dig deeper into issues of
strategic significance to the future of United Nations
peacekeeping - specifically, on mandates and
modalities, on the political dimension and on
resources. We believe these three baskets of issues are
at the heart of any effort to update and renew broad-
based support for United Nations actions. Canada very
much supports the non-paper's comprehensive
coverage of this terrain, with a view to enhancing
credibility, capacity and cohesion.

Let me just say a few words about these three
strategic challenges from a Canadian perspective. First,
on mandates and modalities, we all know that the
Security Council is deploying missions in response to a
wider, more complex array of challenges than at any
point in its history. In the most difficult environments,
such as in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Darfur, the effectiveness and credibility of United
Nations operations are limited by a mismatch between
mandates and resources. Alleviating this gap requires a
means of sustaining support among the Council, troop-
and police- contributors, the Secretariat and the host
Government. It also requires improved capacity for
strategic planning and designing mandates and
revisiting the Brahimi panel's recommendation on a
two-phase approach to mandate making, in order to
design implementable mandates, including robust tasks
such as the protection of civilians.

The second challenge lies in the political
dimension. It is often said that peacekeeping cannot
substitute for effective peacemaking. However,
peacekeeping missions have often been called upon to
do exactly that. As we look at the future of United
Nations missions, it is essential that greater attention
be paid to the political dimensions: peacemaking,
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Accomplishing this will mean integrating the New
Horizon initiative with the recently released reports of
the Secretary-General on mediation and on early
recovery, recognizing the critical relationship between
peacebuilding and peacekeeping and enhancing
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. But, above all, a renewed
commitment by the Council to sustain its political
engagement in countries on its agenda would assist in
ensuring that fragile political settlements are not
derailed by local or regional disputes.

The final challenge is resourcing. Ensuring
appropriate human, financial and material resources
and recognizing the growing role of regional
organizations and arrangements in implementing
mandates are vital to the continued success of United
Nations missions. Reforms inspired by the Brahimi
report have helped, but the process has stalled. The
Department of Field Support strategic support plan
offers innovative first steps in logistics, procurement
and human resources that Canada views as necessary
for today's operations.

In conclusion, there are clearly no easy answers.
But with sustained and serious effort by the Secretariat,
the Council, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and the membership as a whole, Canada
believes it is possible to renew and indeed strengthen
the ability of the United Nations to meet contemporary
challenges to peace and security. Canada stands ready
to support this effort.

