First, I would like to congratulate the Russian Federation on its professional handling of this month's presidency of the Security Council in the face of current challenges owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. As the United Nations recently marked the seventy-fifth anniversary of the signing of the Charter, the question of Palestine, whose fate is inherently bound to the history and existence of the Organization, tragically remains unresolved. Today, while their territory remains under continuing occupation and millions of Palestinian refugees remain exiled from their homes, the Palestinian people faces ever-increasing new challenges. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused the loss of Palestinian lives. Compounded by social distress, economic downturn and concerns about recent developments, including Israel's ongoing annexation threats, the situation put a just and durable solution of the question of Palestine into deep peril. Since my last statement to the Council in July (S/2020/736, annex 24), the signing of agreements between Israel and the United Arab Emirates on 15 September and between Israel and Bahrain on 18 October, has brought a change in relations in the Middle East. The State of Palestine subsequently rejected these agreements because, while they ostensibly purported to halt Israeli de jure annexation plans of more Palestinian territory, the Palestinian people had been excluded from the process. The threat of annexation and occupation of their territory remains intact, as do the colonization measures that entrench the occupation and facilitate annexation - all in grave breach of international law. As some States Members of the United Nations and their partners expressed concern about the unilateral character of these agreements, others welcomed the decision by Israel to suspend its planned annexation and called for the permanent halting of annexation plans and measures. The Secretary-General expressed the hope that the agreements could create an opportunity for Israeli and Palestinian leaders to re-engage in meaningful negotiations to realize a two-State solution in line with relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and bilateral agreements. Later, at the general debate of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly in September, we heard numerous statements reaffirming support for the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and freedom, in favour of the two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders and firmly opposing Israeli annexation. The Committee calls for the total halt of any annexation plans by Israel, the occupying Power, and supports any initiatives, including a possible international peace conference, as repeatedly called for by Palestinian President Abbas, under the auspices of an expanded Quartet, which would allow for the re-engagement of the parties and the launch of a credible political horizon. The goal of seeing Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and security along the pre-1967 borders with East Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State remains unchanged; we must redouble our efforts in that direction and prevent that the current health emergency and socioeconomic crisis push this issue to the backburner. Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov, in his 29 September briefing to the Security Council (see S/PV.8762), stated that the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) had not seen any significant progress. Israel's continued military occupation of Palestinian territory is facilitating illegal settlement activity, which is a situation confirmed by the Special Coordinator's follow-up warning statement of 15 October issued in response to Israel's advancing plans to illegally build nearly 5,000 settlement units in locations deep inside the occupied West Bank. Settlement construction is illegal under international law, remains one of the major obstacles to peace and must stop. A spike in expropriations, seizures and demolitions of Palestinian-owned structures was also reported, together with daily violence, including Israeli settler violence, against Palestinian civilians. At the same time, rockets continued to be fired from Gaza into Israel, highlighting a persistent risk of military escalation, which must be prevented at all costs. The arrest and imprisonment of Palestinian civilians, including children, by Israel, as well as the use of administrative detention, also continue and the abuse and neglect of Palestinian prisoners persist. We call on Israel to halt such illegal actions. The Committee remains concerned by the $200-million financial shortfall faced by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) at a time when the needs of the 5.6 million Palestine refugees supported by the Agency are increasing due to the global pandemic. We urge donors to provide UNRWA with sufficient and predictable funding for its vital core activities and emergency appeals. The Committee notes with concern the rising COVID-19 infection rates in the occupied Palestinian territory, as well as in Israel, and urges increased support by the donor community to address the increased needs and vulnerabilities of the population in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Gaza. The Committee is heartened by the recent steps taken towards Palestinian unity and welcomes plans to hold legislative and presidential elections in the occupied Palestinian territory in the near future. The 2020 report of the Committee, contained in document A/75/35 and enclosed in a letter of transmittal dated 1 September 2020, provides a list of recommendations to advance efforts aimed at achieving a just solution to the question of Palestine, including actions by the Committee, other intergovernmental bodies, including the Human Rights Council, Member States, regional organizations and United Nations entities, enhanced advocacy and outreach activities with the international community and civil society, and specific support action in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Committee welcomes the Secretary-General's clear position on the question of Palestine, based on international law, countless United Nations resolutions and the pursuit of a just solution, which echoes our own long- held stance on the matter. Let me conclude by reaffirming the need for our collective show of solidarity with the Palestinian people and their resilience and our commitment to continuing to exert our best efforts towards the achievement of a just, comprehensive and durable solution to their cause. In that regard, the Committee invites all Member States to attend this year's commemoration of the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People on 1 December and for all to use that special event to recommit to, and revitalize our collective efforts towards, resolving the Palestinian- Israeli conflict, which remains the key to lasting peace, stability and prosperity in the region.
