Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Mr. President, for conventing today's emergency
meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman
for his briefing. I listened carefully to the statements
by the representatives of Israel and Palestine. China is
closely following the recent developments in the Israeli-
Palestinian situation.

In spite of repeated calls by the international
community, Israel has continued with its large-scale
aerial bombardment against Gaza and has launched a
ground invasion into Gaza, resulting in heavy civilian
casualties, including women and children. China is
deeply concerned and grief-stricken at this development.
China condemns all abuse of force, whatever the excuse,
and any action that causes heavy casualties among
innocent civilians. Instead of solving problems, force
leads only to more bloodshed, destruction and hatred.

We are disappointed that the humanitarian pause
did not lead to a sustained ceasefire. We urge the
parties concerned to immediately cease hostilities,
withdraw their ground troops from Gaza, completely
lift the blockade against Gaza and give access to
United Nations and other international humanitarian
aid agencies so as to alleviate the misery of the local
population. China supports efforts by the Security
Council to adopt the necessary actions, take a firm
stand on the Gaza situation, promote an alleviation of
tension, prevent more civilian casualties and maintain
peace and stability in the Middle East.

China appreciates and supports the diplomatic
mediation efforts by the international community,
including by Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon, Egypt
and other countries of the region and the League of
Arab States, to de-escalate the current situation. The
imperative at this stage is for the Israeli and Palestinian
parties to respond positively to the international
community's ceasefire initiative and good offices,
immediately achieve a ceasefire and avoid any military
ground operations, rocket-firing or other actions that
may lead to further escalation and tension.

China is in close contact with the parties concerned
to push for an Israeli and Palestinian ceasefire. A
Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister just met separately
in China with envoys and representatives of Israel,
Palestine, Egypt and other Arab countries and the Arab
League and is deeply engaged with them. As we speak,
the Chinese special envoy on the Middle East is on a
shuttle mission of good offices to Israel and Palestine,
pushing for peace and dialogue. We will also send a
further tranche in humanitarian aid to Palestine to
ease the humanitarian difficulties in Gaza. China is
ready to maintain communication with the concerned
parties, including Arab countries, and will spare no
effort in easing the Israeli and Palestinian situation and
maintaining peace and stability in the region.

The question of Palestine remains at the core of the
Middle East issue. The ongoing stalemate in the Middle
East peace process is not conducive to peace and stability
in the Middle East region. The re-emergence of conflict
in Gaza underscores the importance and urgency of
a solution to the Palestinian issue given the current
situation in the region. The international community
must step up its efforts to bring about constructive
initiatives by both sides in order to restore mutual trust,
to promptly resume dialogue and to achieve substantial
progress. As the dominant force, Israel must take
proactive steps and establish the necessary conditions
for the relaunching of the peace talks.

China firmly supports the just cause of the
Palestinian people to restore their legitimate national
rights and the establishment of a fully sovereign and
independent State on the basis of the 1967 borders
with East Jersusalem as its capital. We also support
Palestine's admission to the United Nations and other
international organizations.

