Mr. Jele (South Africa): I should like to join those
who have congratulated you, Madam, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We have no doubt that your experience and wisdom will
enable you to steer its meetings successfully.

By the same token, allow me to extend a word of
gratitude and appreciation to Ambassador Weston of the
United Kingdom for the efficient manner in which he
presided over the Council's deliberations during the past
month.

We welcome the opportunity to participate in this
orientation debate and hope that this practice will become
a more frequent occurrence.

May I also take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for the current report submitted to the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1008 (1995) of
7 August 1995, in which the Council took a decision to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) until 8 February 1996.

My delegation also appreciates the tireless efforts of
the Secretary-General and those of the three observer
States - Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United
States of America - in persuading the two Angolan parties
to fulfil their obligations under the terms of the Lusaka
Protocol. The commitment by the Government of Angola
and UNITA on 12 January 1996 to a new timetable for the
implementation of previous agreements is commendable.
The time has thus come for both parties to translate those
agreements into tangible action.

My delegation has taken note of the observation in
the current report that a climate of mutual trust and
confidence between the Government of Angola and
UNITA is still eluding both parties. It is well known that
the uncertainty experienced by people as a result of the
pain and suffering caused by war has a tendency to
dampen the spirit and shade even the rays of hope that
appear on the horizon. But the answer lies in the political
will and the determination of the warring parties
themselves to find common ground.

My delegation considers it vital that President dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi should be encouraged to meet as
soon as possible. The confidence-building mechanism
should revolve and evolve around the process of dialogue
between these two leaders.

In southern Africa, we who have lived under the
pain of apartheid and war - scourges that seemed
unrelenting, unyielding and unending - have witnessed
the dawn of a new day. The foundations of peace and
stability have been laid for the region. The onus is on the
Angolan actors not to continue drawing the curtain of
mistrust on the promise of a better life. It behoves the
Angolan parties, therefore, to create a climate conducive
to finding a durable solution.

My delegation concurs with the Secretary-General's
View that the international community should continue to
respond to all constructive initiatives taken by both parties
to make the peace process irreversible. The pace,
however, needs to be accelerated vigorously in order to
sustain the patience and goodwill of the international
community. It would indeed be tragic if UNAVEM's
mandate were to cease because of a lack of progress.

In this connection, my Government believes that the
Security Council should send a clear and unambiguous
message to UNITA that failure to honour the agreements
reached is totally unacceptable. UNITA must be urged to
comply, and be seen to comply, fully with the agreement
for the quartering of its troops and for the release of all
political prisoners. We thank you, Madam President, for
doing so this afternoon.

We welcome the release of political prisoners by the
Government of Angola and hope that UNITA will take
similar steps, and other steps, to push the peace process
forward.

 

My Government wishes to reiterate its willingness to
continue our assistance in a meaningful way in order to
facilitate and expedite the peace process in Angola. My
delegation is therefore wholly supportive of the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the mandate of UNAVEM
Ill be renewed for a further six months, until 8 August
1996.

