Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to
thank Under Secretary-General Lowcock for his
comprehensive briefing. We commend his efforts and
fully support him.

Conflict in Syria has brought enormous suffering
to the civilian population. Today, we also have to
underline the very difficult winter conditions, in which
millions of people are in need of basic assistance. We
are deeply troubled by the recent negative impact of
armed conflict on civilians in many parts of Syria,
especially in the north-west and north-east of the
country. Any military operations, including those
aimed at combatting terrorists, should be fully in line
with international humanitarian and human rights law
so as to prevent harm to thousands of civilians. The
protection of civilians is not a choice; it is a legal
obligation of all sides to the conflict. Those who deny
such protection should be held accountable.

In Idlib governorate and surrounding areas,
where the fate of some 3 million people continues
to depend on the restraint exercised by the parties,
recent shelling and fighting in areas in and around the
demilitarized zone continue to result in civilian deaths
and injuries, the destruction of civilian infrastructure
and the displacement of the civilian population. We
are also concerned by the risk of military escalation
and, in consequence, another great humanitarian
catastrophe. Civilians across Idlib and surrounding
areas have continued to face a range of protection
threats and massive humanitarian needs have persisted.
In this particular context, we consider the agreement
between Russia and Turkey on the Idlib de-escalation
zone to be a crucial move towards avoiding a
humanitarian catastrophe. At the same time we have to
stress - unfortunately, yet again - that all parties to
the conflict should ensure the full implementation of
the agreement.

We reiterate our call on all parties to the conflict to
implement the ceasefire so as to ensure unhindered and
safe humanitarian access for all humanitarian actors
to the whole territory of Syria. Despite the changes
in territorial control within Syria, the authorization
of humanitarian deliveries continues to be vital,
particularly in northern Syria. First, access to priority
areas - such as the Rukban area, as well as areas that
have recently changed control - ought to be granted,
including for cross-border deliveries of humanitarian
assistance. The first convoy to Rukban last November
was a positive step in the right direction. We should
underline nevertheless that its meaning was rather
symbolic when we take all the needs into consideration.
Therefore, we look forward to the speedy approval of a
facilitation letter by the Syrian authorities in order to
bring in the needed second convoy.

While underlining the obligation for the protection
of civilians and civilian infrastructure by all the parties
to the conflict, we insist on practical measures to
alleviate civilian suffering.

Let me conclude by underlining that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A political
agreement remains the only way towards peace. This
requires a genuine political transition, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). In that context, let me express full
support for the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen. Tangible progress
in overcoming the stalemate in the political process is
of the utmost importance.

