Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like, at the outset, to congratulate the Republic
of C6te d'Ivoire on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to wish it every
success. We also thank the People's Republic of China
for the wise manner in which it presided over the
Council last month.

My delegation would like to express its deepest
condolences to the United States delegation in New York,
the United States Administration and the American
people on the passing away of former President George
Herbert Walker Bush.

We also thank Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan,
Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/ Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, for his valuable briefing. We commend his
personal commitment to carry out his work with care
and determination under difficult circumstances, as
well as his tireless efforts to fulfil his mandate pursuant
to resolution 2379 (2017) and the terms of reference
according to the highest international standards.

We welcome the first report (see S/2018/1031) ofthe
Special Adviser on collecting, preserving and storing
evidence of crimes committed by terrorist group Da'esh,
in order to promote accountability and justice. The
international community is keen to provide assistance
to the Republic of Iraq in the post-Da'esh phase and
following the victories it achieved against Da'esh, as
evidenced by the unified international efforts to adopt
an international resolution to condemn and document
evidence of the crimes perpetrated by Da'esh in Iraq.
In that regard, we commend the efforts of the United
Kingdom and other co-sponsors, in cooperation with
the Government of Iraq, in sponsoring the resolution.
Those efforts bore fruit, as evidenced in the adoption
of resolution 2379 (2017), which includes a request to
collect evidence of all acts committed by the Da'esh
terrorist organization in Iraq that amount to crimes
against humanity, genocide or war crimes.

Paragraph 2 of the resolution called for establishing
an international Investigative Team headed by a
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General to carry out
the functions of collecting, preserving and storing
evidence of the crimes of Da'esh and submitting same
to national Iraqi courts. That is in line with the content
of the resolution, which reaffirms full respect for the
for the sovereignty and legal and judicial jurisdiction
of Iraq. My country hopes that the Investigative Team
will achieve the desired results. We underscore that the
Government of Iraq has taken the necessary actions
and measures as swiftly as possible to facilitate the
establishment of the International Investigative Team.

We call on the international community and the
States Members of the United Nations to join efforts to
confront and contain the phenomenon of international
terrorism, which threatens international peace
and security, pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations on the need for international cooperation to
combat threats to international peace and security.
The working mechanism of the Investigative Team,
pursuant to the resolution and the terms of reference,
is based on full respect for Iraq's judicial jurisdiction,
and the resolution has set out a number of approaches to
achieve its objectives.

First, the Team shall collect, preserve and store
evidence of crimes committed by Da'esh in Iraq in
order to submit them to national Iraqi courts. It shall
ensure the broadest possible use of that evidence and
enable investigations by the competent Iraqi authorities
on crimes perpetrated by Da'esh. That evidence will
eventually be used in fair and independent criminal
proceedings conducted by the competent Iraqi courts.
The competent Iraqi authorities should be the primary
intended recipients of that evidence, as specified in the
terms of reference, and any other use of that evidence
shall be determined in agreement with the Government
of Iraq, on a case-by-case basis.

In that regard, when it comes to the death penalty,
my Government believes that it is premature to talk
about that matter, especially as the Security Council
decided to review the mandate of the Special Adviser
and the Team after a period of two years. We reaffirm
that Iraq will exercise its sovereign right, pursuant to
article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. We reiterate what we said before the
Council on 13 November (see S/PV.8396) with regard to
judicial proceedings for terrorist crimes. They will be
carried out in accordance with the law and we will take
into consideration the right of the accused to defend and
appeal at all stages of the proceedings.

Secondly, resolution 2379 (2017) also underlines
that Member States on whose territory Da'esh has
committed acts that may amount to war crimes,
genocide and crimes against humanity may ask the
Investigative Team to collect evidence of such acts, but
only with the approval of the Security Council. The
Secretary-General may also establish separate terms of
reference with regard to the work of the Team in that
State.

Thirdly, the resolution reaffirms that the
Investigative Team will ensure that Iraqi experts benefit
from its expertise and will make every possible effort
to share knowledge with and assist the Government of
Iraq.

Fourthly, the Government of Iraq reaffirms the
impartiality and independence of the Investigative
Team pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017) and the terms
of reference that constitute the framework within
which the Team will operate, pursuant to the relevant
provisions of international law and the best practices of
the United Nations in that regard.

Fifthly, in order to ensure that the Government
of Iraq will address the outcomes and results of the
resolution in an optimal manner, we reaffirm the need
for Member States and regional and international
organizations to provide appropriate legal assistance
and capacity-building in order to strengthen the courts
and judicial system of Iraq, pursuant to resolution 2379
(2017).

Sixthly, Iraq calls on Member States and regional
and international organizations to provide their
full support to the Investigative Team - including
financial support, services and equipment - in order
to enable the Team to carry out its work. In that regard,
we commend the contributions of the United Kingdom,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the State of Qatar,
as well as the contribution announced today by the
United States, to endow the Team trust fund. We call
on Member States to support the Team so that it can
carry out its mandate and achieve the political objective
for which it was established.

In conclusion, we hope that the Investigative
Team will work within the approaches and the terms
of reference contained in the resolution, while fully

respecting the sovereignty and judicial system of Iraq.
We call once again on Member States to swiftly meet
the financial requirements cited by the Head of the Team
in his report to the Fifth Committee so that the Team
can fulfil its mandate within the period established by
the resolution. We wish the Head of the Team and its
members every success.

The meeting rose at 5.05 pm.
