I thank Ms. Matar and Mr. Rajasingham for their briefings. First of all, I would like to commend the efforts of the Special Envoy, who is working ina particularly difficult context. France has taken note of the announcement that an agreement was reached for an agenda for the next two meetings of the Constitutional Committee. This agreement was long overdue, and we hope that it will be fully respected. Nevertheless, more than a year after the establishment of the Constitutional Committee, it is high time it finally moved forward on constitutional reform. Unfortunately, we note that the regime refuses to participate in the political process in good faith. Clearly, it is seeking to challenge the mandate of the Constitutional Committee, which it itself had endorsed. We therefore call on the United Nations to keep the Security Council informed of any new obstacles and identify those responsible. The lack of progress on the political front is appalling in the face of the continuing deterioration of the humanitarian and security situation. France is concerned by the ongoing hostilities in the north-west of the country, the increasing instability in the south and the entrenchment of Da'esh in the badiya. The civilian population continues to pay the price for this. There is an urgent need to respond to the appeal of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy to implement a lasting cessation of hostilities in accordance with resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2254 (2015). We call on all parties, in particular the Syrian regime, to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law. The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, must remain the top priority. The humanitarian situation continues to worsen. The number of cases of coronavirus disease has more than doubled in a month, and we all know that this figure is much lower than the real number of cases. Food insecurity is worsening day by day. More than 2 million people do not have adequate shelter and are preparing to face another harsh winter in inhumane conditions. The increase in humanitarian needs makes full access to humanitarian assistance more essential than ever. Shortcomings in the delivery of medical aid in the north-east are particularly alarming. In this context, priority must be given to relaunching a credible political process. We call on the Special Envoy to move forward on all elements of resolution 2254 (2015), in parallel to the work of the Constitutional Committee. I refer to the release of detainees, the establishment of a safe and neutral environment and the preparation of elections in accordance with the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015) - and under United Nations supervision - in order to give a voice to all Syrians, including those in the diaspora. We welcome the intention of the Special Envoy to review the implementation of this resolution. France is ready to contribute to that process. We repeat the following every month: unless there is a credible political solution, France and its partners will not deviate from their position on sanctions and reconstruction. This is a pragmatic position: there can be no stabilization in Syria without a political solution to the conflict. Organizing a conference on the return of refugees cannot change the reality: the conditions for the return of refugees and displaced persons have not been met, which is why France and its European partners have refused to participate. It is time for all members of the Security Council to understand that no one can emerge victorious from the Syrian crisis through military means. In the face of this impasse, there is an urgent need to resume dialogue and for all parties to show a spirit of compromise. I call in particular on Russia to hear this message and get the Syrian regime, which owes its survival to Russia, moving on it.
