Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Mr. President, we
thank you for conducting this meeting today. Let me
welcome Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Darfur, whom some of us prefer
to remember fondly as President of the General
Assembly. I also welcome Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and thank him for his briefing. I also welcome my
boss, Her Excellency Mrs. Lila Ratsifandrihamanana,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, and thank her for her statement.

My delegation supports the efforts of the United
Nations Special Envoy, Mr. Jan Eliasson, and his
African Union colleague, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, in
continuing to intensify consultations, engagements and
mediation with the Government of Sudan and the non-
signatory movements. For us, the political process is
also a key pillar of the peace process in the Sudan.
Therefore, its success is just as important to us as
everything else that is being done there.

For this reason, we welcome the reported
progress in terms of the unification efforts of the
movements during the course of November and
December, but we remain concerned that such
coalitions are rather fragile. In fact, having listened
closely to Mr. Eliasson, one gets the impression that
the political process is going very, very slowly, to say
the least. I wonder if, at the end of our meeting,
Mr. Eliasson could perhaps suggest ways in which the
Council could assist him and Mr. Salim in moving this
process forward.

We note with concern that the earlier
fragmentation of various rebel factions has persisted,
that not much commitment has been shown by some of
them and that some are still putting preconditions on
their participation. In this regard, my delegation calls
upon the leaders of these rebel movements to join the
political process by moving swiftly on their common
positions. Clearly, the Security Council should be able
to take firm action against those who wilfully delay
their participation in these negotiations, choosing
instead to engage in violent action against the innocent
people of Darfur, who have already suffered more than
enough.

We call upon the international community to also
do everything it can to ensure that everybody joins the
peace process without conditions, because the peace
talks are a critical element in the solution of the Darfur
conflict.

We appreciate the progress that has been made so
far with regard to the implementation of resolution
1769 (2007), especially the re-hatting of the African
Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) to the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), which has been referred to earlier. We
urge the United Nations, the African Union and the
Government of the Sudan to further accelerate this
process and ensure that UNAMID is fully deployed.
We commend the progress achieved in the finalization
of the status-of-forces agreement. Clearly, the success
of UNAMID depends on the cooperation of all the
parties involved. In this regard, we want to stress the
need for ongoing dialogue among the United Nations,
the African Union and the Government of Sudan.

My delegation remains concerned that the process
of generating aviation and ground transportation units
has not been successful so far. As has been repeatedly
pointed out, these capabilities are indispensable not
only for the timely deployment of UNAMID, but also
for the implementation of its mandate. We believe that
a robust and effective UNAMID will contribute to
long-term stability in Darfur.

Another major issue of concern is the threat
against the civilian population along the border with
Chad, along with recent attempts to destabilize the
Government of Chad by force. All necessary steps
should be taken to ensure the security of the civilian
population, the displaced people and women and
children in Darfur. Conditions should be created to
enable humanitarian assistance to reach the sections of
the population in need.

The situation in Darfur has occupied the attention
of the international community for a long time, and we
appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and others in
making the issue a priority.

My delegation remains concerned that the
deterioration in the security situation on the ground and

the renewed tensions in the relationship between the
Sudan and Chad are complicating the search for a
political settlement in Darfur. We continue to stress
that a solution in Darfur lies in a political settlement.
Nonetheless, there is a window of opportunity for
peace through a political dialogue and negotiations
and, to support that, through the deployment of a
peacekeeping force that can help make a difference.

We would like to reiterate the poignant point that
peace in the Sudan is indivisible. In that regard, my
delegation is pleased that there is a close coordination
between the United Nations Mission in Sudan,
UNAMID and the work of the Special Envoys.

Finally, allow me to bid farewell to Ambassador
Mladineo, who I have always called my sister in the
Council. Now the rest of my term in the Council will
be sisterless, and I think that will be very boring.

