I thank you. Mr. President, for having convened this important debate on a comprehensive review of the situation in the Persian Gulf. I also thank the Secretary- General and other briefers for their valuable insights. The Persian Gulf is a historically unique region characterized by its own distinct civilization and cultural identity. It has for centuries deeply integrated into the world through people-to-people exchanges, commerce and religious movements. Today the Gulf remains at the core of the geopolitical dynamics of the Middle East and has enormous economic and energy potential to bring about peace, security and prosperity for the whole region and beyond. In years past, countries in the Gulf have strived for socioeconomic development and improved regional cooperation, thereby contributing to addressing the root causes of regional security problems and global challenges, including poverty, inequality and social injustice. It is also encouraging that those countries are assisting one another in the fight against the coronavirus disease pandemic. Yet certain tensions in the Persian Gulf that have lasted for decades and were recently escalated by a series of incidents raise grave concerns about the threat of a spiral of military confrontation in the region and have multifaceted implications for international peace and security. The Middle East will be faced with developments it does not wish to see if instability in the Gulf continues unabated, with the resultant unpredictable impacts on the ongoing complex and intertwined regional conflicts and humanitarian crises, such as in Syria, Yemen, Libya, Palestine and Lebanon. That dangerous scenario needs to be excluded. In that regard, I wish to put special emphasis on the following. First, all parties, regional and extraregional, have crucial roles and responsibilities in maintaining peace and stability in the Persian Gulf and the Middle East as a whole. The current situation together with specificities and peculiarities requires efforts to uphold international law, the Charter of the United Nations, relevant Security Council resolutions and international commitments. Efforts must also be made exercise self-restraint, refrain from actions and statements that could provoke tensions, and promote dialogue and negotiations to settle differences. We reiterate the call on all parties to conflict to heed the Secretary-General's appeal for an immediate global ceasefire and facilitate humanitarian activities. Secondly, although the idea of a collective security arrangement in the Persian Gulf has been floated for years, the changing regional political landscape makes the time ripe for further exploration and to turn the idea into concrete action. Such a mechanism should be customized to regional circumstances and anchored in the principles of the United Nations Charter and international law, particularly those of sovereign equality, territorial integrity, non-use of force and peaceful settlement of disputes. We also believe that dialogue on common regional security interests can pave the way to and play a significant role in reducing tensions and building trust. Among those common interests are addressing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, safeguarding maritime security and freedom of navigation, combating terrorism and illicit arms trafficking, and promoting disarmament and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and the realization of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. Thirdly, the role of regional organizations is indispensable for a comprehensive security approach. This is vividly drawn from our experience in which the Association of Southeast Asian Nations plays a central role in our regional security architecture and has helped to transform South-East Asia from a region of hostilities into a cohesive, integrated and people-centred community. We could encourage and strengthen the collaboration between regional and subregional organizations in the Gulf and the Middle East and the United Nations and the Security Council in conflict prevention, mediation and preventive diplomacy in line with Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. Viet Nam has friendly and cooperative relationships with all countries in the Persian Gulf region and the Middle East. We remain strongly committed to making meaningful contributions in the Security Council and other relevant forums to foster an environment conducive to dialogue and cooperation for the benefit of peace, stability and prosperity in this region.
