Mr. Deng (South Sudan): I am very pleased and
honoured to address the Security Council again under
your leadership, Sir, on an issue of great interest and
concern to us as a country, and to me personally - that
is, the crisis situation in Abyei. As I have spoken on
numerous occasions on the situation in Abyei and the
role of the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA), I will try to be brief in my statement.

We sincerely welcome the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/77) and the renewal of UNISFA's
mandate by the adoption earlier of resolution 2205
(2015). Both the report of the Secretary-General and
the resolution address issues that are critical to the
security and the general welfare of the people of Abyei.

As I have repeatedly said, the deployment of
UNISFA is perhaps the most significant positive
development for the people of the area in decades.
Abyei used to be exposed to unhindered attacks from
the North that had led to the virtual depopulation of the
area as people fled to the North and the South for safety.
We are very grateful to the United Nations and the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for this major
historical reversal of the situation. We also appreciate
the role played by successive Force Commanders of
UNISFA and their brave men and women in service. We
take this opportunity to welcome the appointment of the
civilian Head of Mission of UNISFA, whom we expect
to work in close partnership with the Force Commander
and other stakeholders in the Abyei situation.

While we acknowledge with great appreciation the
positive role being played by UNISFA and the sustained
commitment of the Security Council, the Secretary-
General and the Secretariat to enhance the protection
and welfare of the people of the area, I would like to
take this opportunity to underscore a number of issues.

First, it cannot be overstated that although
the Government of South Sudan and a number of
international actors are doing what they can to provide
assistance to the area, the people of Abyei are suffering
from a vacuum of State responsibility for their
protection and service delivery. Secondly, despite the
heroic efforts of UNISFA, as the Secretary-General's
reports so credibly reflect, they continue to experience
high levels of insecurity, with frequent killings, cattle
looting and overall physical harassment. Thirdly, all this
is done with absolute impunity. With all the murders
that have been committed in the area over decades, not
a single culprit has been arrested, tried and punished.
This has naturally deterred the displaced Ngok Dinka
from returning to the area, despite repeated calls for
them to do so. The international community is called
upon to redouble its efforts to more effectively fill this
protection and assistance vacuum.

A positive step in that direction must be identifying
the sources of insecurity and threats to lives without
ambiguity or moral equivalence. Although the last
report of the Secretary-General has clearly and
unequivocally exposed the attacks on the Ngok Dinka,
the resolution unfortunately falls back on the old
practice of evenhandedness that clouds the facts and the
correlative responsibility. For instance, the language,

"strongly condemning the attacks on United
Nations personnel, calling for investigations of
these attacks in a swift and thorough manner and to
hold those responsible to account" (resolution 2205 (2015), fourteenth preambularparagraph)

makes it sound as though these attacks are from both
communities, which is not the case. Likewise,

"expressing its determination to prevent the
recurrence of violence against or displacements
of civilians and to avert intercommunal conflicts"
(ibid., fifteenth preambularparagraph)

gives the impression that both communities are
responsible, when it is well documented that the attacks
in the area are one-sided. Again, "expressing concern
over 'the decision of the Ngok Dinka to conduct
a unilateral referendum'", while only "taking note
that the Government of the Sudan is proceeding with
the preparations for the organization of its national
elections in Abyei" (ibid., eighteenth preambalar paragraph) can hardly be called evenhandedness.
Finally, "the denial of security clearances, and the tense
security situation in the vicinity of Kadugli" (ibid., ninth preambalar paragraph) is presented as a shared
responsibility, when it is occurring within the Sudan. It
is only by credibly identifying the source of problems
that appropriate remedies can be found. We hope that
future draft resolutions will take these concerns into
consideration.

Although good will implementation of all
agreements between the Sudan and South Sudan for
resolving the Abyei situation is pivotal, the security of
the area will ultimately rest on restoring the peaceful
and cooperative relations that used to exist between
the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya. While that state of
affairs has been severely damaged by armed conflicts,
compounded by the linkage of the two communities
to Khartoum and Juba, with good will from the key
stakeholders, the situation can be much improved and
eventually normalized in the interest of all concerned.
Steps need to be taken urgently to facilitate dialogue,
reconciliation and cooperative coexistence between the
Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya. In this connection, we
welcome the call for measures aimed at bringing closure
to the assassination of the Ngok Dinka Paramount
Chief, including by releasing the report of the African
Union investigation committee into the assassination,
and facilitating traditional methods for resolving such
conflicts.

While the traditional rights of seasonal access to
water and grazing for the Misseriya must be reaffirmed
and guaranteed, the reported plans and actions of the
Government of the Sudan to resettle the Misseriya
nomads in the Ngok Dinka territory, as defined by
the Permanent Court of Arbitration in July 2009,
must be stopped, as they only fuel tensions between
the two communities. In the interim, until the current
tensions ease, UNISFA should be commended for the
measures it has taken to improve the security situation
by establishing a disengagement line between the
Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya during the dry season
and determining safe routes for Misseriya's passage to
water and grazing.

A conspicuous source of insecurity in Abyei is the
presence of the oil police in Diffra, whose Dinka name
is Ker. Indeed, one of the incongruities in the area is
the tendency to call many Ngok Dinka areas by the
names given to them by the Misseriya nomads instead
of their original Dinka names. Efforts have been made
to correct this tendency without much success.

On the oil police specifically, we welcome the
Security Council's reiteration of

44'

its demands that immediately and without
preconditions the Government of the Sudan
redeploy the oil police in Diffra from the Abyei
Area" (ibid., paragraph 10).

Instead, UNISFA should be mandated to control and
protect the wells and the installations in the Area.

There is an urgent need to enhance the security of
the area north of Abyei town, encourage the displaced
inhabitants to return to their original home areas,
provide them with essential services and stabilize the
situation, pending the resolution of the final status
of Abyei. In this connection, we welcome with much
appreciation the statement that the Council

"recognizes that absence of the development
projects and the inability to deliver basic
government services has had an adverse effect
on Abyei populations and calls upon donors to
support reconstruction and capacity-building"
(ibid., paragraph 20).

Towards that objective, the Government of the Sudan
should be urged to make available to the area the agreed
percentage of the revenues from the oil produced in
the Abyei Area and to agree on a mechanism for their
control and disbursement.

The issue of the administrative vacuum in Abyei
also needs to be urgently addressed. Abyei needs and
deserves arrangements that will ensure autonomous
self-administration for the Ngok Dinka, in much the
same way the Misseriya administer themselves in their
own area. This can then be complemented by special
arrangements for addressing issues of mutual concern,
such as is now the case with the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee.

To conclude, allow me to restate a point that I
introduced earlier. Given the obvious lack of State
protection and assistance for the Ngok Dinka of Abyei,
the international community is urgently called upon
to step in and fill the vacuum. Much has already been
done and is being done, especially through UNISFA,
but a great deal more needs to be done. Abandoning the
area can no longer be an option.

