Mr. Mutaboba: It is a privilege for me to
introduce to the Council the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2012/280), dated 30 April 2012. The following are
the main highlights of the situation on the ground and
2
at the international level since the report was compiled
following the 12 April 2012 coup d'etat.

At the national level, the release of Interim
President Raimundo Pereira and Prime Minister Carlos
Gomes Ji'mior on 27 April met a key precondition of
the ruling African Party for the Independence of
Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC) for participation in
any talks. Notwithstanding, while the Secretary of
State for Former Combatants, Brigadier General Fode
Cassama, was also released on 28 April, it is important
to note that several Government officials are still
seeking refuge in diplomatic compounds in Bissau or
are still in hiding. It is therefore critical to work
towards improving current security conditions to
ensure the safe return of those officials and facilitate
the restoration of constitutional order in the country.

While the PAIGC is facing internal divisions,
with 35 members suspended for questioning the
credibility of the party's leader, Carlos Gomes Junior,
the party continues to call for the full restoration of
constitutional order with the reinstatement of the
constitutionally elected civilian authorities. The
National Anti-Coup Front, led by the former security
sector reform (SSR) adviser to late President Malam
Bacai Sanha and leader of the Solidarity and Labour
Party, Iancuba Djola N'Djai, has condemned the coup
and called for, first, the immediate restoration of
constitutional order and the release of all detainees;
second, the end of the persecution of Government
leaders and looting of public property; third, the
reinstatement of the PAIGC Government elected in the
2008 elections; fourth, the deployment of a United
Nations-mandated stabilization force to provide
security to State institutions and to facilitate the
implementation of the SSR programme; fifthly, the
fight against impunity and drug trafficking; sixth, the
imposition of individual sanctions on the coup leaders
and their prosecution; and seventh, the conclusion of
the electoral process.

As negotiations towards finding a solution to the
crisis continue, the needs of the population of Guinea-
Bissau have been set aside. As a result of the political
crisis, the payment of civil servants' salaries has been
delayed in the absence of a Government, and the
cashew trading season, which is crucial to the economy
and livelihood of the population, has been disrupted.
Food security assessments conducted by the World
Food Programme to measure the impact of the current
situation on the household food security in the regions
12-33105
of Oio, Quinara, Gabu, Bafata and Cacheu have
indicated that cashew nuts are being traded at a lower
price - 150 to 200 CFA francs per kilogram - than
the agreed price, which is 250 CFA francs per
kilogram. In addition, barter trade has increased in the
absence of cash flow. This is seriously affecting the
revenue of the population relying on this main export
product and their ability to earn a living or to survive.

In the face of the quickly evolving crisis, the
United Nations on the ground has continued to
mobilize efforts to ensure a swift and peaceful return to
constitutional order. To this end, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) has met with the military junta on a
number of occasions to underscore the need to return
the country to constitutional rule, release detained
officials and complete the electoral process.

Following the Security Council's issuance of its
presidential statement of 21 April (S/PRST/2012/15),
my office met with the leadership of the military junta
to hand over a copy of the presidential statement and to
enquire about what steps the junta planned to take to
comply with the statement. The junta indicated that it
was engaging in negotiations with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) aimed
at arriving at a solution to the crisis. During the
meeting, it agreed to grant access to the United Nations
to visit the detainees, and that visit took place on
26 April 2012.

I also consulted with the PAIGC, opposition
parties and civil society organizations to ascertain their
various positions regarding the coup and to encourage
their participation in the ECOWAS-led mediation
process. Overall, the coup is unpopular in the country,
especially within the population and in the former
freedom fighters' association. There is mounting
anxiety, particularly around the fact that the longer a
solution to the crisis is delayed, the more severe the
social and economic consequences. In addition, human
rights violations, including restriction on freedom of
expression and on peaceful assembly, intimidation and
arbitrary arrest, continue unabated.

The UNIOGBIS Human Rights Section has met
on a regular basis to analyse the impact of the coup
d'etat on the human rights situation in the country. The
Section monitors the situation in detention centres and
has called on the military authorities to respect the
detainees' human rights. The United Nations
12-33105
Emergency Preparedness and Response Working Group
has also conducted an assessment of the humanitarian
situation in the aftermath of the 12 April coup and
reviewed the United Nations inter-agency contingency
plan. The assessment concluded that the situation is not
critical for the moment.

I also held a series of regular discussions with
international partners based in Bissau to echo the
Council's call for a common and coordinated voice and
action in addressing the ongoing political crisis. In
order to ensure the effective sharing of information, as
well as mutual support among international partners
and the harmonization of efforts, international partners
in Bissau agreed to the creation of a crisis contact
group, including ECOWAS, the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP),
the United Nations and possibly the European Union
(EU) as a major development partner, under the
chairmanship of UNIOGBIS. The first formal meeting
of the group will be convened on my return to Bissau.

At the regional level, ECOWAS has continued to
lead the mediation process aimed at facilitating the
peaceful restoration of constitutional order. In this
regard, the Gambia, on behalf of the ECOWAS
regional contact and follow-up group, convened a
meeting of Guinea-Bissau stakeholders in Banjul on
29 April. The meeting was attended by representatives
of Guinea-Bissau, including the military junta, the
PAIGC, the forum of opposition political parties, the
five candidates contesting the results of the first round
of the presidential elections, as well as the inter-faith
facilitation group that, prior to the coup, had attempted
to mediate a solution for the completion of the
electoral process.

During the meeting, the regional contact and
follow-up group proposed the following solutions:
first, taking immediate measures to restore
constitutional order; second, putting in place a
12-month transitional period for the revision of the
Constitution and the electoral law, the implementation
of the national security sector reform programme, and
other reforms to prepare the ground for new elections
aimed at choosing a president during the transition;
third, reinstalling Mr. Raimundo Pereira as the Interim
President; fourth, appointing a consensual Prime
Minister vested with full powers to lead a broad-based
Government during the transition; fifth, granting the
interior and defence portfolios to the military junta;
sixth, extending the National Assembly's mandate until
3
the end of the transition; and seventh, deploying an
ECOWAS force to provide security for the departure of
the Angolan mission in order to guarantee security
during the transitional period and to assist in the
implementation of SSR within the scope of the
ECOWAS/CPLP road map in support of national SSR
strategies.

Although the ECOWAS summit held in Abidjan
on 26 April started on a positive footing, leading to the
release of the Interim President and the Prime Minister,
the talks in Banjul on 29 April stalled when parties
disagreed on key issues, such as who should be the
Interim President. In addition, the proposals put
forward by the regional contact group included
measures that could be challenged as not meeting the
ECOWAS zero tolerance principle and the Security
Council's call for the restoration of constitutional
order. This is particularly true in the case of its
decision that the military junta should take the defence
and interior portfolios in the transitional Government.

There is also a lack of clarity on what the
completion of the election process means in practical
terms. The armed forces spokesperson has argued that
the military junta was fully compliant with ECOWAS
requirements and that the only point of difference was
the question of the interim presidency. The PAIGC, on
the other hand, insisted that a solution had to be based
on a sole premise, namely, respect for constitutional
and democratic legality. For the PAIGC, which did not
participate in the negotiations on the ground, restoring
constitutional normalcy means the unconditional
release of all detainees, the return of power to the
legitimate civilian authorities - that is, the Interim
President, the Prime Minister and the Government -
and the conclusion of the 18 March 2012 electoral
process.

On 3 May, I attended an extraordinary summit of
ECOWAS Heads of State and Government on Guinea-
Bissau, in Dakar. In their final communique, ECOWAS
leaders reaffirmed their zero tolerance principle for
coups in the subregion and confirmed their previous
decision to deploy a contingent of the ECOWAS
Standby Force to Guinea-Bissau, though no timeline
was given. The communique also established a
12-month transitional period in the country, during
which the following measures would be taken with the
assistance of ECOWAS: first, a review of Guinea-
Bissau's legal texts, including the country's
Constitution and electoral code; and secondly, reforms
in the defence and security sectors and other reforms
aimed at preparing the ground for the holding of fresh
elections to choose a President by the end of the
transition.

They also recommended that, first, the National
Assembly renew its leadership through a vote,
following which the elected Speaker of the National
Assembly should assume the responsibility of Interim
President and the elected Deputy Speaker become the
Speaker of the National Assembly; secondly, a
consensual Prime Minister with full powers be
designated to lead a broad-based Government that
should lead the transition to its conclusion; thirdly, the
Interim President and the transitional Prime Minister
not be eligible to contest the envisaged presidential
election; and the tenure of the membership of the
National Assembly be extended through appropriate
mechanisms to cover the transitional period. In
addition, ECOWAS leaders directed the ECOWAS
Commission to seek the assistance of the African
Union, the United Nations and the international
community in implementing these measures. They also
decided to maintain the sanctions imposed on the
military junta until such time that all the protagonists
accept the modalities for a return to constitutional
order.

Meanwhile, the EU has imposed targeted
sanctions on six members of the military junta,
including travel bans and the freezing of assets. For its
part, the CPLP issued a resolution on 5 May
demanding, inter alia, the reinstatement of the Interim
President and the Prime Minister, and the conclusion of
the electoral process that was disrupted by the 12 April
coup d'etat. It also called on the Security Council to
impose targeted sanctions on the military and civilians
involved in the coup, and reiterated its support for the
establishment of a United Nations-mandated
stabilization force in Guinea-Bissau comprising troops
from ECOWAS, the CPLP and the African Union.

The main parties to the mediation process led by
ECOWAS are the military junta and political parties,
including the PAIGC, which formed the
constitutionally elected Government prior to the
12 April coup. The PAIGC argues that all parties
should not be on the same footing in the negotiations
and that account needs to be taken of the results of the
2008 legislative elections.
12-33105
In a document entitled "Memorandum on the
Management of the Politico-Military Crisis in Guinea-
Bissau advocated by ECOWAS", which was issued on
2 May, the Permanent Commission of the PAIGC
Political Bureau expressed some reservations about the
ECOWAS decisions. In particular, the PAIGC stressed
the importance of maintaining the policy of zero
tolerance regarding the 12 April coup d'etat, and
expressed its determination not to participate in a
transitional organ that would explicitly or implicitly
legitimate the coup or give credence to the coup
leaders. The PAIGC also pointed out the ECOWAS
decisions that were viewed as unconstitutional,
including the appointment of members of the military
junta as Ministers of Interior and Defence, whereas
Guinea-Bissau's Constitution states that the armed
forces and its active members cannot undertake any
political activity.

In another memorandum issued on 5 May, the
Political Bureau reiterated its earlier messages and
rejected the ECOWAS proposal to extend the mandate
of the National Assembly beyond November 2012. The
Political Bureau stressed that it would instruct its
parliamentary group not to take part in any process that
would not respect the approved rules for the
functioning of Parliament.

Allow me to conclude by making the following
key points.

First, I would like to reaffirm the United Nations
strong condemnation of the unconstitutional seizure of
power by the armed forces in Guinea-Bissau. I also
underscore the importance of United Nations support
for the ECOWAS-led mediation process, which should
aim at ensuring the restoration of constitutional rule in
the country in compliance with Guinea-Bissau's
Constitution.

Secondly, in the light of the divisions in Guinea-
Bissau, including within and between the political and
military groupings in the country, any sustainable
solution to the current political crisis must be one that
is inclusive of all national stakeholders. In that
connection, I will continue to work with national actors
to foster inclusive dialogue among segments of
Guinea-Bissau's society, aimed at arriving at a
consensual solution to the current crisis.

Thirdly, the continued delay in the return to
normalcy in Guinea-Bissau is negatively impacting on
the innocent citizens of the country who want to see a
12-33105

speedy resolution of the crisis. In that regard, the
Council may wish to consider the imposition of
targeted measures against those who continue to
impede the return to constitutional order in the country.

Finally, the international community cannot
afford to be divided in its engagement in Guinea-
Bissau. In that regard, it is essential that all

international partners - in particular the African
Union, the CPLP, ECOWAS, the European Union and
the United Nations - agree on a joint international

response to facilitate the peaceful restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau. I would like to
assure the Council that I will continue to engage with
international stakeholders with a view to achieving that
objective.

