Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): First of all, the
Maldives would like to offer its sincere condolences to
the people and Government of Turkey for the recent
tragedy. We are also deeply saddened by the passing of
the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia and would like to
extend our deepest condolences.

The Maldives congratulates Nigeria on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council and commends
the work completed to date. We further thank Under-
Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing today.

The Maldives has recently undergone a transition
from autocracy to democracy, and we understand full
well the growing pains that come with such a
transformation. Yet we sincerely hope that the situation
in Syria will find a peaceful solution and that the
dialogue process to take place in Cairo will see fruit in
the form of greater democratic reforms and will create
venues for the aspirations of the Syrian people to have
their voice heard in Government.

The Maldives applauded resolution 1973 (2011)
on Libya, and now supports that country's current
transition to a functioning democracy. Much work
remains to be done by the National Transitional
Council to prepare for elections that will be free, fair
and meaningful in order to realize the aspirations of the
Libyan people. Only with the support and assistance of
the international community will a stable Libya pull
through.

The Maldives believes that the single most
important issue concerning peace in the Middle East is
the recognition of a Palestine State. We do not believe
that there can be a meaningful dialogue without this
acceptance of statehood. For 40 years, the ongoing
peace process in the Middle East has been continually
undermined by the very fact that it rests on an unequal
power relationship. While this dynamic will not change
until real peace is established, we as the United
Nations have an obligation to level the playing field.
We have an obligation to ensure that all elected
Governments have representation that is equal to the
mandate given by their people.

Furthermore, it is clear that Palestine has a
Government that is capable of administering its
country and an Administration that is ready to take on
the full burden of governance. The only way forward,
therefore, is through the international recognition of
Palestine as a State with a view to Palestinians
negotiating their own interests and concentrating on
developing their own socio-economic infrastructures
while being at peace with Israel.

After 64 long years of inaction, the time to move
forward is now. Let me conclude with an appeal from
the people of the Maldives to support three generations
of Palestinians who have lived their lives under the
yoke of occupation. The Maldives strongly calls on all
States, especially the members of the Security Council,
to prevail against a history of failure and stand up for
the dignity of these men and women by supporting a
free and independent Palestinian State.

