Mr. Cheng Jingye (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish first of all to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2004/431) and Under-Secretary-General
Egeland for his briefing.

Since the publication five years ago of the first
report of the Secretary-General on this topic
(S/1999/957), the international community has been
devoting great attention to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The Security Council and the General
Assembly alike have adopted numerous resolutions on
the protection of civilians in general and of women and
children in particular, and on the prevention of armed
conflict. United Nations peacekeeping operations too
have marked the protection of civilians as an important
task. In times of armed conflict, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
United Nations Children's Fund and other relevant
international organizations have promptly provided
emergency assistance to refugees, thus playing a
positive role in easing the humanitarian situation in
conflict areas.

Admittedly, owing to continued conflict and
violence in some regions - for example, Africa, the
Middle East and Iraq - the task of protecting civilians
remains arduous and still requires much work. We
believe that, to protect civilians from the suffering
brought about by war and turmoil and to mitigate as
much as possible the difficult humanitarian situations
in which those civilians find themselves, the
international community should adopt a comprehensive
strategy that addresses both root causes and symptoms.

First, it must be made clear that the countries
concerned and the parties to conflict bear the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians. On the one hand,
they should abide strictly by international humanitarian
law, complying fully with their obligation to protect
civilians. In particular, they should adopt effective
measures to protect vulnerable groups, such as women
and children, to alleviate their suffering. Those who
have committed serious crimes against civilians must
be brought to justice, and their punishment must be
commensurate with the seriousness of their crimes. On
the other hand, we need to ensure that international
humanitarian organizations are facilitated in their
efforts to provide assistance.

Secondly, the most fundamental and lasting way to
protect civilians is to put an end to conflict and to achieve
peace. Therefore, as it provides timely humanitarian
assistance to civilians in conflict areas, the international
community - particularly the United Nations, including
the Security Council - must actively promote ways in
which the parties concerned can reach political solutions
to the conflict and must provide appropriate assistance
to that end, including through peacekeeping and post-
war reconstruction. Only thus can we fundamentally
resolve the question of protecting civilians.

Finally, I should like to stress that the protection of
personnel of international humanitarian organizations and
the protection of international personnel participating in
post-war reconstruction are also very important. It is a
cause for concern that violent terrorist acts against
those personnel have been increasing rather than
decreasing in recent years. Such acts should meet with
condemnation on the part of the international
community in one voice. Those responsible must be
brought to justice. We urge all sides to effectively
implement Security Council resolution 1502 (2003), on
strengthening the protection of United Nations
personnel, and we call upon all countries to positively
consider joining the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel.

