Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa wishes
to reiterate its unequivocal and strong support for
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO), which was established
by the Council under resolution 690 (1991). That was
the beginning of the issue. We recall that MINURSO
was created primarily to facilitate the holding of a
referendum in Western Sahara to enable its people to
realize their right to self-determination.

We also wish to emphasize our firm support for the
political process facilitated by the Secretary-General's
good offices through his Personal Envoy for Western
Sahara, Mr. Horst Kohler. We express our appreciation
for the work he is undertaking, as well as for the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Western Sahara and Head of MINURSO, Mr. Colin
Stewart. The role of the Security Council in supporting
the Personal Envoy and the Special Representative in
the discharge of their respective mandates is critical in
seeking a solution to the situation in Western Sahara.

Although resolution 2468 (2019) contains numerous
paragraphs with which South Africa can agree, there
remain several elements of concern to our delegation.
These include the following.

First, the current text as it stands is not balanced
and does not provide a true reflection of the efforts
undertaken by the two parties, Morocco and the
Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, which are both
States members of the African Union. The mandate
as approved tends to favour one party over the other,
which is not conducive to a neutral political process.

Secondly, the use of terms such as "realistic"
and "realism", as well as additional references to
"compromise", are of concern to us. It is unclear as
to what is meant by these terms as the principle of
self-determination for the people of Western Sahara
is well established by numerous General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions, as I said earlier. We
should not in any way dilute that principle through
unclear and ambiguous terms and language. The
Council must reaffirm its commitment to the right to
self-determination for the people of Western Sahara in
an unqualified manner.

Thirdly, the resolution should not try to unduly
influence the direction of the political process or to
pre-empt any final status of the negotiations.

Fourthly, South Africa regrets that the Council
continues to resist a human rights monitoring mandate
for MINURSO, despite the fact that many around
this table eagerly propose such mechanisms in other
mandates, without exception. We have not seen the
same vigour or determination in terms of MINURSO,
which creates the impression that the human rights of
the people of Western Sahara are not held in the same
regard as those of other peoples elsewhere in the world.
That lack of consistency undermines the Council's
credibility. Lastly, we want to note that the text must
differentiate between the parties to the conflict,
which are Morocco and the Frente Popular para la
Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro, and
the neighbouring States of Algeria and Mauritania.

We want to reiterate that the Council's working
methods on this matter, whereby it delegates
responsibility to the Group of Friends of Western
Sahara, remain a serious source of concern for South
Africa. We have consistently raised this issue as
problematic, particularly given the unrepresentative
nature of the Group, which does not include a single
African member of the Council, despite the fact that
this is an African issue. This is yet another example
of an African issue being decided by non-Africans. It
is unjust.

South Africa would like to reiterate its principled
position on the situation in the Western Sahara, which
remains the last colony on the African continent,
listed by the United Nations as a non-self-governing
territory. Our own national experience has taught us
the value of the international solidarity that brought
down the repressive system of apartheid. Similarly, it is
international solidarity that will ultimately realize the
foremost aspiration of the people of Western Sahara,
which is to eventually be independent and free. That
is why the Southern African Development Community
recently hosted a solidarity conference with the
Sahrawi people. As long as the Sahrawi people do
not enjoy their basic right to self-determination, they
will continue to be denied the opportunity to develop,
prosper and enjoy a brighter future. People who have
to live with uncertainty, whether under colonialism
or in refugee camps, are severely disadvantaged. The
Security Council must take responsibility for ensuring,
through a neutral, balanced approach, that it can
assist the parties in progressing towards a mutually
acceptable settlement of the situation.
In considering the draft before us, South Africa
seriously considered not supporting resolution 2468
(2019), which is why we abstained in the voting. As we
have stated, the Council's resolutions on MINURSO
continue to address the issue in an opaque and
non-inclusive manner. Council members are not given
enough time or opportunity to meaningfully negotiate
on the texts. They are a fait accompli by the penholders
and their supporters. That prevents Council members
from effectively exercising the mandate entrusted
to us by the General Assembly to contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
significant, though, that the draft before us does renew
MINURSO's mandate for the next six months, and we
endorse that and the political process that the Personal
Envoy of the Secretary-General has embarked on.

Finally, we wish the people of Morocco and
Western Sahara a very fruitful, constructive and,
hopefully, happy ending to their political negotiations
through the third, fourth, fifth and sixth rounds of
talks in Geneva. The Council's role is to support and
assist them in reaching such a settlement. As South
Africans, we hope that there will be a settlement one
day in Western Sahara. Morocco is a very substantial
African Member State. We need it to play its role in the
political and economic integration of Africa so that the
people of Western Sahara can live in freedom like the
rest of us.

