Mr. Ney (Germany): Germany fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered this morning by the
representative of Slovenia on behalf of the European
Union.

I would like to add my voice to those who have
expressed their appreciation to the presidency for
including the important item of children and armed
conflict on the agenda of the Security Council. Our
particular thanks go to the Secretary-General for his
most recent insightful reports on this issue, to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict for her dedicated work in
taking this agenda forward; and to France for its
ongoing commitment in dealing with this issue as
Chair of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflicts.

The German Government attaches great
importance to the promotion and protection of the
rights of children, in particular to the situation of
children affected by armed conflict. We welcome the
progress made on this issue. At the same time, we are
mindful of the fact that much more remains to be done.

An estimated 300,000 child soldiers continue to
exist worldwide, and tens of thousands of children are
still killed, maimed, raped or abducted from their
homes as a result of unlawful recruiting practices every
year. Our work is far from over.

The Security Council has come a long way in
dealing with this issue since it was first put on the
Council's agenda in 1998. The adoption of resolution
1612 (2005) is rightfully regarded as a milestone in
creating an effective international monitoring and
reporting mechanism for children and armed conflict.

The first signs of progress are evident. Some
parties to conflicts listed in the annexes of United
Nations reports have shown a greater consideration of
this subject matter, and some have adopted action plans
commensurate with the United Nations
recommendation to end the use of child soldiers and
illegal recruiting practices. Others have committed
themselves to a more regular dialogue with the United
Nations to create preconditions for their de-listing from
the United Nations list of perpetrators.

Under the Security Council's monitoring and
reporting mechanism, ample information and evidence
of grave violations has been collected in six major
categories of violations against children, while
focusing on the illegal recruiting and use of children as
child soldiers. We fully agree with that focus.
However, there are three points I would like to
highlight in particular.

First, to adequately address all aspects related to
violations against children in armed conflict, we must
not shy away from including new perspectives in the
scope of our dealing with these issues. Sexual violence
is one such issue that deserves our undivided attention.
Perpetrators should be included in the annexes to the
reports of the Secretary-General.

Secondly, we must also speak a clear language
with conflict parties that keep appearing on the lists of
perpetrators or with parties that have chosen to ignore
persistent calls to cease their illegal practices with
regard to children in armed conflict. In cases where
national systems fail to provide adequate protection for
children in armed conflict, the Security Council should
act and refer such violations to the International
Criminal Court for further investigation and possible
prosecution.

Thirdly, another important area for enhanced
attention by the Security Council is the mainstreaming
of the issue of children and armed conflict in United
Nations peacekeeping and political missions, for
instance through child protection advisers and
enhanced cooperation with relevant United Nations
actors such as UNICEF, the United Nations
Development Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. The report of
the Secretary-General, for instance, clearly shows that
there is an interrelation between the issues of refugees,
internally displaced persons and armed conflict, and
the likelihood of children becoming involved as
soldiers in volatile situations in the aftermath of armed
conflict. Here too, the United Nations faces challenges
that are yet to be mastered.

Germany fully supports the analysis and
recommendations outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2007/757). We remain firmly
committed to joining hands with all those striving to
end the use of child soldiers and the plight of all
children affected by armed conflict. In the context of
conflict prevention and post-conflict rehabilitation, the
German Government already supports measures
countering the recruitment of child soldiers, their
reintegration into civilian life, for example in the
Sudan and Nepal, and measures addressing all aspects
related to violations against children and women in
armed conflicts. We look forward to further
consideration of these issues within the Security
Council and with like-minded partners beyond.

