Mr. Chen Xu (China) (interpretation from Chinese): First, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and the statement he just made. We appreciate
the efforts made by the Netherlands to promote the
peace process between Ethiopia and Eritrea.

Since the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities
was reached between the two countries, under the
leadership of the Organization of African Unity last
June, the situation along the borders has remained
calm. The deployment of the United Nations Mission
in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) is proceeding
smoothly. The two countries have already started
proximity talks. The parties involved are doing their
best to carry out mediation efforts. We express our
appreciation for these positive signs.

At present the two sides are cooperating with the
peace efforts being made by the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). We hope that
the international community can take this opportunity
to step up its work, and on the basis of the progress
already achieved, try its best to help the two countries
achieve a comprehensive and lasting peace. In this
regard, we support the efforts made by the OAU,
Mr. Bouteflika, the President of Algeria, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as the
other parties involved, to continue their mediation
efforts to assist both sides in carrying out the next
round of proximity talks and in trying to reach
agreement as soon as possible on such core issues as
demarcation and compensation so as to create the
conditions necessary for final resolution. We also hope
that the international community will respond
positively to the consolidated inter-agency appeal to
alleviate the humanitarian situation in both countries.

We appreciate the cooperation rendered by the
two countries to UNMEE. We hope that UNMEE can
further step up the pace of its deployment. We welcome
Mr. Legwaila to the post of the Special Representative
for Ethiopia and Eritrea. We hope that under his
leadership, UNMEE will be able to carry out its work
based on the mandate set forth in resolution 1320
(2000) and contribute to the resolution of the conflict
between the two countries.

