Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Haysom,
for his presentation. I also thank the Ambassador
of Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin, for his statement, and I
associate myself in advance with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Like many before me, I would like to express
France's strongest condemnation of this morning's
attack on the Parliament in Kabul by the Taliban. France
stands by the Afghan authorities and the Afghan people
in their fight against terrorism, and we will continue to
support democracy and the rule of law in that country.
We also offer our full support to Spain in ensuring
that the Council can react as quickly as possible to this
unacceptable new terrorist attack.

As underscored by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2015/422), the political progress being made
in Afghanistan is noteworthy, and we welcome the
recent appointments in the Government. With the
presidential elections already a year ago, the National
Unity Government must be able to work at its full
capacity, and we welcome the efforts made towards that
end. We hope that the reform agenda will be upheld, in
particular with regard to electoral reforms which will
make it possible to maintain the democratic momentum
that began during the holding of the presidential
elections in 2014. We also recall the importance of the
senior officials' meeting scheduled for 5 September in
Kabul, which should enable the adoption of a revised
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.

But many challenges remain. On the security
front, the spring offensive led to an unacceptably sharp
increase in the number of civilians killed. We also
deplore the attacks carried out against the institutions
of the Afghan State, including that on Parliament this
morning and also those against judicial bodies or their
representatives. Such attacks are a reminder of the need
to maintain our decisive support for the rule of law in
Afghanistan.

On the human-rights front, the lynching on
19 March ofa young woman, Farkhunda, is shocking. It
is a reminder of the extent to which women continue to
be the victims of Violence in Afghanistan. We hope that
Afghan civil society and the authorities will continue
to mobilize to ensure that the law on the elimination
of violence against women is implemented fully and
effectively.

In addition, we are counting on the continued
mobilization of the Afghan authorities against drug
trafficking. This is a subject of great concern for France
because it is a major destabilizing factor for Afghanistan
and its neighbours. We encourage the authorities
to continue their work to curb drug production and
trafficking.

In Afghanistan we are still facing a difficult
environment, and, in that context, the efforts of the
international community must continue for the long-
term so as to support the country and enable it to
achieve stability, prosperity and a democratic future.
The commitments made during the London Conference
on Afghanistan in December 2014 must be upheld,
because Afghanistan, more than every before, needs the
support of its partners. The agreement signed with the
International Monetary Fund is an important element
of support for the long term. France will continue to
stand with Afghanistan within the framework of the
Franco-Afghan Friendship and Cooperation Treaty. We
are contributing to the European Union commitment to
Afghanistan in the amount of€1.4 billion for the period
from 2014 to 2020.

Finally, regional support is an important requirement
for guaranteeing the conditions conducive to a lasting
peace in Afghanistan. We welcome the efforts made
along those lines by Afghanistan's regional partners.
Let me now say a word about the role of the United
Nations. While Afghanistan is at a turning point in
its history, the United Nations will continue to play a
decisive role during this Transformation Decade. The
support provided by the United Nations and its agencies
to the Government remains key, particularly in order
to enable the population to benefit from Government
programmes and international assistance. But that role
must evolve and be adapted to the situation. In that
regard, we welcome the establishment of a dialogue
mechanism between the United Nations, Afghanistan
and donors on the desirable evolution of the support
provided to the country by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. France will be involved in that
dialogue and will pay particular attention to the initial
results of consultations.

In conclusion, I would like to commend all of the
United Nations personnel, who, under the leadership
of Mr. Haysom, are working in particularly difficult
conditions in Afghanistan. They have our sincere
admiration.

