Ms. Power (United States of America): Here is
what is happening right now in eastern Aleppo. Syrians
trapped by the fighting are sending out their final appeals
for help, or they are saying their goodbyes. A doctor
named Mohammad Abu Rajab left a voice message:

"This is a final distress call to the world. Save the

lives of these children, women and old men. Save

them. Nobody is left. You might not hear our voice

after this."

A photographer named Amin Al-Halabi wrote on
Facebook,

"I am waiting to die or be captured by the Al-Assad
regime. Pray for me and always remember us."

A teacher named Abdel Kafi Alhamdo said,

"I can tweet now, but I might not do it forever.
Please save my daughter's life and others. This is a
call from a father."

Another doctor told a journalist,

"Remember that there was a city called Aleppo that
the world erased from the map and history."
This is what is happening in eastern Aleppo.
This is what is being done by States Members of the
United Nations that are sitting around this horseshoe
table today. This is what is being done to the people of
eastern Aleppo - to fathers, mothers, sons, daughters,
brothers and sisters, like each of us here.

It is extremely hard to get information, of course,
out ofthe small area still held by the opposition. We will
hear that as an alibi and a way of papering over what
video testimony, phone calls and others are bringing us
live. We will hear it invoked, that it is hard to verify.

It is deliberate. The Al-Assad regime and Russia,
backed by Iran, using militias on the ground, have
done everything that they can to cut off the city. The
Security Council will hear "Well, we do not really
know. Maybe it is made up." But they are hiding what
is happening from the world. It would be easy for
independent investigators to get in, along with food,
health workers and others. Instead, the perpetrators are
hiding their brutal assault from the world wilfully. But
consider the many accounts that have made it out, so
many of them - those of first responders describing
children's voices from beneath the rubble of collapsed
buildings. There are no first responders or equipment
left to dig them out, and no doctors left to treat them.
Bodies lie in the streets of eastern Aleppo, but nobody
dares collect them for fear of getting bombed or shot
to death in the process. As many as a 100 children are
reportedly trapped right now in a building under heavy
fire. Clearly, those young children must be terrorists,
because all those who are being executed, everybody
being barrel-bombed, everybody who has been attacked
with chlorine gas - Council members will be told they
are all terrorists, every last one, even the infants.

The regime of Bashar Al-Assad, Russia, Iran and
their affiliated militias are the ones responsible for
what the United Nations calls a complete meltdown of
humanity. And they are showing no mercy, even now,
despite their territorial conquests. Just in the past 24
hours, pro-Al-Assad forces reportedly killed at least 82
civilians, including 11 women and 13 children. Those
forces are reportedly entering homes and executing
civilians on the spot, as we have heard. According to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, foreign militias, such as the Iraqi
Harakat Al-Nujaba organization, are involved in those
killings. Where civilians are able to run the gauntlet
and make it across the front lines, Syrian intelligence
agencies are pulling people aside and sending them
away, perhaps to be gang-pressed to the front lines
or likely to the same prisons in which we know the
Al-Assad regime tortures and executes those in its
custody.

In the light of these reports, we join others - and
especially the Secretary-General in one of his final
appeals, in reiterating our call to the Al-Assad regime
and Russia to stop their assaults on Aleppo - to protect
civilians. We call on Russia and Al-Assad to allow
impartial international observers into the city to oversee
the safe evacuation of the people who wish to leave but
justifiably fear that if they try, they will be shot in the
street or carted off to one of Al-Assad's gulags.

The Al-Assad regime and Russia appear dead set
on seizing every last square inch of Aleppo by force no
matter how many innocent bodies pile up in their wake.
But we keep insisting on answering the United Nations
call for access and safe and orderly evacuation, because
we are not willing to accept that innocent men, women
and children can be butchered simply because they
happen to live in a conflict area. Our shared humanity
and security demand that certain rules of war - the
most basic - hold. It is up to each and every one of us
here to defend those rules.

To the Al-Assad regime, Russia and Iran, three
Member States behind the conquest of and carnage in
Aleppo, I say that they bear responsibility for these
atrocities. By rejecting the evacuation efforts of the
United Nations and the International Committee of the
Red Cross they are signalling to those militias that are
massacring innocents to continue doing what they are
doing. Denying or obfuscating the facts, as they will do
today, by saying that up is down and black is white will
not absolve them.

When one day there is a full accounting of the
horrors committed in this assault of Aleppo - and
that day will come sooner or later - those countries
will not be able to say that they did not know what was
happening and were not involved. We will all know
what was happening, and we will all know that they
were involved.

Aleppo will join the ranks of those events in world
history that define modern evil and stain or conscious
decades later: Halabja, Rwanda, Srebrenica and now
Aleppo. To the Al-Assad regime, Russia and Iran, I
say to them that their forces and proxies are carrying
out these crimes. Their barrel bombs, mortars and air
strikes have allowed the militias in Aleppo to encircle
tens of thousands of civilians in their ever-tightening
noose. It is their noose - three States Members of the
United Nations contributing to a noose around civilians.
It should shame them. Instead, by all appearances,
it is emboldening them; they are plotting their next
assault. Are they truly incapable of shame? Is there
literally nothing that can shame them? Is there no act of
barbarism against civilians, no execution ofa child that
gets under their skin or just creeps them out a little bit?
Is there nothing that they will not lie about or justify?

To the members of the Council and all States
Members of the United Nations, I say that the ghastly
attacks that we are witnessing in Aleppo will not stop
if the city falls. The regime and its Russian allies will
only be emboldened to replicate their starve-and-
surrender-and-slaughter tactics elsewhere. This will be
their model for attempting to retake cities and towns
across Syria. It will not end with Aleppo, and it will
not focus on terrorists. It never has, and there is no
evidence that it will.

No matter how small a country, no matter its view
of sovereignty, if it shares our view that terrorism is one
of the singular causes on Earth that is worth fighting, it
is essential that each of us shoulder our responsibility
to denounce these atrocities. We have just heard the
Secretary-General state it plainly. We have to tell those
responsible that they must stop. This is not the time for
more equivocation, for self-censoring, to avoid naming
names, for diplomatic niceties of the kind that are so
well-practiced here in the Council.

Say who is responsible. Appeal to Moscow, to
Damascus, to Tehran that they have to stop. Use every
public and private channel available and bank shot off
someone who knows someone. The lives of tens of

thousands of Syrians still in eastern Aleppo - between
30,000 and 60,000 people - and hundreds ofthousands
more across the country who are besieged depend on it.

