Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Allow me to begin, Mr.
President, by thanking you for convening this open
meeting on the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
Let me also take this opportunity to pay special tribute
to the former Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and President of Algeria, Mr. Abdelaziz
Bouteflika, and to the Secretary-General of the OAU,
Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, for their sustained efforts
which culminated in the signing of the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities between the Governments of
Ethiopia and Eritrea on 18 June 2000 in Algiers.

We also take this opportunity to thank the United
Nations, the European Union, the United States of
America and other members of the international
community for their continued and unwavering support
for the efforts of the OAU in resolving the conflict
amicably.

The Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, deserves
our commendation for his commitment and dedication
to the peaceful resolution of conflict in Africa,
particularly the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
We thank him for his comprehensive and, indeed, most
thoughtful report before us today on the status of the
proposed United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea, preparations for which are at an advanced
stage.

Let me also thank Mr. Miyet for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General and for the update he
gave us this morning.

The signing of the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities between the Government of Ethiopia and the
Government of Eritrea was a significant achievement
and a major step forward in the peaceful resolution of
the conflict between the two countries. Under the
Agreement, the concerned parties committed
themselves, among other things, first, to resolve the
present crisis and any other dispute between them
through peaceful and legal means, in accordance with
the principles enshrined in the Charters of the OAU
and the United Nations; secondly, to reject the use of
force as a means of imposing solutions to disputes; and
thirdly, to respect the borders existing at independence,
as stated in OAU resolution AHG/Res.l6 (1), adopted
in Cairo in 1964, and, in this regard, determining them
on the basis of pertinent colonial treaties and
applicable international law, making use, to that end, of
technical means to demarcate the borders and, in case
of controversy, resorting to the appropriate means of
arbitration.

Furthermore, the Agreement commits the parties
to an immediate cessation of hostilities and stipulates
that starting from the signature of the Agreement, all
air and land attacks are to cease. In this regard, my
delegation fully agrees with the assessment made in the
report of the Secretary-General that to date the parties
have shown the commitment and goodwill required to
ensure the implementation of the ceasefire Agreement
and the provisional agreements contained therein.

We call upon the parties to continue to
demonstrate their commitment in good faith for the
sake of peace, development and prosperity, not only for
the two peoples concerned but also for the region and
for Africa as a whole.

My delegation welcomes the holding of proximity
talks last month in Washington on outstanding issues
such as the modalities for the delimitation and
demarcation of the border and the issue of
compensation. In this connection, we congratulate
President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, who has been
mandated by the OAU to continue his mediation efforts
with a View to reaching a peaceful and lasting solution
to the conflict.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
urge the international community to generously provide
financial assistance, bilaterally or through the United
Nations country teams in both countries, to enable the
Governments concerned to cope with the consequences
of the war and drought.

Of great concern to my delegation is the existence
of landmines and unexploded ordnance, which remains
a serious impediment to resettlement activities.
According to a United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) report, these landmines have killed or
injured about 167 people, mostly children, since
February this year. We call upon the international
community to provide technical assistance to the
countries concerned to enable them to successfully
conduct their mine-clearance activities. We are pleased
to learn that the United Nations Mine Action Service is
preparing a mine action-assistance programme to help
mitigate the threat posed by landmines and unexploded
ordnance.

It is our hope that the public information
component of the envisaged United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) will play a pivotal role
in the dissemination not only of the mandate of
UNMEE, but also of the mine awareness activities,
with a view to sensitizing urban and rural communities
to the dangers of landmines. This should be done in
order to reduce and eventually eliminate the incidence
of fatalities and injuries caused by landmines,
especially among children and women. My delegation
is encouraged that both countries have expressed
willingness to provide UNMEE air time on their
national radio and television stations.

Finally, my delegation welcomes the well-defined
coordination between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) for carrying out
the tasks contained in the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities. The United Nations and the OAU should
indeed work together in the areas of consultation, the
exchange of information and the coordination of joint
action, with a view to successfully implementing this
Agreement.

We also welcome the understanding between the
United Nations and the OAU that each organization
will maintain its separate identity in this exercise,
including as regards sources of funding, and also that
UNMEE will provide, to the extent possible, logistical
assistance to the OAU. However, successful
peacemaking will depend on the capacity for sustained
support and assistance. The OAU must be assisted in
mobilizing the necessary financial and logistical
support if it is to be an important player in preventive
diplomacy, peacemaking and peace-building.

