Mr. Pressman (United States of America): We
thank Special Representative Honore for her briefing
today. First and foremost, I want to convey our deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of
Haiti for the devastation and loss of life that Hurricane
Matthew inflicted last week. Against that backdrop, I
am going to speak today about both the importance of
disaster relief efforts, including what the United States
is doing to help, and the political situation in Haiti,
while recognizing that the storm does not change the
fact that we are at a critical moment in Haiti's political
life and for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH).

When Hurricane Matthew swept through Haiti
and the region last week, it claimed hundreds of lives,
levelled homes and businesses and dealt a severe
blow to the country's infrastructure and agriculture,
especially on the southern coast. The images coming
from Haiti are simply searing and heartbreaking. We,
the international community, must do all that we can
to help Haiti at this time. To our Haitian brothers and
sisters, please know that the people of the United
States of America stand with them. The United States
Agency for International Development (USAID), with
support from the Department of Defence, as well as
other key United States partners, including the Centers
for Disease Control, is leading our response. Through
USAID, we have so far made available $1.3 million
in humanitarian assistance for communities in Haiti
affected by the hurricane. As of 11 October, our
Department of Defence-led task force has delivered
more than 186,000 pounds of relief commodities, aid
and supplies to areas devastated by Hurricane Matthew.
We know that much more remains to be done as the
full extent of Hurricane Matthew's damage becomes
known. But in the immediate term, yesterday, the
United Nations, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General just mentioned, issued a flash
appeal calling for an additional $120 million to meet
immediate lifesaving needs. Haiti needs assistance as
soon as possible, and it is incumbent upon all of us to
step up and contribute.

The fresh humanitarian challenges facing Haiti
are grave and can be met only by fully functioning
institutions. That is why, even with the devastation
brought about by the hurricane, we strongly urge the
Government of Haiti to continue to move towards
holding elections as soon as possible. The Haitian
people need elected representatives at all levels of
Government who can address the aftermath of the
crisis and start promoting policies that will build a
strong and prosperous Haiti. That means improving the
business and investment climate and building a model
for economic growth. It means fighting corruption
and helping to create an independent and transparent
judicial system so that all feel that they will get fair
treatment under the law.

As damaging as the hurricane was, we must not
allow it to undo the impressive gains that the Haitian
Government and the electoral officials have made
towards the elections. The decision of Haitian officials
to repeat the first round of presidential elections has
presented Haiti with an opportunity to improve on the
2015 process. While the United States did not believe
that a repeat was warranted, we are encouraged by steps
that Haiti's electoral authority has taken to address
the shortcomings identified in the previous elections,
including requiring all participants to identify their
voting location in advance of election day. We therefore
look forward to the final round of elections on 8 January
2017 and to welcoming the seating of a new President
on 7 February 2017. We call on the Government of Haiti
at all levels to remain politically neutral throughout the
electoral process and not support any one candidate or
party. And we call on all actors, especially candidates
and political parties, to engage peacefully in the
political process.

The United States Government is among the
donors providing funding for an international observer
mission from the Organization of American States
and local Haitian observers in an effort to strengthen
transparency and bolster voter confidence. We strongly
urge all Haitians to go to the polls and exercise their
right to choose Haiti's next leader, confident that the
outcome will reflect their voice.

Turning to the future of MINUSTAH, we look
forward to a strategic assessment mission to be
deployed during this mandate period, which will
make recommendations on the possible withdrawal
of MINUSTAH and on a future presence and role of
the United Nations in Haiti in a manner that is fit for
purpose.

We welcome the Secretary-General's new efforts
to better address cholera in Haiti for both treatment
and prevention and to develop a proposal on material
assistance and support to those most directly affected
by the awful cholera epidemic. We look forward to
hearing more details about that new approach, and
welcome collaboration between the United Nations and
Haiti, with the support of the Member States, to devise
an appropriate response to the crisis.

As always, we thank the men and women of
MINUSTAH, the troop and police contributors and the
Group of Friends for Haiti for their tireless efforts to
promote stabilization and development, especially at
this critical time.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming the close
ties between the United States of America and Haiti.
We are not only neighbours, but also partners and
friends. The United States looks forward to deepening
that partnership further by working together with an
elected Haitian President who can address key issues,
such as electoral and judicial reform, anti-corruption
efforts and economic growth. We are eager to work
together with that new President in our shared goal of
ensuring that the future will be strong and bright and
benefit the people of Haiti.
