Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): We, too, would
like to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his comprehensive
briefing. We also want to join our colleagues in
congratulating the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Haekkerup, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) on the successful conduct of the
Kosovo-wide elections. They were relatively free of
violence and vote-tampering.

However, while the elections saw a credible 64
per cent participation rate across all ethnic
communities, it is notable that there was apparently a
reduction in the voting of the ethnic Albanians. I do not
know whether Mr. Annabi can explain to us if there is a
specific reason for that.

Also noteworthy is that only 46 per cent of the
entire Serb community voted. This figure would have
been even lower had not President Kostunica and the
Governments of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Serbia encouraged the Kosovo Serbs to vote. We would
like to thank them for doing their part. At the same
time, precisely because of this, what the low-level
ethnic Serb participation also shows is that not all the
necessary conditions were fully in place for their full
participation. Perhaps the security and freedom of
movement of ethnic Serbs in Kosovo and the return of
Serb refugees could be improved. We hope that
UNMIK, KFOR and the ethnic Albanian leaders will
work harder to improve these conditions.

The aim must be to ensure substantial ethnic Serb
participation in the self-governing institutions in
Kosovo. As I think was mentioned by Ambassador
Franco a few minutes ago, we have to create a multi-
ethnic Kosovo. The problem we face, of course, is that
the social fabric of Kosovo, as we all know, has been
damaged. There seems to be more separation and
partition than integration. The question is whether or
not we can do something about this.

With the elections over, a significant stage has
been reached in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). We acknowledge that much more needs to be
done before UNMIK and KFOR can be said to have
fulfilled their mandates under the resolution. We
further recognize that UNMIK and KFOR have to stay
until Kosovo is out ofthe woods, so to speak - that is,
until it cannot slip back into another conflict. This is
the essence of peace-building, and not whether or not
an entity gains independence. In fact, the final stage of
UNMIK'S responsibilities under resolution 1244 (1999)
is to oversee

"the transfer of authority from Kosovo's

provisional institutions to institutions established

under a political settlement". (res. 1244 (1999),

para. 1] (fl)
Of course, the problem we have in the case of
Kosovo - and this is a great handicap - is that we

still have no idea what the final political settlement
will look like. It may therefore be timely for the
Security Council to take a long-term view of the
Kosovo issue and to see whether or not we can define a
clear exit strategy for Kosovo.

Indeed, some Council members have stressed the
need to apply the presidential note (S/2001/905) on the
question of "No exit without strategy", and we agree
that Kosovo is as good a test case as any. Indeed, in
paragraph 3 of the presidential note, the Security
Council agreed that it was essential that clear direction
should be given and milestones established that support
a comprehensive and integrated approach to peace-
building, where peace-building is appropriate, as well
as the operation's exit strategy.

Now that Kosovo has crossed one major hurdle, it
would perhaps be useful for the Council to be briefed
at some point by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and by UNMIK on their initial thinking on
the peace-building and exit strategies for Kosovo,
specifically on the next steps in gradually downsizing
and finally withdrawing the international presence, on
the benchmarks, and on how long each step will take.

The first of these steps is actually very clear, and
I am glad that Mr. Annabi spoke about the next steps. It
is clear that, here, one of UNMIK's responsibilities is
to arrange for the transfer of its administrative
responsibilities while overseeing and supporting the
consolidation of Kosovo's local provisional
institutions, along with other peace-building activities.
In a pertinent list of recommendations in its report on
Kosovo's landmark election, the International Crisis
Group stated that

"UNMIK should allow the new self-governing

institutions as free a rein as possible to govern

within the parameters laid down in the

Constitutional Framework. The institutions

should have the opportunity to learn by their

mistakes and to grow in responsibility and
effectiveness."

We heard Mr. Annabi say that that is what is
going to be done, and we are pleased that there is
movement in that direction. But it is also important to
bear in mind that this is not merely a case of
transferring administrative responsibility; it is also a
case of allowing the local population to involve itself
in more decision-making. We believe that this can
change the political chemistry and can stabilize the
situation in Kosovo even further.

We also note that, in resolution 1244 (1999), the
Council decided that UNMIK should facilitate
"political process designed to determine Kosovo's
future status, taking into account the Rambouillet
accords" (para. 11 (e)). That is one of the final-status
provisions in the resolution. However, while those
accords call for the convening of an international
meeting three years after the entry into force of the
accords to determine the mechanism for a final
settlement for Kosovo on the basis of the will of the
people, resolution 1244 (1999) was silent on that. I
wonder whether anyone has given any thought to when
such an international meeting will be convened.

One reason for us to focus on this is that, as we
all know, immediately after the elections, Ibrahim
Rugova, the leader of the Democratic League of
Kosovo (LDK), which won the most seats in the
Kosovo Assembly, reiterated his call for independence
for Kosovo. If a rough time frame for the final
settlement for Kosovo is not set, some problems could
worsen. Hence, the International Crisis Group, in the
same report from which I quoted earlier, stated the
following:

"it is unrealistic to expect Kosovo Albanian
leaders or voters to shelve the one overriding
issue that really matters to them. [The] newly
elected officials will be unlikely to accept for
long the straitjacket imposed by the unelected
international administration. Albanian anger over
UNMIK's agreement with Belgrade to obtain
support for Serb participation, added to
impatience with the slow progress towards
independence, may be a precursor to more
strained relations between UNMIK and the
Albanian parties after the election."

Clearly, we do not want to see an unhappy result after
the elections, and we should give some thought to how
to prevent such an unhappy event.

Let me stress here that we are not calling for any
kind of premature exit from Kosovo of the
international presence. We are cognizant of the dangers
that that would entail for the stability of Kosovo and of
the region. We have stated many times that the eventual
termination of the international presence must be
gradual and carefully structured to bolster, not
undermine, the painstaking progress that has been
achieved. Indeed, to quote the presidential note on "No
exit without strategy" again,

"The Security Council agrees that a major
criterion for the Council's decision on the scaling
down or withdrawal of a peacekeeping operation
is the successful completion of its mandate,
resulting in the establishment of a requisite
political and security environment conducive to
durable peace and/or a follow-on post-conflict
peace-building process". (S/2001/905, para. 6)

That applies to Kosovo as much as it applies to other
issues before the Council.

Since we have spoken quite a bit about the exit
strategy dimension, we wanted to cite some remarks
made in our 15 November 2000 debate on that subject.
One of the most thoughtful interventions was made by
Ambassador Jean-David Levitte - I am sorry he has
left the Chamber. I would like to quote something he
said then:

"[The] Security Council has established
some important, even decisive, operations - I
am thinking of Kosovo and Timor in particular -
and it must be able to terminate them without
risking the future of the peoples concerned".
(S/PV4223, p. 6)

And he went on to observe that "Persistence is often a
key element of success" (p. 7).

However, in our View, as with all peacekeeping
operations, the Security Council must be clear about
what the conditions are for the scaling down and
withdrawal of the international presence and when
those conditions have been met. In the November 2000
debate, Ambassador Levitte referred to the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic, and
he said that

"the Group of Friends established a series of
criteria, benchmarks to assess the Mission's
performance... Even if these criteria were
imperfectly met, they provided both a road map
describing the objectives for durable stabilization
of the situation, and a kind of tracking board
making it possible to assess the results and adjust
the operation's duration and mandate" (p. 7).

Ambassador Levitte concluded his statement in that
debate by saying that

"the very image of the United Nations depends on
our capacity to successfully manage exit
strategies for peacekeeping operations, which our
Council is mandated to lead to success" (p. 8).

We completely agree with the sentiments
expressed by Ambassador Levitte in that debate, and
we hope that they will be applied systematically to all
the operations in which the United Nations is involved.

