Mr. Toungui (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
initiative in organizing this important debate on
counter-terrorism. We are aware of your commitment
and that of your country in fighting this phenomenon.
We welcome among us the presence of the Secretary-
General, and I reaffirm the support of my country for
10-55136
his ongoing work for peace and security throughout the
world. We endorse the draft presidential statement to
be adopted at the end of the meeting.

Terrorism is not only an attack on the life and
dignity of the human being; it is also and above all a
negation of civilization and can therefore never be
justified. No cause, ideology or religion can serve as a
pretext for the atrocities perpetrated throughout the
world, including in Somalia, Uganda, India, Russia,
Afghanistan, Iraq and the Sahel, to list only a few of
the most recent examples.

The tentacular structure of terrorism requires a
strong and unified response from the international
community. Since the adoption of resolutions 1373
(2001), 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004), the United
Nations has assumed its full responsibility to help
Member States to effectively fight terrorism. I
welcome the outstanding role played by Turkey,
Austria and Mexico in guiding the work of the counter-
terrorism committees.

In adopting the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy in September 2006, States Members
of our Organization reaffirmed their commitment to
fighting international terrorism. This momentum
should lead us to consolidate the legal framework and
means for fighting this phenomenon. Hence, we must
do our utmost to overcome the differences in
approaches that stand in the way of the finalization of a
comprehensive convention against international
terrorism.

Given that terrorism is a global threat, no nation
small or large is safe from this scourge. At the same
time, we see a distinct asymmetry between the methods
of engagement and the global nature of the threat. In
addition to the costs of the fight, the terrorists
themselves are also engaged in increasingly
sophisticated operations. I therefore call for a
strengthening of the capacities of the developing
countries, taking into account the specific needs and
identified threats, especially in African countries.

My country welcomed the Central African
workshop organized in Libreville in June by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The workshop
allowed us to learn about the international legal
provisions applicable to illegal actions against the
security of shipping and offshore oil rigs. Gabon has
also adopted major security, financial and customs-
excise measures, in synergy with the States of the
subregion, to enhance preventive actions against the
financing of terrorism.

I will end by saying that our common action
against terrorism must be in step with our
commitments to respecting human rights and fighting
poverty. Since counter-terrorism is a collective
responsibility, my country reaffirms its commitment to
contributing to the global effort to fight this odious
international phenomenon.

