Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): I thank the
Indonesian presidency for convening this important
meeting of the Security Council. I especially thank
you, Minister Marsudi, for presiding. I also thank
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov and Mr. Pierre
Krahenbiihl, Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), for their comprehensive
briefings and sober assessments of the current situation
in all its dimensions.

We reiterate our thanks to the Special Coordinator
for his efforts, in cooperation with Egypt, to de-escalate
the recent cycle of violence, which brought about more
loss of civilian life, destruction and displacement. We
stress once again the urgency of providing protection to
the Palestinian people and lifting the Israeli blockade
ofthe Gaza Strip, which continues to subject an already
traumatized population to dire humanitarian conditions
and increasing needs.
We also renew our gratitude to the Commissioner-
General and the entire staff of UNRWA for their fortitude
in implementing the Agency's mandate, in spite of the
very challenging circumstances on the ground and
recurrent financial crises. With the generous support
of the international community, the Agency continues
to provide vital, life-saving assistance to the Palestine
refugees in all fields of operation - ensuring education,
sustenance, stability and hope where there would
otherwise be none. We are grateful to all the United
Nations agencies that extend support to the Palestinian
people, in recognition that UNRWA remains at the fore
of upholding that responsibility pending ajust solution
to the plight of the refugees, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III).

We completely reject attacks against UNRWA
and its programmes, which are recognized globally as
providing exemplary humanitarian and development
assistance. Attempts to characterize the Agency as part
of the problem, when it has done extraordinary work
to alleviate the plight of millions and to contribute to
regional stability, are cynical, unfair and rejected - not
only by us but also by the vast majority of States that
continue to strongly support UNRWA's mandate, as we
have heard today. We urge continued support for the
Agency and solidarity with the refugees.

The Palestinian people have just solemnly marked
71 years since the 1948 Nakba, lamenting not only the
tragedy of the violent uprooting, dispossession and
ethnic cleansing of our people from their homeland
seven decades ago but also lamenting the Nakba that
continues to be suffered as their rights continue to be
grossly and systematically violated.

In the absence ofjustice, Palestinians continue to be
denied their rights to return and to self-determination,
continue to be dispossessed of their homes and forced
off their lands, and continue to be marginalized and
subject to all forms of humiliation and deprivation
by an illegal Israeli occupation that knows no bounds
and stands in absolute contempt of the international
community, including the Security Council.

This protracted injustice has kept 5.4 million
Palestine refugees away from their ancestral homes
and lands, forced to live in limbo, suffering one misery
and one crisis after another - their vulnerability and
despair interminably deepening. It is a primary factor
in the degradation of international law and has bred
a dangerous culture of impunity. And the protraction
and gravity of this injustice have kept this issue on the
United Nations agenda for decades and have brought
us to the Chamber time and time again to plead for
the Council to uphold its duties and implement its
resolutions, certain that this constitutes the key to the
establishment of peace and security.

That conviction is shared by the overwhelming
majority of the international community, which
continues to reaffirm, at every juncture, the pillars and
parameters of a just solution to the Palestine question.
The global consensus remains strong on the two-State
solution, with the pre-l967 borders, as the foundation
of a peaceful solution on the basis of international law,
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road
map. The Council has reaffirmed that unequivocally,
most recently in resolution 2334 (2016), and it remains
the core of the international community's position.

Israel's actions stand in sharp contrast to that
global consensus and, regrettably, its intransigence
and violence have only been further emboldened by
recent decisions by the United States disregarding,
contradicting or completely undermining the pillars of
that consensus and foundations of a peaceful solution.

Ignoring the Council, Israel has persisted with
its crimes and entrenched its belligerent military
occupation and settler colonization of our land,
especially in and around Jerusalem. Israel's appetite for
expansion and annexation has only grown in tandem
with its belief that it can get away with it.

After 52 years ofcalling and appealing, cajoling and
appeasing, it should be self-evident to the international
community that only accountability can break this
toxic cycle to finally end this illegal occupation, assert
the rights ofthe Palestinian people and establish lasting
Israeli-Palestinian peace.

No one can deny that we are in need of new efforts
and new energy to overcome the suffocating political
deadlock, least ofall us. But new cannot mean trampling
the law or mocking and discarding the long-standing
international consensus. As we have heard repeatedly in
the Chamber, a solution can be founded only on respect
for the law and human rights, the implementation of
United Nations resolutions and good-faith negotiations
to resolve all final-status issues, including Jerusalem,
refugees and borders. For a genuine lasting peace, such

core issues must be justly resolved and cannot simply
be relegated as non-issues.

That is the path for ensuring justice and creating
the peaceful and secure Middle East we have long
sought, where all States can live side by side in peace
within secure and recognized borders, including an
independent, sovereign State of Palestine.

The saying that peace requires painful compromises
is borne out starkly by the Palestinian experience.
The Palestinian people and leadership made the most
monumental and painful compromise over 30 years ago
in accepting the two-State solution on the 1967 borders
and declaring the independence of their State on only
22 per cent of their historic homeland.

Contrary to the myths and rhetoric, that is actually the
most generous offer for peace ever made. But Israel has
rejected it over and over, never missing an opportunity
to obstruct and undermine it. The one-State apartheid
reality we face today is its doing. Claims otherwise
are false. We are committed to a peaceful solution and
to political, legal, popular and non-violent means for
achieving it. Our pledge to respect international law
and United Nations resolutions is unwavering. For the
sake of peace and coexistence, we have for decades
engaged with courage and in good faith in negotiations
and cooperated with every single credible peace effort,
believing firmly in multilateralism and dialogue as
essential for realizing peace.

But assumptions that further, unfair compromise
can be forced upon us by financial or political pressures
are faulty at best and cynical and destructive at worst.
Only in the context of a just solution is compromise
possible, logical and defensible. Occupation, annexation
and human rights violations will never be acceptable
and will never become the new normal, no matter the
spin, rhetoric or pretext. Likewise, we cannot accept
dangerous attempts to convert this conflict into a
religious battle.

In truth, no one can accuse us ofnot wanting peace
or not seeking the best interests of our people. There
is only one legitimate basis for peace - international
legality - and that cannot be characterized as a
condition. It is a minimal ask, not only for Palestine but
the wider international community.

As stressed recently by the Palestinian Government,
a solution to the conflict can be achieved only through
a political solution that guarantees an end to the
occupation and the realization of the national rights of
the Palestinian people, embodied in their independent,
sovereign and viable State within the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and realization of
the Palestine refugees' right to return, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions and
international law.

The Palestinian leadership cannot accept merely
improving the lives of the Palestinian people while
this illegal occupation continues apace. Nor have the
Palestinian people endured decades of suffering and
waited nearly a century for freedom to resign themselves
to limited autonomy. Those who believe that ignore
history, international law and the resolve of a people to
attain justice and human equality and dignity.

The vision that will offer Palestinians new
opportunities to realize their full potential is one in
which independence is the centrepiece. Despite all
the setbacks and challenges, the Palestinian people
have long demonstrated their resilience, ability and
ingenuity. What they need and are entitled to is self-
determination and control over their land, borders and
resources - not endless international aid. They will
not accept half-solutions or faits accomplis as their fate,
and they will not surrender to despair. They will persist
on their journey to fulfil their legitimate national
aspirations and inalienable rights, including to be a free
people and live in security and peace in their homeland.

We appeal to the international community,
particularly the Security Council, to rise to its
responsibilities and act now to salvage the prospects for
peace and spare future generations of Palestinian and
Israeli children the conflict, strife and suffering their
ancestors have so tragically borne.

