We thank Indonesia for organizing this most pertinent and useful debate on an important topic that has been a great concern for all of us. We extend our gratitude to Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General, Office of Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for their informative and insightful briefing. Terrorism is one of the most serious threats that humankind faces today. The scourge of terrorism does not distinguish between countries or regions. It is the grossest affront to the enjoyment of the inalienable human right to life and to living in peace and security. India strongly condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. There can be no justification of any form of terrorism. Looking for root causes for terrorism is akin to trying to find a needle in a haystack. Today it is a widely accepted fact that both terrorist organizations and organized crime groups constitute transnational criminal groups. The adoption of resolution 2482 (2019), on this important issue, has also demonstrated the Security Council's determination to address the threat emanating from this unholy nexus. Several United Nations reports have documented incidents of transnational organized criminals trafficking persons across borders to facilitate the recruitment of cadres to terrorist organizations. Organized criminal networks are involved in many different types of criminal activities, spanning several countries. These activities may include trafficking in people, drugs, illicit goods and weapons, armed robbery, counterfeiting and money- laundering. With revenues estimated in the billons, these criminal enterprises closely resemble those of legitimate international businesses. They have operating models, long-term strategies, hierarchies and even strategic alliances. Organized criminal networks also help terrorist groups funnel funds into legitimate businesses. There is documented evidence where smuggling of narcotics, natural resources and cultural artefacts are sustained by safe transit corridors provided by terrorist entities. We have seen the destruction created by the narcotics trade in our region, which has sustained and funded terrorist networks. It is a well- known fact in common law that the accomplice is as culpable as the principal. Therefore, by virtue of being in nexus with terrorist groups, transnational organized crime groups become accessories to terrorist acts. India has been a victim of terrorism sponsored from across our border. We have experienced first-hand the cruel linkage between transnational organized crime and terrorism. An organized crime syndicate, the D-Company, which used to smuggle gold and counterfeit currencies, was transformed into a terrorist entity overnight when it caused a series of bomb blasts in the city of Mumbai in 1993. The attack resulted in the loss of more than 250 innocent lives and millions of dollars of damage to property. The perpetrator of that incident also, unsurprisingly, continues to enjoy patronage in a neighbouring country, a hub for arms trafficking and the narcotics trade, along with other terrorists and terrorist entities that have been proscribed by the United Nations. Over the years, terrorist groups have developed a diversified funding portfolio and raised funds through a range of criminal activities, including but not limited to extortion, kidnapping for ransom, robbery and theft, drug smuggling and trafficking in blood diamonds, humans and antiquities. Terrorist organizations have also begun to exploit the anonymity afforded by blockchain technology for fundraising and finances. As data increasingly becomes the currency of the future, regulators will have to come up with better solutions to fight terrorism. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has severely impacted the movement of people and materials around the world. While nations are focused on delivering health care to their people and on tackling the economic impact of the pandemic, organized criminals have nevertheless been exploiting the crisis to find new avenues for their crimes, including illicit trafficking in natural resources, narcotics, firearms and explosives. In its latest research brief, UNODC reported that an increase in online activity has led to an expansion of phishing, credit-card fraud, pirated sites for fake donations, and cyberattacks. There have been multiple reports of fake and cloned websites as well as suspicious e-mail addresses. Many of these scams involve coronavirus- related topics, such as the sale of face masks and disinfectants. The Global Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime, a renowned Geneva-based network of more than 500 organized crime experts, released a valuable report in March 2020 entitled Crime and Contagion: The impact of a pandemic on organized crime. The paper provides various examples from around the world of how organized crime is coping with and ultimately exploiting the COVID-19 nightmare. At this stage, it is imperative for all of us to remain alert to the nature of the symbiotic threat posed by the linkage between terrorism and transnational organized crime and reinvigorate our efforts to counter it. In this regard, we have the following five suggestions. First, the success of collective action against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant serves as an example of how focused attention by the international community yields results. A similar focus on addressing threats posed by such proscribed individuals and entities as Dawood Ibrahim and his D-Company, the Jaish-e-Mohammed and Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, will serve humankind well. Secondly, it is important to hold States accountable for activities that support or encourage terrorism in territories under their control. The resolutions of the Security Council make it clear that Member States have the primary responsibility in countering terrorist acts and preventing and suppressing the financing thereof. Thirdly, Member States that suffer due to poor governance and inadequate oversight of financial institutions are more vulnerable to exploitation by terrorist entities and organized criminals. Implementation of the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) on strengthening the capabilities of the governance structure of financial and economic assets should be one of the topmost priorities to counter the menace. Fourthly, the United Nations needs to enhance its coordination with bodies such as the FATF that have been playing a significant role in setting global standards for preventing and combating money laundering and terrorist financing. Finally, with the rapid development of information and communications technology, as well as other technologies concerning financial transactions, encryption, mode of transportation and delivery, Member States should remain vigilant in identifying new trends in linkages between terrorist groups/terrorist individuals and organized criminals. There is compelling evidence of a broad, geographically dispersed and continuing connection between terrorism and organized crime. Going forward, we need to work towards enhancing cooperation among law enforcement and Governments around the world, which is needed in the battle against that growing nexus. Meaningful progress will require increased political will, strong legislation, consistent enforcement, intelligence-gathering and -sharing, deterrent measures and innovative solutions. We sincerely hope that today's discussions will lead to an enhancement of our collective efforts to stem the spread of the menace of terrorism and organized crime. Perhaps that will be our greatest contribution to humanity.
