Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We wish to thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing to the Council.
We also wish to congratulate the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) on the
recent extension of its mandate, as well as to thank
it for the report submitted to the Committee in May
(S/2012/395).

We welcome the Chairman's report to the Council
on the informal meeting on 1 June. We find that to be
a good step forward in the interests of transparency. In
that regard, we continue to emphasize that any action
of the Committee should enjoy the consensus of its
members and should remain focused on attaining a
peaceful solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.

South Africa is encouraged by the ongoing
engagement between the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and Iran over concerns about the Iranian
nuclear programme. We believe that that engagement is
consistent with decisions taken at the November 2011
session of the IAEA Board of Governors. We note that, as
a result of Director General Amano's visit to Tehran, the
Agency and Iran have agreed to resolve the outstanding
issues through a structured approach. We urge Iran and
the Agency to continue working in a constructive and
flexible manner and to seek continued opportunities for
both parties to engage in discussions on the remaining
differences as soon as possible.

Furthermore, South Africa is encouraged by the
positive atmosphere that appears to have characterized
the recent talks between the E3+3 and Iran. We note that
a further round of discussions will be held in Moscow
and we encourage all those involved in that process to
diligently work for progress and a positive outcome,
which is the expectation of the rest of the international
community.

South Africa therefore hopes that the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) will
be able to carefully examine the report submitted by
the Panel of Experts and agree on a way forward in a
manner consistent with calls for a peaceful resolution to
concerns about the nature of Iran's nuclear activities. It is
our conviction that the process must also avoid creating
further antagonisms, which will only harden positions
among States involved in resolving the concerns of the
international community.

South Africa calls upon Iran to continue to
cooperate with the IAEA and to fulfil its obligations
in order that all outstanding issues can be clarified and
confidence restored in the peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme. A sustainable solution will be one that
restores international confidence in the peaceful nature
of Iran's nuclear programme while respecting Iran's
right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy, consistent
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons.
In conclusion, South Africa looks forward to active
participation in the Committee, with the objective of
contributing towards a sustainable solution.

