Mr. Bouah-Kamon (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the outset, I congratulate you, Sir, on the
dynamic manner with which Senegal has presided
over the Security Council this month. I also thank
today's briefers, whose statements allow for a better
understanding of what is at stake with regard to water
management throughout the world.

As was the case during the most recent open debate
(see S/PV.7816), my delegation is especially pleased
to participate in today's debate devoted to the issue
of water, peace and security, which provides us an
opportunity to exchange views on this important topic.

Water is a natural resource and, at the same time, it
is a food, a source of energy, a means ofcommunicating
and an essential component of the agricultural cycle.
Simply put, water is the source of life, and some might
even say that water is life. Through its many and essential
functions, water is of a strategic dimension for human,
animal and vegetable life. Human activities linked to
inappropriate or restrictive uses of this natural resource
can sometimes become a source of conflict. The history
of peoples unfortunately shows us that water has been
used for strategic and military purposes and exclusive
and even criminal designs. The link between water,
peace and security is therefore a question of great
relevance because today, as in the past, it continues
to fuel tensions undermining international peace and
security. Experts in the area of the geopolitical role of
water even speculate that future wars will waged over it
and that that war has already been declared.

Faced with the risk ofwater-related conflicts, people
have been thinking for a long time about the options we
have for peaceably managing our water and settling our
disputes. The mechanisms proposed so far often involve
mediation and cooperation and are based on bilateral,
multilateral and international agreements, as was rightly
pointed out in the concept note (S/2016/969, annex)
underlying our debate. Such agreements have enabled
us to avoid many potential conflicts around the world.
It is therefore important to ensure that the international
community, in particular the United Nations through
the Security Council, continue to encourage Member
States to use such mechanisms, especially in the case
of transboundary cooperation. For our part, Cote
d'Ivoire actively participates in the efforts made by the
Mano River Union for political, economic and security
cooperation among Member States.

In the same vein, it would be useful for States to
incorporate in their national legislation international
legal instruments for the prevention and punishment
of criminal acts and war crimes related to the access
or use of water. In that regard, my delegation would
like to refer to article 54 of the Protocol additional
to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and
relating to the protection of victims of international
armed conflicts, known as Protocol I, and to article 14
of Protocol II of 8 June 1977 additional to the Geneva
Conventions; to article 29 of the Convention on the
Law of the Non-navigational Uses of International
Watercourses; and to article 12 of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. In
conflict areas or post-conflict situations, water issues
should also be taken into account in the mandate of
peacekeeping operations or peacebuilding processes.

Water is the most abundant resource on Earth,
but only a small amount - about 2.53 per cent - is
freshwater that can be used for agriculture, industry
and human consumption. Studies show that, by 2025,
within national borders, close to 4 billion people across
the world could find themselves in a situation of water
stress. A report of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) from 2006 indicated that 90 per
cent of the population of the Middle East and North
Africa will live in countries affected by water shortages
by 2025. In addition to those areas mentioned in the
UNDP report, much of sub-Saharan Africa is also
concerned by this issue, with potential implications for
agriculture, food, health and the economy. In countries
such as mine, where the cycle of life, in particular the
agricultural cycle, is intimately linked to the natural
phenomenon of precipitation, water stress sometimes
can be a source of tension and even open conflict
among farmers, cattle breeders and their communities.

My delegation would like to emphasize the
importance of technology transfers and fighting
climate change as relevant approaches for developing
countries. That includes strengthening the capacities
of those countries in terms of adaptation and the
mitigation of the adverse effects of climate change, but
also to enabling them to acquire innovative irrigation
methods for agriculture and cattle raising, as well
as desalination techniques to ensure greater water
availability. Addressing water issues and combating
climate change through Sustainable Development Goals
6 and 13 offer real prospects for the future. United
Nations agencies, such as the Food and Agriculture
Organization and UNDP, for their part, should play a
particularly active role.

As we have been hearing throughout this debate, the
issue of water is of strategic importance for humankind,
and therefore must be given due attention in order
to prevent future wars in the upcoming decades. My
delegation therefore welcomes the fact that the Security
Council has taken on this issue because water wars are
most often those of the poor and the weak, far from our
gaze and the great public debates.
