Mrs. Calmy-Rey (Switzerland) (spoke in French): First, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate. Switzerland, as co-chair of the
Group of Friends on conflict prevention, has a special
interest in this important topic.

Civil society, whether at the local or international
level, is well placed to send out early-warning signals
of emerging crises; analyse the social and cultural roots
of a conflict; broaden the range of issues to be
addressed in a peace agreement in order to better
reflect the full scope of public concerns; gain access to
militant movements when official actors encounter
practical or political difficulties; prevent, address and
resolve disputes at the community level; promote
respect for international human rights and
humanitarian standards by all State and non-State
parties; and promote social and political reconciliation
in the aftermath of violence.

The involvement of civil society is useful not
only in elaborating a peace agreement; it also offers a
way to ensure an agreement's success. Peace
settlements enjoy greater legitimacy and sustainability
if they are anchored in societies and reflect the needs
of the various sectors of the population.

In that context, two important questions need to
be asked. First, at the institutional level, how can
cooperation between the Security Council and civil
society organizations be strengthened? Secondly, at the
policy level, how can civil society's contributions in
peace-settlement and peacebuilding efforts be better
integrated?

With respect to the institutional level, I strongly
believe that the creation of a Peacebuilding
Commission, to which Member States have just agreed,
is a valuable opportunity to promote civil society's
involvement in conflict prevention and peacebuilding
efforts. Switzerland proposes the inclusion of the
principal institutional actors of the United Nations in
the deliberations of the Commission. I am thinking in
particular of the chair of the United Nations
Development Group, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and/or the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Those three institutions already
have solid experience in cooperation with civil society.
Furthermore, we propose that the Peacebuilding
Commission directly involve representatives of civil
society, academic institutions and the private sector
when that is useful. Thus, rather than creating
additional institutional frameworks for cooperation
with civil society, we should elaborate a mandate for
the Peacebuilding Commission that allows for the
involvement of all relevant actors, including civil
society.

In a more general context, I believe it is essential
for the Security Council to have a genuine partnership
with the Economic and Social Council, which
possesses complementary expertise and privileged
links with civil society. The new Peacebuilding
Commission could provide a framework for
strengthening such cooperation between the Council
and the Economic and Social Council.

At the policy level, Switzerland welcomes the
fact that the Security Council has been giving
increased attention in recent years to reconciliation and
post-conflict reconstruction. I should like to encourage
the Council to continue to explore how civil society
can better contribute to those efforts. This could be
done, for example, by systematically examining the
past and the potential role of civil society in peace
processes when designing peace operations and
systematically applying the principles of resolution
1325 (2000) when assessing peace missions.

Women and girls are particularly affected by
armed conflict. I therefore attach the greatest
importance to the equal participation of women in
peace and reconstruction processes. Sustainable peace
agreements can be reached only if the entire population
has a voice in shaping them. Resolution 1325 (2000)
represents a milestone in that direction, and we must
continue our efforts to translate it into action, in
particular by supporting women's organizations
working in the field in the service of peace.

The United Nations must serve as an example in
involving civil society in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. The partnerships that already exist
between the United Nations and independent
institutions can provide a useful means of developing
such civil society participation. Switzerland supports a
number of institutions that have strong links with the
United Nations, such as the Geneva International
Centre for Humanitarian Demining; the Geneva Centre
for Security Policy; the Centre for Democratic Control
of Armed Forces; the Harvard Program on
Humanitarian Policies and Conflict Research; the
Small Arms Survey; and the Geneva-based War-torn
Society Project International.

My country also actively supports civilian
initiatives to promote peace, such as the Geneva
Initiative, which had its origin in Israeli and Palestinian
civil societies. That initiative, which is fully in line
with and complementary to the third phase of the
Quartet's road map, proposes a comprehensive and
realistic model for a permanent agreement that takes
into account the vital interests and aspirations of both
Israelis and Palestinians.

In conclusion, I should like to recall that
Switzerland has extensive experience in cooperating
with civil society organizations. We intend to continue
our efforts to strengthen the participation of civil
society in conflict prevention and settlement, as well as
in peacebuilding.

