Mr. Captan (Liberia): The Government of
Liberia expresses its gratitude to the Security Council
for the opportunity to make a statement at this
important hearing on the report of the Panel of Experts
appointed pursuant to Security Council resolution 1306
(2000) in relation to Sierra Leone.

The Government of Liberia notes the report ofthe
Panel of Experts with serious reservations. Members of
the Security Council will recall that the involvement of
the Government of Liberia in the resolution of the
conflict in Sierra Leone is a result of a mandate from
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), contained in a final communique issued in
Bamako. In that communique, the Authority of Heads
of State of ECOWAS requested the President of Liberia
to

"get personally involved in solving the issues
which hamper the peace process in Sierra Leone
and to seek adequate solutions in consultation
with the other Heads of State".

Also, the Government of Liberia could not have been
an uninterested bystander. Liberia and Sierra Leone
share common historical, cultural and family ties, as
well as a common border. In addition, Liberia is
hosting over 100,000 Sierra Leonean refugees as a
result of the civil conflict. It is the considered position
of the Government of Liberia that peace in Sierra
Leone is synonymous with to peace in Liberia. There
can be no peace and stability in Liberia until there are
enduring peace and stability in Sierra Leone and other
neighbouring countries.

In keeping with the ECOWAS mandate, the
President of Liberia organized several meetings in
Monrovia between the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) leadership, ECOWAS leaders - including the
Chairman of ECOWAS, President Alpha Konare; the
President of Nigeria, Olusegun Obasanjo; the
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity,
President Gnassingbe Eyadema; President Yahya
Jammeh of the Gambia - and officials of the United
States Government and the United Nations, aimed at
moving the peace process forward. Meetings were also
convened between leaders of the RUF and the Armed
Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC) in Monrovia,
which led to the return to Freetown of Corporal Foday
Sankoh and Johnny Paul Koroma. The President also
averted a potential armed confrontation between Foday
Sankoh and Sam Bockarie that had the potential of
derailing the peace process in Sierra Leone. The
President accepted the request of ECOWAS, in
consultation with the United Nations, to remove Sam
Bockarie from Sierra Leone to Liberia.

It must be recalled that, at the request of
ECOWAS and the United Nations, the President of
Liberia negotiated the release of over 500 United
Nations peacekeepers who had been taken hostage by
the RUF. In addition, Liberia has permitted RUF
delegations going to ECOWAS-sponsored meetings to
transit through its territory. Liberia has also permitted
RUF officials to hold meetings on its territory with
officials of ECOWAS and the United Nations. The
appointment of a new interlocutor and leadership for
the RUF was achieved as a result of an initiative of the
President of Liberia at a meeting held between some
heads of State of ECOWAS and the RUF commanders
in Monrovia on 26 July 2000. These efforts on the part
of the President of Liberia were made with the sole
objective of furthering the peace process in Sierra
Leone.

Notwithstanding these initiatives, the
Government of Liberia has and continues to be the
target of grossly unsubstantiated allegations of
diamond smuggling and gun running with the
Revolutionary United Front.

On the issue of diamonds, the Government of
Liberia can neither deny nor confirm that the war in
Sierra Leone is financed by the sale of conflict
diamonds. What the Government of Liberia can
confirm is that it is neither connected nor a party to the
illicit trade of Sierra Leonean diamonds. If, as claimed
in the report, the Government of Liberia was exporting
and selling $217-million-worth of diamonds annually
to Belgium, the report fails to provide evidence of a
trail of financial transactions implicating the
Government of Liberia.

According to the Panel's report, during the period
1994-1999, a total of $227-million-worth of illicit
diamonds was traded annually between the three
neighbouring countries of Guinea, Gambia and Cote
d'Ivoire, in addition to the alleged $217-million value
of illicit Sierra Leonean diamonds that were
purportedly exported from Liberia. Significantly, these
figures exclude the official exports from Sierra Leone.
It is puzzling that the experts' report would attempt to
have the international community believe that, during
this period, the value of Sierra Leone's annual
production of diamonds was approximately $450
million. Clearly, these figures are grossly inflated. No
one familiar with the industry would agree with the
Panel that the pre-conflict value of Sierra Leone's
annual production was anywhere close to $450 million.

It is acknowledged that smuggling is endemic to
the diamond industry worldwide and not limited to
Sierra Leone. Historically, Liberia itself has faced this
problem and previous Governments have been unable
to adequately address it. This Government finds itself
in a much weaker position, having recently emerged
from a disastrous seven-year civil war that completely
destroyed the basic national infrastructure. The
problem has been further exacerbated by the
Government's lack of resources and personnel,
including customs, immigration, transport and
communications.

Liberia's export statistics clearly illustrate that
the 1987 pre-war official diamond export was 295,000
carats. This is in contrast to the official export figures
of 8,500 carats for 1998 and 1999 respectively. The
Ministry of Finance estimates that this represents only
10 per cent of the domestic production, and the
Ministry of Land, Mines and Energy estimates it to be
20 per cent. In other words, depending on which figure
is used, between 80 and 90 per cent of Liberia's
domestic production of diamonds is smuggled out of
the country. This should refute the conclusion reached
in paragraph 89 of the Panel's report that "it is not
conceivable that so much of Liberia's own diamond
production could avoid the detection of government".

With regard to the supply of arms to the RUF, the
Panel's conclusion erroneously presupposes that
virtually all of RUF's weapons are obtained from
external sources, in this case Liberia. However, the
Panel negates this conclusion when it recognizes the
following sources of weapons acquired or seized by the
RUF - namely, considerable amounts of weaponry
seized from the Sierra Leone armed forces; a
significant number of weapons seized from a Guinean
unit of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) in January 2000; and another Guinean
unit serving under the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) that had previously been disarmed during
ambushes and seizures. Great amounts of rifles were
lost to the rebels, as well as eight armoured personnel
carriers and several other military vehicles, when
UNAMSIL contingents were kidnapped and disarmed
in May 2000. This can be seen in paragraph 179 of the
Panel's report. Additional sources of weapons to the
RUF include those seized from the Indian contingent of
UNAMSIL.
In addition, the RUF obtained weapons directly
from the Sierra Leone army inventory when the Armed
Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC), headed by
Johnny Paul Koroma, took power in May 1997 and
entered into a power-sharing arrangement with the
RUF. The Sierra Leone Government may also have
been a source of supply to the RUF when it requested
two waivers of the provisions of the ECOWAS protocol
on the small arms moratorium on 23 June 2000 and 18
July 2000. The waivers were to permit the importation
from the United Kingdom of five rounds of 7.62 NATO
ammunition, 4,000 rounds of 81 mm mortar
ammunition, and five million rounds of 7.62 NATO
link ammunition for General Purpose Machine Guns
(GPMGs).

Given the pattern of events in Sierra Leone, it is
not an unreasonable assumption that a substantial
portion of these shipments also ended up in RUF's
hands. And it should be noted that in paragraph 82 of
the report, it is confirmed that additional arms
shipments were received by the RUF from
neighbouring Guinea based on RUF diamond sales
made to mid-level Guinean military officers. The report
further admits in paragraph 248 that the RUF received
weapons captured from ECOMOG forces that fell
victim to various ambushes.

Given all of these well-documented non-Liberian
sources of arms received by the RUF, we find it unfair
and erroneous that the Panel would conclude that the
primary supplier of arms received by the RUF is
Liberia and that this arms flow is a result of official
Liberian policy. The Government of Liberia
acknowledges that it maintains a training base in
Gbartala, Bong County, Liberia, which provides much-
needed training facilities for its internal security
organizations, including members of the Special
Security Services, which provides executive protection,
and the Anti-Terrorist Unit, which provides protection
for foreign embassies and sensitive Government
installations. Non-governmental organizations and
foreign observers, including the United States military
attache, have been permitted to visit the training
facilities from time to time. The Government of Liberia
is currently engaged in discussions with the
International Committee of the Red Cross to provide
workshops on humanitarian law at the training base. It
must be re-emphasized that the Government of Liberia
does not train any foreigners at this facility.

As regards Liberian Government initiatives, the
Government has reacted to allegations of illicit
activities on its border by making concrete proposals to
the United Nations to ensure proper monitoring and
verification. These have included, among other
measures, the deployment of UNAMSIL on the
Liberian side of the border with Sierra Leone, the
deployment of international monitors at all ports of
entry within Liberia, the establishment of a multi-
spectral aerial surveillance of Liberian borders and the
provision of technical assistance to develop Liberian
indigenous capacity to monitor illegal trading of
diamonds. Unfortunately, these measures have yet to be
considered by the Security Council. In light of the
current situation, the Government of Liberia considers
it imperative that these measures be given urgent
consideration by the Council.

In the area of aircraft registry, on Monday, 22
January 2001, the Government of Liberia took the
decision to ground all Liberian-registered aircraft and
has requested the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) to notify the civil aviation
authorities of all member States of this action. The
Government has also revoked the appointment of all
agents acting on its behalf in matters of aircraft
inspection and registration. These measures are in
recognition of the fact that many aircraft fly the
Liberian flag without the knowledge or authorization of
the Government of Liberia, and that some of the
aircraft actually registered under the Liberian flag
obtained their authorization during the period of the
civil war and prior to the election of the present
Administration. The Government of Liberia has sought
the assistance of ICAO in providing technical
assistance to improve its capacity in air traffic control
and surveillance.

As concerns disengagement from the Sierra
Leonean peace process, while it is the desire of the
Government of Liberia to continue to be constructively
engaged in the search for peace in Sierra Leone, it is
equally true that it cannot continue its engagement in
the midst of the grave allegations levied against it by
the Panel of Experts, especially the accusation that
Liberia has not played a constructive role in Sierra
Leone.

In view of the foregoing, the Liberian
Government has embarked upon an alternative policy
of disengagement from Sierra Leone. Consistent with
this policy, all RUF members, including Mr. Sam
Bockarie, have been asked to leave Liberia. All
members of the RUF have left, with the exception of
Mr. Bockarie, whose return to Sierra Leone the RUF
leadership has rejected. Cognizant of the ongoing
constructive dialogue between the RUF and
UNAMSIL, the confidence-building visits into RUF-
held territory, the opening of roads and the ongoing
discussions concerning the deployment of UNAMSIL
forces into RUF territory, the Government of Liberia,
in order to avoid a breakout of hostilities occasioned by
the return of Mr. Bockarie, has engaged the Chairman
of ECOWAS in discussions aimed at identifying a third
country that will accept him.

The transiting of RUF members through Liberian
territory will no longer be permitted, nor will they be
allowed to attend meetings on Liberian territory. My
Government is prepared to take further actions to close
its border with Sierra Leone and to recuse itself from
all discussions on the peace process in Sierra Leone,
should the international community deem it necessary.

On the subject of diamonds, cognizant of the
complex and difficult problems associated with the
monitoring and control of diamond trading in its
territory and the subregion, the Government of Liberia
has decided to seek the assistance and cooperation of
the United Nations in putting into place an appropriate
mechanism for the control and monitoring of the
diamond trade, especially with the view towards
maximizing transparency and control. The Government
of Liberia proposes the following.

First, two or more buying companies recognized
by the World Diamond Council should be encouraged
by the United Nations to set up buying stations in
Liberia. Secondly, all diamonds bought by the
companies should be exported through the Central
Bank of Liberia under international guidelines, as set
up under Security Council resolution 1306 (2000),
dealing with the certification of Sierra Leonean
diamonds. Thirdly, the United Nations should place a
monitoring regime at the Central Bank of Liberia to
oversee this process for six months. Fourthly, an
embargo should be placed on all diamonds exported
from Liberia except those certified under this regime.
Fifthly, the international community should assist
Liberia by providing technical assistance in developing
an internationally acceptable certification regime, in
order to develop its capacity in dealing with the illegal
trading of diamonds.

As regards cross-border incursions, the ongoing
cross-border armed incursions within the Mano River
Union is a matter of grave concern for the Government
of Liberia, which has suffered four different attacks on
its territory from neighbouring Guinea. Based upon the
complaint ofthe Government of Liberia to ECOWAS, a
committee was established to investigate the
incursions. After its report to the heads of State, the
committee confirmed that the attacks on Liberia did
emanate from the territory of Guinea and were by
Liberian dissidents. It was the recommendation of the
committee that a military observer mission be deployed
at the borders of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone and
that dialogue ensue among the heads of State. Liberia
welcomes the ECOWAS committee's recommendations
and calls upon the United Nations to urgently facilitate
the implementation of these recommendations by
assisting ECOWAS with its logistical requirements.

Furthermore, Liberia unequivocally condemns all
dissident activities within the Mano River Union,
including the recent attacks in Guinea.

I now turn to other concerns of the Government
of Liberia. The Government expresses its concern at
the inclusion of Mr. Ian Smillie as a member of the
Panel of Experts. Mr. Smillie co-authored an article in
January 2000 entitled, "The Heart of the Matter: Sierra
Leone, Diamonds & Human Security". In the article,
he indicts the Liberian Government on charges of
supplying the RUF with guns and providing an outlet
for the sale of illicit diamonds. Mr. Smillie's
conclusions were reached without local investigation,
and he did not confront the Government of Liberia with
his purported evidence, as is required under the right of
reply. His presence on the Panel was prejudicial from
its inception.
The Panel of Experts exceeded the mandate
provided for it under paragraph 19 (d) of Security
Council resolution 1306 (2000), which enjoined the
Panel to make

"observations and recommendations on
strengthening the implementation of the measures
imposed by paragraph 2 of resolution 1171
(1998), and of those imposed by paragraph 1
above, no later than 31 October 2000".

The measures imposed by the Council referred to
above include the prohibition of the direct or indirect
import of rough diamonds from Sierra Leone and the
prohibition of the sale and supply of arms and related
materiel to non-governmental forces in Sierra Leone.
The mandate of the Panel envisioned recommendations
from experts that would provide remedial measures to
strengthen the measures already imposed by the
Council, not punitive measures.

The extreme prejudice of the Panel is
demonstrated by its recommendation for the imposition
of a travel ban on Liberian officials and diplomats by
United Nations Member States, a measure that has no
basis in the Charter of the United Nations and that
denies Liberia the opportunity to conduct its external
relations as a sovereign Member of the United Nations.
In addition, the proposed ban on the export of Liberian
timber is intended to deny the Government substantial
revenue, which funds social programmes in the areas of
education, health and social welfare. The claim by the
Panel that timber revenue is used to purchase arms for
the RUF is a contradiction of the Panel's submission
that the revenue from diamond sales "is more than
enough to sustain its military activities" (S/2000/1195, para. 80).

We Wish to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the initiative of the member States of our
regional organization, the Economic Community of
West African States, with regard to the problem in
Sierra Leone.

Since the inception of the civil war in Sierra
Leone, ECOWAS has remained seized of this matter,
while enjoying the support and cooperation of the
United Nations. ECOWAS has not only committed
peacekeepers to Sierra Leone, but has also formulated a
peace plan through negotiations involving all the
parties to the conflict and international guarantors.
Furthermore, ECOWAS has contributed a significant
proportion of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) forces. Sharing the concerns of
the Security Council, ECOWAS established a
commission of enquiry to investigate the illicit trade in
diamonds and the trade in arms - a commission that
has yet to receive funding assistance from the
international community. Quite recently, ECOWAS
successfully negotiated a ceasefire agreement with the
RUF, which has led to a general cessation of hostilities,
the return of some of the seized UNAMSIL equipment,
access to RUF territory and negotiations towards the
deployment of UNAMSIL forces into RUF-controlled
territory within the next few weeks.

These efforts are ongoing and reflect the
commitment and resolve of the member States of
ECOWAS to make every effort to achieve a pacific
settlement of the Sierra Leonean conflict. It is the hope
of the Government of Liberia that the Security Council
will encourage, support and utilize this regional
initiative, which has proved successful in the past, in
Liberia during its civil war. We therefore welcome the
upcoming meeting between the ECOWAS delegation
and the Security Council.

Within the context of regional peace, security and
stability, the Government of Liberia reaffirms its
commitment to the Mano River Union binding Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Guinea. It unreservedly condemns the
atrocities and other human rights abuses inflicted on
the civilian population in Sierra Leone as a result of the
civil crisis in that country. Those members of the RUF
and all others found guilty of violating the Lome
Agreement after its signing must be held accountable
for their actions.

The Government of Liberia equally condemns the
continuing cross-border attacks, which are contributing
to a humanitarian crisis throughout the region. It is
imperative that the countries in the subregion,
particularly the Mano River Union countries, identify
the root causes of instability in the region, including
security concerns, and take timely measures to build
confidence and restore peace and stability, as the best
means of promoting the welfare and development of
their respective countries and peoples.

Liberia, as a founding member of the United
Nations, remains committed to implementing all
resolutions adopted by the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
light of the very serious charges made against Liberia
and its concrete decisions to address the concerns of
the international community, the Government of
Liberia requests the cooperation and support of the
Security Council in the undertakings of the
Government. This approach, coupled with the regional
initiative of ECOWAS, would yield far greater positive
results than would the imposition of punitive measures.

The Government of Liberia intends to remain a
constructive partner within the comity of nations. It
will do whatever is reasonable and positive to
contribute to the search for peace in the region.

The Government of Liberia proposes a new
programme geared at controlling the illicit diamond
trade in West Africa, in Liberia in particular. It requests
active United Nations involvement in securing
Liberia's borders, so as to avoid the appearance of any
interaction with the RUF. It has grounded all Liberian-
registered aircraft and has appealed to the International
Civil Aviation Organization to assist in the proper
registration and use of Liberian-registered aircraft. It
agrees to have its airports and seaports monitored by
the United Nations to eliminate the entry of war
materials which could end up in Sierra Leone. It calls
for monitoring of all borders within the Mano River
Union to minimize and eliminate cross-border
conflicts. It has disengaged itself from all activities
related to the peace process in Sierra Leone. It agrees
to work in harmony with the United Nations in all of
its efforts to end the suffering of the people of Sierra
Leone.

The Government of Liberia strongly condemns
the atrocities and other human rights abuses inflicted
upon the innocent people of Sierra Leone. It is the view
of the Government that the perpetrators of these
heinous crimes should be brought to justice.

The seven-year Liberian civil war destroyed the
country's infrastructure and its productive base,
weakened its private sector, reduced its tax base,
exacerbated its debt burden, weakened its monetary
and fiscal-management capacity, weakened its
institutional capacity, ruined its investment climate and
created an unprecedented unemployment rate of 85 per
cent. Liberia's production base has been narrowed and
is dependent mainly on its timber and rubber exports.
The external debt burden now totals $2.731 billion,
which is considered too high for meaningful economic
development.

Liberia faces the challenge of addressing the
needs of its population, of which 55 per cent are under
18 years of age and 45 per cent are under the age of 14.
Furthermore, 73.2 per cent of Liberia's women are of
childbearing age. Poverty-reduction assistance
programmes to this population have been withheld
through the influence of powerful States, under a
regime of punitive sanctions. Nevertheless, we remain
hopeful that this Council will not permit the suffering
of the Liberian people to be further exacerbated and to
remain unabated.

