Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes to
thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for her briefing.

Bolivia regrets the crisis in Syria, which, after all
these years, has caused so much destruction and the
loss of so many lives. Ms. Mueller told us that, since
the beginning ofthe conflict, more than 500,000 people
have died; currently, there are 13.1 million people who
need humanitarian assistance, 2.9 million of whom are
trapped in besieged and hard-to-reach areas; and at
least 6.1 million people have been internally displaced.

We believe that the most recent events have resulted
in an increase in the number of dead, ofpeople who need
humanitarian assistance and of internally displaced
persons. We call for the cleaning and demining of and
access for basic humanitarian assistance to the city of
Raqqa to take place as soon as possible to allow for the
safe and dignified return of those families who were
displaced due to the conflict. We regret that, since the
month of October 2017, approximately 220 people have
died and others have been injured in blasts.

The recent events in Syria show once again the
urgent need to revitalize the Geneva political process,
reinforcing the tangible results of the Astana meeting,
in consultation, of course, with all the parties involved,
including the opposition, in order to facilitate the
development of mutual confidence-building measures
and, as a result, the improvement of the political and
humanitarian situation. We are certain that this will
also allow for the release of detainees and hostages
and the search for the disappeared, as well as for the
establishment of conditions for a political process and a
sustained and lasting ceasefire.

We express our support for the efforts made recently
in Vienna and for the work to take place in Sochi. We
welcome the decision of the Secretary-General to allow
his representative to participate in those events.

We once again remind the parties to the conflict that
they must allow unconditional access for humanitarian
assistance, ensuring and safeguarding the security
and physical integrity of humanitarian workers, in
particular in the besieged and hard-to-reach areas.
In that regard, we reiterate once again our highest
recognition for the work being done by the staff of the
various humanitarian assistance agencies and bodies on
the ground, and we urge the parties involved to meet
their obligations under international law, in particular
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

We remind the parties involved that they must
implement the Astana agreements, respect the
de-escalation areas and prevent any attacks on civilian
institutions, such as residential areas, schools and
hospitals, in line with international humanitarian law,
to ensure the protection of civilians and unimpeded
access for accredited humanitarian organizations
to provide the greatly needed assistance. In that
regard, we underscore the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which has
reached 800,000 people through cross-border convoys.
We hope that those operations can continue, for which
better coordination and cooperation between the
United Nations and the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic are recommended.

In that context, we underscore the agreements arrived
at among Iran, Russia, and Turkey on 22 December
2017, and we urgently call for strengthening them so as
to free detainees and abductees, as well as to positively
identify missing persons. We stress the importance of
the work of the Russian Centre for Reconciliation of
Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, which
has become a guarantor of security and the distribution
of humanitarian aid, while ensuring the evacuation of
persons from areas facing armed conflict.

Lastly, it is important to point out that the
humanitarian situation, which is affecting more
than 13.2 million people in Syria, must be resolved
exclusively through an organized, inclusive and
political process based on dialogue and led for and by
the Syrian people, which would allow for a peaceful
solution respecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence of Syria. We call on members of the
Security Council to make every effort to ensure that
it remain unified on such an issue as fundamental as
humanitarian assistance.
