Mr. Schwarz-Schilling: I first spoke to the
Council six months ago, shortly after becoming High
Representative and European Union Special
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. On that
occasion, I set out the importance of handing over
greater responsibility to the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and how I intended to place the principle
of local ownership as a guideline of the international
community for the normalization and progress of this
country towards Euro-Atlantic integration.

Half a year later, I wish to discuss with the
Council the complex reality of putting that principle
into practice. I will also describe how we are seeking
to help Bosnia and Herzegovina make the transition
beyond peace implementation towards Euro-Atlantic
integration. I will also highlight areas where progress
has been made and areas where it has not, as well as
outstanding issues that need to be addressed.

The report before the Council covers the first six
months of this year and ends with the decision of the
Peace Implementation Council (PIC) Steering Board to
close the Office of the High Representative at the end
of June 2007. Developments since that decision have
demonstrated the scale of the challenge involved in
moving to local ownership, and will have to be
06-60815
considered by the PIC Steering Board when, early next
year, it reviews its decision, taking into account the
overall situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
region.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's reality today is in
many ways uncomfortable. For Bosnian politicians it
has been difficult to move forward on the road of
ownership and to avoid the temptation of blaming
political opponents or the international community for
the lack of progress. For the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina it has been frustrating to see the reform
process slow. Fortunately, there is considerable
goodwill on all sides in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Unfortunately, goodwill is not universal, and
opportunists have sought to exploit the difficulties of
transition to play on old fears of the people. That
makes it harder for those politicians with the courage
to take on greater responsibility for governing the
country and serving the citizens. One can also see in
quarters of the international community that now is not
the time to step back and hand over the reins. We might
need more time and more patience in the process.

Yet in these testing times, the international
community must hold its course and continue handing
over responsibility gradually. It must not be done so
quickly that the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
overwhelmed and unable to take the reins. But, at the
same time, it must not be done so slowly that the
country's leaders fail to develop a sense of
responsibility for Bosnia and Herzegovina's situation,
with a corresponding sense of duty towards the citizens
who elected them.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is in many respects
fortunate, since the direction in which it is travelling is
clear. The European Union (EU) is offering the
prospect of membership to Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the countries of the Western Balkans, as it did so
successfully with the eight Central European countries
that joined in 2004, as well as Bulgaria and Romania,
which will join next year. If there is one issue that the
overwhelming majority of people in Bosnia and
Herzegovina agree on, it is that their country's future
lies in Europe. That is very much the case, even though
political leaders in Republika Srpska have on occasion
asserted that they were prepared to sacrifice Bosnia
and Herzegovina's European future rather than make
compromises on certain issues. That European
perspective should therefore become the driving force
06-60815
for the country's recovery. The incentive to reform is
the guarantee of future prosperity.

For that to occur, the country's politicians have to
take the necessary steps to reach European standards in
main areas of the State and civil society. In that
connection, in the negotiations with the European
Commission on a Stabilization and Association
Agreement, the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
have started with high professionalism. The Bosnian
negotiators excelled at negotiating the technical side of
the Agreement - a promising sign of their capacity
and willingness to do what is required over the next
few years to complete EU integration.

Allow me here to pay tribute to the role played by
Prime Minister Adnan Terzie, who will address the
Council as soon as I finish, and the lead negotiators,
Igor Davidovic and Osman Topcagic.

There is, however, also a political side to the

Agreement, and political reforms - which are a
precondition for completing the stabilization and
association process - have stalled. The necessary

parallel process of implementation of the outstanding
reforms by local politicians has not happened. In part,
the reform process has stalled because of the inevitable
need for a period of adaptation and adjustment to the
concept of ownership and the ability to put it into
practice. In part, moreover, it has stalled because of the
elections that took place on I October. Those
inevitably involved a period of campaigning and
election rhetoric that moved away from the problem-
solving spirit of compromise and cooperation needed
to undertake sensible reforms to fulfil the requirements
of Euro-Atlantic integration.

However, failure to complete public broadcasting
legislation and insufficient progress on a higher
education law and on legislation essential to fiscal
sustainability are clearly slowing Bosnia and
Herzegovina's progress towards Europe.

One of the key outstanding requirements for the
Stabilization and Association Agreement is police
restructuring. That is needed for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to progress towards EU integration, and,
above all, it is needed for the sake of the citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

A Police Restructuring Directorate has been
working since January and is scheduled to deliver an
implementation plan at the end of this month, based on
3
three principles drawn up by the European
Commission. Securing political agreement on this plan
will be a key test of the capacity of local institutions to
assume ownership. Police restructuring and the other
reforms are not small matters. They go to the heart of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's ability to develop and grow,
to function effectively and to serve its citizens

properly.

Another area that goes to the heart of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's identity, past and future, is that of
constitutional reform. The Dayton constitution was
created in 1995 to end a war. It must evolve to meet the
demand for a functional, fiscally sustainable State able
to join Euro-Atlantic institutions and a democratic
State accepted as legitimate by all who live in it.

Party leaders on all sides came together regularly
throughout 2005 and early 2006. After hundreds of
hours of sitting together, discussing where
compromises could be made and where consensus was
not yet possible, they agreed a first package of
constitutional amendments in March. Despite
widespread support for that package and optimism that
Bosnia and Herzegovina's politicians were ready to
take that first step, the initiative failed - by just two
votes - to obtain the required two-thirds majority in
Parliament.

That was a tough blow to those who dared to take
a step in a difficult but vital direction. The setback was
also subsequently exploited by opponents of the
constitutional amendments, who chose to step out of
what had been a constructive negotiating process.

To be sure, the constitutional reform package is
less than perfect. It is, however, a reasonable first step
towards more functional State structures better able to
meet European standards. It also represents the level of
compromise and progress that can be made at this time.
This imperfect political reality of compromise to make
progress is what ownership means. That is how a better
future can be built gradually. There are no easier
alternatives, and there are no perfect political solutions
waiting around the corner. The politicians of Bosnia
and Herzegovina must learn that such important issues
can be dealt with only one step at a time, bringing all
sides together within the process, identifying where
compromises can be reached and where they cannot,
and making the most of issues that can be taken
forward rather than focusing on areas where progress
cannot be made.
The parties that agreed to those amendments to
the Constitution have to date fulfilled their
commitments. As a result, there remains an opportunity
for the amendments to be put before the newly elected
parliament. Indeed, the issue of constitutional reform
will rise to the top of the political agenda as soon as
coalitions and governments have been formed. The
Council should also be aware that it is likely to remain
there for a long time, as the first package is but the
beginning of a longer-term process that both Europe
and the United States are committed to supporting.

Another issue that will not disappear is that of
cooperation with the International War Crimes Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague. The fact that
war crimes suspects like Ratko Mladic and Radovan
Karadzic remain at liberty after so many years
continues to impede the peace process, undermines
faith in the rule of law and demonstrates an
unwillingness to face up to the crimes of the past.

The requirements for completing both peace
implementation and EU integration are clear.
Responsibility for both lies with the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

That brings us back to the issue of transition. It
was in recognition of the progress that has been made
in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the past 11 years
that the decision of the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board to close the Office of the High
Representative and to develop the role of Europe was
taken in June. As a key element of the next phase, the
European Union is reinforcing its presence in Bosnia
and Herzegovina with a view to assisting the country
on the road towards European integration by finalizing
the Stabilization and Association Agreement and
developing in particular the role of the EU Special
Representative. In the process, many difficult issues,
including in particular the rehabilitation of individuals
removed from office by my predecessors, have to be
resolved before the Office of the High Representative
can be closed.

That brings me to an issue that the United
Nations failed to resolve before closing down its
International Police Task Force (IPTF) in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in 2002. When I spoke to the Security
Council in April, I drew attention to the plight of police
officers decertified by the IPTF without the possibility
of review or appeal. On that occasion, I said that we
should not preach the principles of the rule of law,
06-60815
responsibility for reforms and ownership while at the
same time contravening those principles in our own
activities.

Since then, the members of my staff have worked
together with their colleagues in both the EU Police
Mission and the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to help establish the facts and develop the outlines of a
review process. In addition, a team of experts has
visited New York twice this year and briefed the
Secretariat, the Core Drafting Group and EU missions.

I intend to continue working on this issue
together with the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I am also happy to consider any proposal
that the United Nations puts forward. However, legally
and politically, I am unable to resolve this issue. The
ball is squarely in the Council's court.

I remain committed to the principle of ownership
and hope to oversee that transition in line with the
schedule I have described. I also recognize, however,
the prudence of the Peace Implementation Council's
decision to review and confirm its June decision to
close the Office ofthe High Representative following a
detailed and careful assessment early next year.

The irresponsible rhetoric that marred the
election campaign has helped generate feelings of
insecurity among parts of the population. That is a
source of concern, as is the seeming inability of
politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina to resolve
problems within existing constitutional structures in
the absence of intrusive international involvement.

There is also the spectre of the decision on the
final status of Kosovo looming over the entire region.
Even if, strictly speaking, there is no linkage between
that decision and the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, it has the potential to be destabilizing if
the decision were to be delayed.

The way forward is, nevertheless, clear. The
politicians of Bosnia and Herzegovina have an
opportunity to demonstrate that the transition can
proceed on schedule by taking the initiative, enacting
and implementing the many outstanding reforms and,
with international support, working towards building a
prosperous European democracy.

