China supports the international community in stepping up humanitarian relief efforts in Syria on the basis of respecting Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity. We encourage the relevant parties to push for progress in cross-line humanitarian operations. China does not object to retaining the cross-border mechanism at this stage. Cross-border operations should strictly follow the guiding principles of humanitarian emergency assistance set out in General Assembly resolution 46/182. Meanwhile, the cross-border mechanism should be adjusted accordingly in the light of the developments on the ground. Years of illegal sanctions have wreaked havoc on Syria's economic and social development, exacerbated the humanitarian crisis and weakened Syria's capacity to respond to coronavirus disease. Secretary-General Guterres and Special Envoy Pedersen have repeatedly called on the relevant countries to lift unilateral coercive measures. Those appeals are supported by the vast majority of United Nations Member States. China has repeatedly emphasized to the co-penholders that the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures must be taken into account in the Security Council's draft resolution on the mandate renewal of the cross-border mechanism in Syria and that necessary actions should be taken on the issue of unilateral coercive measures. However, the co-penholders ignored the appeals of Member States and refused to accept China's proposed amendments. Under such circumstances, China was left with no choice but to vote against draft resolution S/2020/667. China once again calls upon the Security Council to address this critical issue and urges the relevant countries to immediately lift the unilateral coercive measures imposed on Syria. We also request an objective assessment by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the impact of unilateral coercive measures on the humanitarian situation in Syria, to be presented in a comprehensive report to the Security Council. The United States claims that it cares about the suffering of Syrian civilians, but it has imposed additional illegal sanctions on Syria through the law known as the Caesar Act, stifling the livelihoods of the Syrian people. The United States claims that there are so-called humanitarian exemptions from the unilateral coercive measures. However, years of illegal sanctions have severely undermined Syria's ability to mobilize resources, develop the economy and improve people's well-being. That can by no means be resolved by the so-called humanitarian exemptions. The United States claims to uphold the spirit of humanitarianism, but it has politicized humanitarian issues and ruthlessly bashed the Government and the people of Syria, devastating livelihoods of the Syrian people. The role the United States has played in the Syrian issue and the crime it has committed in Syria are clear to the people of the world. China emphasizes once again that we should take a holistic and comprehensive approach to the Syrian issue, considering the political, counter-terrorism, security and humanitarian aspects together. We urge all parties to strengthen dialogue and negotiation, actively promote a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political process and work together to achieve a peaceful, just and proper settlement of the Syrian issue at an early date.
