Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing the first open debate of the year. I
also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
comprehensive briefing.
This debate is taking place just two days prior to
the beginning of the second Geneva Conference on
Syria in Montreux. The holding of the Conference and
the political push that it will certainly generate are a
welcome and necessary development. Brazil is ready
to contribute to a positive outcome to the Conference,
which should mark the opening of a dialogue between
the Syrian Government and opposition groups to end the
violence and to ensure that peace is fully re-established.

Brazil has consistently advocated for a peaceful
solution to the current conflict and supported the
launching of a Syrian-led political process that meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people while
preserving the independence, sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria. The presence of a vibrant
community of Syrian origin in Brazil only increases
our interest in contributing to peace in that sister nation.

We remain convinced that an agreed transition
that halts the violence in Syria is still possible. At the
same time, it is also true that, had the principles and
guidelines agreed upon in the Geneva communique
of June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex)been put into effect
earlier, the urgent task of restoring peace to a war-torn
country and neighbouring areas would have been less
formidable today. In Montreux, we look forward to the
beginning of a process that will lead to the formation
of a transitional governing body with full executive
powers, established by mutual consent.

We underscore that the parties must create a positive
atmosphere for negotiations and, having embraced the
path of dialogue, reject once and for all the illusion of
military victory. The Syrian Government, which has
the primary responsibility in that regard, must cease
all armed violence, release arbitrarily detained persons,
including the more vulnerable, in particular women and
children, and allow full humanitarian access to people
in need. The Syrian armed opposition must shoulder its
responsibilities and reciprocate and bear in mind that
humanitarian obligations apply to all armed parties.
There will be many obstacles, but the process must
be sustained. All the relevant stakeholders should be
allowed to participate, without exclusions. All must
refrain from aiding and abetting extremist groups and
those who wish the process to fail. The influx ofweapons
to all parties in Syria should cease immediately.
Brazil continues to be extremely concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Syria and in neighbouring
countries, such as Lebanon, Turkey, Jordan, Iraq and
Egypt, which have been receiving hundreds ofthousands
of refugees throughout the conflict. In order to mitigate
that precarious and tragic humanitarian situation, Brazil
has made important financial contributions, including
during the second International Humanitarian Pledging
Conference for Syria, held last week in Kuwait with great
success. We have constantly urged all parties in Syria
to allow full and unhindered access by humanitarian
staff and assistance to the civilian population. At the
same time, in line with the reports of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic, we reiterate our grave concern about
the negative impact that unilateral sanctions are having
on the living conditions of the Syrian people.

Brazil is deeply concerned about the increase of
instability in Lebanon. There has been a series ofviolent
acts by armed groups across Lebanon, especially in
Tripoli, and terrorist bombings that caused death and
injury among the population, including murdering
a Brazilian citizen in Beirut. We join the Security
Council in condemning those heinous crimes. The
international community must keep up its support for
Lebanon's State institutions, including the army, and
for the fight against terrorism.

We welcome the opening, on 16 January, of the trial
at the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, nearly nine years
after the attack that killed former Prime Minister Rafiq
Hariri and 21 others.

As the homeland of millions of Lebanese
descendants and with a Brazilian community living
in Lebanon, Brazil reiterates its readiness to help
Lebanon face current challenges. Brazil fully supports
the important work carried out by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, which has been a key
player in the promotion of stability in Lebanon and
instrumental for security along the border between
Lebanon and Israel.

The current instability in Iraq and the increasing
number of civilian victims reinforce our perception that
sustainable peace cannot be achieved through unilateral
actions without Security Council authorization.

Brazil has welcomed the resumption of direct final
status negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians,
in the hope that the talks will lead to the realization
of a two-State solution based on the 1967 borders. We
commend the efforts undertaken by the international
community, especially by United States Secretary of
State John Kerry, and encourage him to continue to
pursue a comprehensive peace agreement.

We regret, however, that after encouraging news
regarding the release of Palestinian prisoners, the
Israeli Government has announced plans for the further
construction of settlement units in the Palestinian
occupied territory. Those settlements are illegal and
undermine the peaceful solution of the conflict. The
logic of following confidence-building measures
with confidence-sapping actions is detrimental to the
process.

At the same time, Brazil strongly condemns the
renewed rocket launches from Gaza into Israel, which
are contrary to the cause ofpeace and only trigger more
radicalization.

Brazil once again calls for the Security Council to
fully carry out its responsibilities and provide support
for the peace process. We also continue to expect that the
Quartet will play a proactive role and report regularly
to the Security Council. In that regard, a support group
to the Quartet with wider geographical representation
might provide badly required impetus to its activities.

We also underscore the importance of the
participation of Israeli and Palestinian civil society in
the creation of conditions for the success of the peace
process. Brazil remains ready to support and engage in
their initiatives towards reconciliation and sustainable
peace. Brazil welcomes and fully supports the launch of
the International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People.

Finally, we are encouraged by the signing ofthejoint
plan of action on Iran's nuclear programme by the five
permanent members of the Security Council and Iran.
We commend the goodwill demonstrated by Tehran
in the negotiations, under the leadership of President
Hassan Rouhani. We hope that the positive dialogue
between the parties will lead to a comprehensive
solution, the lifting of sanctions and an encompassing
agreement as soon as possible.

