Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): 1 am pleased to be
speaking on behalf of the members of the Group
of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict-Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
Cote d'Ivoire, France, Germany, Indonesia, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Sweden,
the United Kingdom, Uruguay and my own country,
Switzerland. The Group of Friends thanks the
Indonesian presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today's open debate, and we also thank
today's briefers for their statements.

This year we are celebrating the seventieth
anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions of 1949,
which have been universally ratified and are the most
important treaties governing the protection of victims
of armed conflict. This year also marks the twentieth
anniversary of seminal developments in the Security
Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
which the Council has recalled today and which
established the protection of civilians as a key aspect of
the maintenance of peace and security.

The Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict welcomes the active role played by
the Council in that process. That has been reflected,
for instance, in landmark resolutions on the protection
of civilians and peacekeeping mandates, the inclusion
of the protection of civilians in situation-specific
resolutions, and the use of other Council tools to
support the implementation of the protection-of-
civilians agenda in concrete ways. The Group ofFriends
urges the Council to build on that progress by being
systematic, comprehensive and consistent, both within
and across situations, in prioritizing the protection of
civilians in its deliberations and decisions, including by
taking timely decisions aimed at preventing and ending
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes,
while taking into account the importance of refraining
from causing further harm to civilian populations. The
Council must maintain a comprehensive approach to
the protection of all civilians, which includes focusing
on all persons in vulnerable situations impartially.
A gender-based approach is also a key component of
effective protection.

It is now more necessary than ever to step up our
efforts, in View of the acute challenges highlighted
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/373).
Indiscriminate attacks occur with appalling frequency
in many contemporary conflicts. The trend in the
urbanization of armed conflicts continues to develop,
with its particularly severe impact on civilians and
civilian facilities, especially due to the indiscriminate
use of weapons in densely populated areas. Conflict-
related sexual violence persists in many armed conflicts,
often as part of a broader strategy. Constraints on
humanitarian access are increasing. All too often, the
wounded and sick, as well as medical and humanitarian
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, are
intentionally attacked, along with their facilities. That
is why we must redouble our efforts to implement
resolution 2286 (2016), taking note in that regard of the
Secretary-General's recommendations as well as the
political declaration of 31 October 2017.

Children often suffer the most from the devastating
effects of conflicts, and that is why we should
condemn unlawful attacks on schools in the strongest
terms, taking note in that regard of the Safe Schools
Declaration and the Paris Principles on the recruitment
of children. Armed conflict has a disproportionate
impact on persons with disabilities. Journalists and
media workers are also particularly targeted and should
be protected, in line with resolutions 1738 (2006) and
2222 (2015). The starvation of civilian populations is
being increasingly used as a method of warfare, which
is a violation of international humanitarian law, as
reiterated in resolution 2417 (2018). In that regard, we
welcome the ongoing discussions among States parties
to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court regarding a proposal to amend the current legal
accountability framework.

Negative trends and the heavy civilian toll oftoday's
conflicts should not prevent us from highlighting
progress and identifying avenues for action. Let us
stress the benefits of compliance with norms and
positive examples. Let us build an ambitious protection
agenda for the 20 years to come and beyond. It is in that
spirit that the Group of Friends would like to stress the
following four priorities.

First, enhancing respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
is absolutely crucial. We are all obliged to respect
and ensure respect for international humanitarian
law under the Geneva Conventions. Armed conflicts
are regulated by specific rules, which include those
governing the conduct of hostilities, protecting the
wounded and sick, as well as civilians, and providing for
humanitarian access. In View ofthe ongoing widespread
violations, we call on Member States to uphold their
responsibilities and urge all States that have not already
done so to consider ratifying the 1977 Protocols
Additional to the Geneva Conventions. The Security
Council must systematically demand that Member
States, as well as parties to armed conflict, respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law in
all circumstances, including allowing and facilitating
unimpeded humanitarian access to those in need. We
also recall the possibility for States to make use of the
good offices of the International Humanitarian Fact-
Finding Commission to facilitate the restoration of an
attitude of respect for international humanitarian law.

Secondly and consequently, ensuring accountability
for violations of international humanitarian law is
of paramount importance to demonstrate to actual
or potential perpetrators that violations do not go
unpunished and to deliver justice to victims. We welcome
national-level investigations and prosecutions, and call
on the Council to promote and encourage support for
accountability at this level. In line with the principle
of complementarity to national jurisdictions, when
such national systems are unable or unwilling to act,
accountability should be ensured through international
investigative andjudicial mechanisms.

In such contexts, the Council should, in a
non-selective manner, use more systematically the
tools at its disposal to establish facts and promote
accountability for serious Violations of international
humanitarian law, as well as violations and abuses
of human rights law amounting to crimes under
international law, including by making use of existing
fact-finding bodies or establishing ad hoc commissions
of inquiry and, when appropriate, ensuring referrals to
the International Criminal Court. We call on all States
to consider ratifying the Rome Statute and to fully
cooperate with the Court.

Thirdly, the Security Council must ensure that
relevant peacekeeping operations have a clear mandate
and adequate support, including training and equipment,
to carry out key protection of civilians activities. The
Council should ensure that the anchoring of protection
of civilians mandates in relevant peacekeeping
operations forms an integral part of comprehensive
peace processes, in coordination with the Secretariat,
troop- and police-contributing countries and the host
State. It should also systematically call for performance
and accountability in the implementation of protection
of civilians mandates, consistent with resolution 2436
(2018), and encourage engagement with local and
affected communities.

The recommendations of the 2018 report (A/72/l9)
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
and the commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative provide a foundation to tackle some of the
challenges related to the implementation of protection
of civilians mandates. As we approach the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we recall the
proven benefits that an increased presence of women in
peacekeeping brings to areas including, but of course
not limited to, the protection of civilians.

Fourthly and finally, we call on States to ensure
that counter-terrorism legislation and measures do not
impede impartial humanitarian and medical activities
or engagement with all relevant actors, as foreseen by
international humanitarian law. We welcome, in that
regard, the emphasis put on this issue in resolution
2462 (2019) and urge the Security Council to follow up
consistently on its demand that all measures taken by
States to counter terrorism comply with their obligations
under international law, including international
humanitarian law, international human rights law
and international refugee law. We support the call of
the Secretary-General for the systematic inclusion of
safeguards for impartial humanitarian activities in a
manner consistent with international humanitarian law
when deciding on counter-terrorism measures.

Seventy years on, the Geneva Conventions
continue to show what is possible when States have
the courage to uphold norms and take responsible
action. Twenty years on, the protection agenda is as
relevant and pressing as ever. More consistency is
needed in the global effort to enhance the protection
of civilians and the implementation of the law and
political commitments, both on the part of Member
States and parties to conflicts and at the level of the
Security Council. There is a need for ongoing and
sustained Member State engagement and dialogue that
go beyond the yearly open debate on the protection
of civilians. We must build on the practical measures
and best practices that we are discussing today. The
Group of Friends is committed to doing its part and to
contributing to global-level advocacy to enhance the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts.

