Switzerland wishes to thank Germany for having organized this debate and the speakers for their contributions. Switzerland welcomes, in particular, the leadership shown by the Secretary-General in strengthening United Nations actions in response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and mobilizing Member States as part of a concerted and effective global response. This pandemic, while primarily a health crisis, has triggered an economic and social crisis without precedent. It constitutes a challenge to human security and to international peace and security. It is therefore imperative to mitigate the security risks. A preventative approach that incorporates respect for human rights will be crucial to any emergency response and medium- or long-term strategy to combat the effects of the pandemic. Switzerland wishes to highlight three important action areas for the Council's response to the pandemic. First of all, the impact of the spread of the coronavirus exacerbates the many situations of armed conflict and other forms of violence on the Council's agenda. It is imperative to prevent the loss of gains made in peace processes. The stalled implementation of the agreement on South Sudan, linked to the pandemic, is, for example, creating a security vacuum that several armed groups are exploiting. In Yemen, United Nations mediation and access to vulnerable populations are becoming even more difficult. It is crucial that weapons be laid down and the pandemic response prioritized. Switzerland therefore welcomes resolution 2532 (2020), finally adopted by the Security Council yesterday, which calls for the cessation of hostilities in all the situations on its agenda and supports the efforts of the Secretary-General. Secondly, Switzerland urges all parties to armed conflict to ensure that humanitarian actors have swift, unimpeded and sustainable access to affected populations. The humanitarian pause the Council is currently calling for should allow access for humanitarian assistance. In Syria, for example, COVID-19 underscores the urgent need to use all possible means to reach those in need. It is crucial that the cross-border mechanism for humanitarian assistance be extended and strengthened with the inclusion of Al-Yarubiyah border crossing. Given the pandemic's negative impact on the implementation of its priorities, the Council should ensure rigorous monitoring of its commitments on the protection of civilians, including women and children. Moreover, the Council and all Member States must implement resolution 2286 (2016) to protect medical assistance. It is unacceptable that attacks against patients, hospitals and medical personnel are on the rise amid a pandemic. Thirdly, the work of the specialized agencies of the United Nations is crucial in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects. Civil society operational expertise is also important. The World Health Organization plays a central role in coordinating the United Nations response to the pandemic and in implementing the International Health Regulations, including through the dissemination of verified information. Disinformation and hate speech could heighten risks to peace and security. Switzerland therefore encourages all States to ensure that reliable information on the pandemic is swiftly made available. In resolution 74/270, introduced by Switzerland and other Member States, the General Assembly called on 2 April - a full three months ago - for global solidarity in the fight against COVID-19. We note with satisfaction that the Council made reference to that resolution in the resolution it adopted yesterday. As shown by the developments in the situations on the Council's agenda over recent months, the COVID-19 pandemic both drives and feeds on violence and instability. Switzerland therefore welcomes the fact that the Council has recognized the linkages between COVID-19 and international peace and security, and that it has stepped up its commitment to responding to the pandemic. This sends an important political signal. Switzerland urges the Council and the international community to implement that resolution in the various contexts on its agenda.
