The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misie' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its condemnation
of interference with humanitarian supplies and the
freedom of movement of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) by all parties within
the territory of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this context it is deeply concerned by
the blockading by Bosnian Government forces of
UNPROFOR personnel in the Visoko, Gorazde,
Gorni Vakuf and Kladanj areas, which included on
20 June 1995 placing mines outside the
UNPROFOR camp in Visoko. The Council is also
deeply concerned at the deterioration in the situation
in and around Sarajevo, the obstruction by the
Bosnian Serb party of freedom of movement and
utilities to the city and the continued obstruction of
the normal operation of Sarajevo airport.

"The Security Council stresses that all such
actions are unacceptable and demands that all parties
fully respect the safety and security of UNPROFOR
personnel and ensure their complete freedom of
movement to enable UNPROFOR to carry out its
mandate in accordance with the Council's
resolutions.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties to
enter into negotiations as provided for in its
resolution 998 (1995) of 16 June 1995 and to agree
without further delay to a cease-fire and a complete
cessation of hostilities in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Council emphasizes that there can
be no military solution to the conflict in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It stresses the
importance it attaches to the Vigorous pursuit of a
political settlement, and reiterates its demand that
the Bosnian Serb party accept the Contact Group
peace plan as a starting point."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/31.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

