Allow me to congratulate France on having organized this open debate marking the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005). We appreciate the concept note, which provides guidance, as well as the valuable briefings by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba, and the executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, Henrietta Fore. The Security Council has been adopting resolutions regarding the protection of children affected by armed conflict since 1999. Each of the resolutions contains increasingly stringent provisions on the protection of children. Adequate and timely financial support remains necessary to ensure that the monitoring and reporting mechanism, as well as the child protection advisers within peacekeeping operations, fulfil their role under this mandate. It is clear that development and peaceful and inclusive societies cannot be achieved without the comprehensive protection of children. However, despite the efforts of the international community, we continue to see serious abuses committed against children by armed groups, which not only constitute a serious violation of their human rights but are also a clear demonstration of contempt for human life. Civilian casualties in armed conflicts are on the rise, with children being the victims of atrocious and vicious violence that hampers their development and education. Of extreme concern are the indiscriminate attacks on hospitals and schools, direct attacks on civilians with explosive weapons, air strikes and the use of chemical weapons, which cause high rates of injury among civilians, including thousands of children, who, in addition to the deprivation of their basic rights, may suffer or die. The perpetrators of such acts should be subject to strict sanctions by the Council. Armed conflicts have devastating consequences for the social structure of a country. Guatemala considers that the preventive approach (sustaining peace) must be accompanied by actions to promote a culture of peace, respect and tolerance as part of the efforts to reintegrate children into their families and communities. Guatemala stresses its commitment to protecting the rights of every child. An example of that commitment is our endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration, which calls for strong political support for the comprehensive protection of every child. This occasion is also important to highlight the global suffering caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is a common enemy and does not discriminate on the basis of nationality, sex, religion, ethnicity or age. Despite this emergency, armed conflicts continue around the world. For that reason, we applaud the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. It is time to put an end to armed conflict and, today more than ever, to focus collectively on the fight against COVID-19. I conclude by emphasizing that defending children is a moral and political imperative. If we continue to act jointly, we will be sending a message of hope and be able to fully carry out our responsibility to protect our societies' most precious asset - children.
