Let me begin by congratulating the Dominican Republic presidency on their successful steering of the work of the Security Council for this month amid this profoundly challenging time. I take this opportunity to express our appreciation to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his comprehensive briefing this morning. My delegation aligns itself with the statement made by United Arab Emirates on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. The Secretary-General's latest report on the implementation of the resolution 2334 (2016), in which he observes that the situation on the ground in the occupied Palestinian territory has only deteriorated owing to illegal occupation policies by Israel, is concerning. It is more concerning that such activities are going on unabated even at this sobering time. As reported by the United Nations, since the outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19), Israel has further intensified its military operations and has demolished a large number of Palestinian residential structures, thus displacing hundreds of Palestinians and also injuring and detaining many. Moreover, there has been a surge of violence by Israeli settlers. Israel's illegal settlement activity in Palestinian territory, land grab and construction of the wall are continuing, as are the provocative calls for annexation. It is unfortunate that Israel is exploiting the public health emergency to divert international pressure and attention from the crisis. This not only makes the prospect of peace bleak but also undermines the Palestinians' pandemic containment efforts. We join the international community in condemning those acts and call upon Israel to cease its hostilities responding to the Secretary-General's global ceasefire appeal. Israel's decades-long blockade has severely impaired the Palestinian health system, which has been especially exposed during the pandemic. Palestinians are in urgent need of health-care materials, such as test kits, intensive care equipment and ventilators, which are scare. Therefore, although the number of confirmed cases appears low so far, any outbreak could, as cautioned by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA), be a disaster of gigantic proportions. Furthermore, Israel's discriminatory practices towards Palestinians in dealing with the pandemic are evident. Israel is neglecting its obligations to carry out vigorous testing, disseminate information and adhere to health regulations, which jeopardizes the existing coordination between the Israeli and Palestinian authorities that is critical to stop community spread of COVID-19. Unfettered access to humanitarian and medical assistance for Palestinians and the entry of medical personnel must be ensured. It is important that patients in Gaza requiring hospitalization be allowed to avail themselves of it outside the Strip. In the event of community spread, closing the Gaza Strip could severely worsen the situation, which should be averted. Moreover, the restrictions imposed to contain COVID-19 have isolated vulnerable communities and crippled their capacity to earn a living and ought to be removed. Vulnerable categories of detained and imprisoned Palestinian civilians need to be released from the overcrowded Israeli prisons because they are at high risk of catching COVID-19 owing to a lack of health care and hygiene. The international community has to ensure Israel fulfils those critical requirements. Israel's continued acts of aggression have given rise to an egregious culture of impunity that has to be brought to an end by ensuring accountability for all Israeli violations and by upholding the rule of international law. 41/99 42/99 It is encouraging that the United Nations system on the ground and the Palestinian authorities are doing good work despite all the constraints, but it is clearly not enough. UNRWA's perennial funding constraints have deteriorated further owing to the pandemic. The dedicated focus of the Secretary-General's Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19 on this crisis is welcome. Nevertheless, it is deeply worrying that UNRWA estimates that its budget for core activities will last until the end of May. Therefore, UNRWA's flash appeal for its COVID-19 response requires immediate attention. We call upon the international community to come up with generous and predictable funding as well as technical assistance to enable UNRWA to continue its work, which is a lifeline for Palestinians. Bangladesh believes that the timely implementation of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map is the key to achieving a lasting peace for the people and the State of Palestine, as well as in the Middle East. We will continue to stand firmly in support of the Palestinian cause and of the Palestinian people's struggle for self-determination until the establishment of the State of Palestine on the basis of two-State solution and pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, we expect the Security Council to renew efforts to end Israel's illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory in fulfilment of Israel's obligations under the Charter of the United Nations by ensuring the implementation of its relevant resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016). Now living in self-quarantine ourselves, we can feel the pain of the Palestinian population, which has been living under siege conditions for decades. More than ever before, Palestinians need global solidarity to fight a dual battle against the pandemic and Israeli occupation. We must not fail them.
