Mr. Abay (Ethiopia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened today's meeting. I would like to
express my appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, the Secretary-General, for his report
(S/2010/514). I also wish to express my deep
appreciation to His Excellency Ambassador Lamamra
and his colleagues for the update and for their efforts to
consolidate peace in Africa and to coordinate the
support for African Union (AU) peacekeeping
operations.

Early this year, the Secretary-General told the
Council, during its open debate on Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, to envision a world in
which regional organizations and the United Nations
work together on all continents, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter, to prevent, manage and
resolve crises (see S/PV.6257). The increased attention
given to the need to strengthen the partnership and
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union has been a very encouraging
development for African states.

Ethiopia attaches great importance to the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. We believe it is critical to harness the
synergy in the relevant domains of both organizations,
maximizing the relative advantages that each can offer.
While we acknowledge that this strategic partnership is
established within the context of the Security Council's
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the AU's proximity to
and familiarity with the problem and its capability
would obviously enable it to respond quickly to issues
arising in that regard.

We are seeing that peacemaking and
peacekeeping have become a shared responsibility in
which the global community has significant roles to
play, and thus working with the regional organizations
would assist the United Nations in attaining its
objectives. The Council, taking this into account, has
taken steps in the right direction to accomplish our
common responsibilities.

My delegation emphasizes the need to accelerate
the implementation of the United Nations-African
Union 10-year capacity-building programme in a
consistent manner. Hence, that venture - or, for that
matter, investing in building Africa's peacekeeping
capacity - means empowering the regional organ in
its handling of the security, stability and future of the
continent. It would enable the continental organ to
realize its potential to the maximum and to stand on its
own by building its capabilities.

We share the proposal by the Secretary-General
indicating that the time has arrived to elaborate clearer
principles and take practical measures to address the
challenges of this partnership. The work already begun
by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur and the African Union Mission in Somalia
serve to illustrate the kind of model collaboration that
the two need to adopt. Those Missions and the lessons
learned could be a basis upon which we can build with
regard to what has been achieved thus far.

My delegation welcomes the joint effort to
develop the African Union's capacity to respond to
crises on the continent and thus supports the proposal
to establish a joint United Nations-African Union team
to examine the detailed modalities for implementing
the capacity-building programme as a whole.

The Council's measures to enhance the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of funding
to strengthen the AU peace and security architecture,
particularly the peacekeeping operations under the
United Nations mandate, are commendable. Yet a lot
remains to be done.

We would like to express our support for the use
of United Nations assessed funding to support United
Nations-authorized African Union peacekeeping
operations, based on the proposal presented in the
Secretary-General's report. The Council should
demonstrate its resolve and political will by providing
the necessary resources to boost the AU's capability in
this domain.

Ethiopia stands ready to work towards the
realization of the objectives of the partnership between
the two organs. As the time for further action has
arrived, I wish to state that my delegation looks
forward to the effective measures that the Council will
take in this regard.

