Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), for his informative briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/780) on the
developments in Libya and the challenges ahead for
the restoration of peace and stability in the country.
We also thank Ambassador Olof Skoog for the quality
of his briefing on the thirty-first report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya.

At the previous briefing on the situation in
Libya (see S/PV.8312), my delegation, like other
members of the Council, welcomed the handover
by the Libyan National Army of the management
of the two oil terminals in the east of the country to
the National Oil Corporation, which has a monopoly
on hydrocarbon exports as provided for in resolution
2259 (2015). We also noted with satisfaction Prime
Minister Faiez Serraj's initiatives to ensure a fair and
transparent distribution of oil revenues by auditing the
transactions of the Libyan Central Bank in Tripoli and
A1 Bayda. Those measures, which are the result of the
transparent and inclusive management of hydrocarbon
resources - the subject of tensions among the warring
parties - have helped to improve the security situation
in the oil crescent region.

However, the resumption of fighting in Tripoli
among armed groups that had nevertheless committed
themselves to join the process initiated by the
Government of National Accord for ending the crisis
dramatically reminds us of the precariousness of the
overall security situation in Libya. The actions of those
armed factions is likely to undermine the efforts of
the international community to promote reconciliation
among Libyans. Cote d'Ivoire therefore calls on rival
armed factions in Derna to put an end to the clashes
and allow unimpeded and safe access for humanitarian
assistance to thousands of suffering Libyans in the city.
We call on all the parties concerned to strictly respect
the ceasefire and curfew decreed in Tripoli, in order
to preserve the gains of the overall post-crisis process.

Cote d'Ivoire notes with deep concern the
persistence of the smuggling of migrants and the gross
violations of human rights in detention centres. We
echo the Secretary-General's call for the closure of
those centres and for respect for the rights of detainees.
We deplore the deliberate administrative burdens that
prevent UNSMIL and humanitarian personnel from
accessing the centres. Those obstacles do little to ensure
respect for the rights of detainees or to improve their
conditions of detention. My country also welcomes the
Council's unity of action, which led to the imposition
of sanctions on 7 June on six individuals involved in
human trafficking in Libya.

Cote d'Ivoire would like to reaffirm its conviction
that there will be no lasting peace and stability in
Libya without accountability. We therefore urges
the international community to assist the Libyan
authorities in identifying and bringing to justice before
the competent international courts those found guilty
of trafficking in human beings and of serious human
rights violations.

Cote d'Ivoire notes with regret that little progress
has been made in implementing the commitments made
by the Libyan parties at the conference held in Paris on
29 May to hold legislative and presidential elections on
10 December. The draft electoral laws for a referendum
on a draft constitution, prepared by the Constituent
Assembly, have not yet been adopted by the House of
Representatives, although the Libyan parties committed
themselves to organizing the referendum at the meeting
of the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya
that took place in Dakar from 11 to 13 May.

In that regard, my delegation would like to
commend the efforts of French diplomacy, which
organized a meeting on 23 July among the four Libyan
representatives who endorsed the Paris agreement,
during which they renewed their support for the holding
of the elections on 10 December and the reunification
of the country's institutions. Cote d'Ivoire also
commends the work of the High National Electoral
Commission and encourages all efforts to respect the
electoral calendar. We urge the Libyan parties and
the international community to work to improve the
security situation, which is essential for the holding
of democratic, credible and peaceful elections, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report.

In conclusion, I would like to extend my delegation's
congratulations to Mr. Salame and all UNSMIL staff
for the quality of their work in an extremely challenging
environment. To Ms. Stephanie Williams, the new
Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs in
Libya, we wish every success in her new position.

