Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): Madam
President, I thank you very much for giving me the
floor to speak briefly on this important issue.

My delegation highly appreciates the Security
Council's sustained efforts since the 11 September
terrorist attacks, as exemplified by its adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001) and the continuing work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee to deal with an
unprecedented threat to international peace and
security. It is especially meaningful, in our view, that
all Council members expressed in a unified voice their
strong resolve to fight against terrorism at the
Council's ministerial meeting yesterday. The Republic
of Korea will do its part to contribute to the
international effort to eradicate terrorism, including the
implementation of related resolutions.

The Security Council's efforts in recent years to
resolve the conflict in Afghanistan have unfortunately
not been productive, despite sanctions targeted against
the Taliban. Now the situation in Afghanistan has
abruptly changed, presenting new challenges for the
United Nations, particularly the Security Council.

We hope that the Afghan people will be able to
overcome the suffering caused by years of conflict and
harsh rule by the current Taliban regime, and succeed
in building a new free and democratic nation on their
own. At this juncture, we believe that one of the most
critical things for them to do is establish a broad-based,
representative political system in which all ethnic and
political groups can participate and their diverse
interests are well reflected. In this process, they will
need the cooperation and support of the international
community, particularly neighbouring countries. In this
regard, we welcome yesterday's joint declaration by
the countries of the "six plus two" group, in which they
pledged to make common efforts to support the people
of Afghanistan.

My delegation highly appreciates the actions
taken by Mr. Brahimi in the past month on the issue of
Afghanistan, including consultations on the future of
the country, with all domestic and foreign parties
concerned. We are grateful for his comprehensive
briefings and fully agree with his recommendations on
the provisional government, security forces,
humanitarian assistance and national reconstruction,
among other things.

We hope that the Security Council will
continually address those issues in consultation with
other Member States of interest. The Government of
the Republic of Korea reiterates that tasks as daunting
as the eradication of terrorism and the rebuilding of
Afghanistan can succeed only when a broad array of
countries pool their wisdom and resources with those
of the members of the Security Council.

My delegation shares the great concern of the
United Nations over a possible humanitarian disaster in
Afghanistan, which could exacerbate the existing
problems of millions of refugees. Let me conclude by
taking this opportunity to say that the Republic of
Korea is extending $12 million in emergency
humanitarian assistance for Afghan refugees in and
around Afghanistan. I assure the Council that we will
also do our utmost, together with the international
community, to support the reconstruction effort and put
in place an effective mechanism for securing peace and
stability in Afghanistan.

