I would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko for his report (S/2020/345, annex) and briefing. I welcome the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia, as well as Ms. Irena Hasic¢, to our meeting. My delegation welcomes the appointment of the new State-level Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are also encouraged to see that the country has been able to manage the extraordinary circumstances of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and bring it under relative control. Furthermore, the recent emergency assistance from the International Monetary Fund as well as other financial and material assistances at various levels from the international community will, hopefully, help Bosnia and Herzegovina meet the urgent needs that arise from the pandemic. However, various dimensions of the country remain in difficulty. Politically, the picture shown to us by Mr. Inzko is a gloomy one, replete with divisive rhetoric and actions. Economically, the World Bank's spring 2020 Western Balkans Regular Economic Report showed that the economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina is expected to enter a recession in 2020, with a drop of 3.2 per cent. Socially, since 2013 more than 200,000 people, about 60,000 in 2019 alone, have left Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 14 December 25 years ago, the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina was signed. One day later, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 1031 (1995), on the implementation of the Peace Agreement. People at that time must have been very eager to see a comprehensive settlement to bring the conflict to an end and to build a new society of peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, although a new generation of people was born, grew up, became adults and have probably begun to have children of their own, none of the objectives and conditions to build a resilient and united society for Bosnia and Herzegovina has been fully implemented. Unhealed pain from the past has divided people in the country and destroyed opportunities to bring peace and stability to the present. We cannot afford to delay the implementation of the Peace Agreement for another generation. My delegation therefore would like to make the following recommendations. First, we call on the leaders of the country as well as those of its entities and communities to give the issue of national harmony their utmost attention. Rather than divisive rhetoric and action, constructive dialogues must be promoted. The three ethnic groups should work together in a reconciliatory and forward-looking spirit to build a strong and united Government. In this process, young people must be recognized as key partners for positive change and promoters of peace and reconciliation. Secondly, it is important for Bosnia and Herzegovina to focus on, among other things, the establishment of rule of law, public administration reform, economic development and its process of regional integration. Thirdly, we encourage all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully live up to their commitments and obligations under the Peace Agreement, with due respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as the long-term interest of all ethnic groups in the country.
