Mr. Palous (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
First and foremost, let me begin by thanking
Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, for his comprehensive
briefing and for his leadership of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I would
also like to welcome the President of the Economic and
Social Council and to thank all those who briefed the
Council and all those who participated in today's
debate.

The European Union welcomes the recent
mission of the Security Council to Haiti and expresses
its gratitude to the Permanent Representative of Costa
Rica, who led the mission. The European Union
followed with great interest the main achievements and
outcomes of the mission. We also took note of the
recent recommendations of the Secretary-General
presented in his latest semi-annual report on
MINUSTAH (S/2009/129).

The European Union would like to thank
MINUSTAH for its very active and effective work,
shown predominantly through its efforts in reversing
the deteriorating security situation and assisting with
State building and institutional capacity-building. The
European Union also notes the progress in the
professionalization of the Haitian National Police
(HNP), which operates in close cooperation with
MINUSTAH. It underlines the continued need for
increased cooperation with the Haitian national police
with a View to responding more effectively to threats
from organized crime. Justice reform is also one of the
prerequisites for consolidating the security situation.

We share the opinion that the formation of a
Government with Michelle Duvivier Pierre-Louis as its
Prime Minister was an important achievement, and we
encourage the Government to take additional steps
forward in the country's further political, security and
socio-economic stabilization. The European Union also
commends the leadership of President Rene Garcia
Preval in stabilizing the economy and restoring
political institutions.

The partial senatorial elections to be held in April
and June 2009, which have been postponed since the
end of 2007, remain a significant challenge for Haiti on
the political front. Those elections will complete the
composition of the upper chamber of the National
Assembly of Haiti. The successful conducting of those
elections will without doubt contribute to further
stabilization of Haiti's political and security situation.
Therefore, support provided by the international
community is crucial in this area. The European
Commission will contribute the amount of €3.3 million
to these efforts.

While tangible progress has been reached in the
areas of political dialogue and elections, the extension
of State authority, security, rule of law and human
rights, there is still much that needs to be done in these
areas. The European Union commends the efforts of
MINUSTAH in assisting the Haitian authorities, in
particular the Haitian National Police, in the areas of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform. The European Union believes
that State-building activities and security sector reform
need to be further pursued, as security sector reform is
one of the key challenges that the Haitian Government
faces. The European Union is committed to remaining
part of the international community's efforts in
supporting Haiti in this critical area, which also
encompasses the rule of law, human rights and
combating armed Violence and organized crime.

The European Union remains particularly
concerned about the levels of poverty and the socio-
economic and humanitarian situation in Haiti. In this
regard, the global financial crisis, the food crisis and
the devastating consequences of Hurricanes Fay and
Gustav and the tropical storms, have put additional
pressure on Haiti's already dire socio-economic
conditions. This deterioration of the socio-economic
situation must be reversed to avoid a potential negative
impact on the overall security situation, which still
remains very fragile. In this context, the continuing
engagement and vigilance of MINUSTAH is important.

The focus of European Union cooperation is
shifting from support for the transition period through
democratic reform and rehabilitation to economic
recovery and basic services. The European Union
indeed believes that strong socio-economic
development is required to sustain and consolidate the
new-found stability. Furthermore, the capacity of the
State to deliver basic services needs to be enhanced.
The European Union cooperation strategy with Haiti
for 2008 to 2013 is based on those elements. The
strategy, funded with €291 million, will primarily focus
on infrastructure, mainly the building of roads, as well
as on governance. In this context, I would also like to
mention that in February 2009 the European Union,
which is one of the major donors to Haiti, opened a
local representation of its Humanitarian Aid Office in
Port-au-Prince.

In conclusion, the European Union would like to
express its full support for the high-level international
conference on Haiti that is scheduled for 13 and
14 April in Washington, DC, to support reconstruction
efforts and the implementation of the Government
growth and poverty reduction strategy. The conference
will also contribute to the establishment of a new
paradigm for cooperation between Haiti and its
financial donors. The European Union stands ready to
play an active part there.

