Mr. Trujillo Garcia (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's briefing. I also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Colombia, for his briefing. I warmly welcome Rosa
Emilia Salamanca and thank her for the remarks she
shared with us today.

Similarly, I would like to thank the members of the
Security Council for their ongoing readiness to attend
informal meetings and hear thoughts regarding the
situation in my country, which are useful because they
help foster a greater understanding of the challenges
facing Colombia and the measures being taken. I thank

them for giving of their time to hear me explain the
overarching challenges we face, which of course
must be considered holistically when analysing the
commitment of President Duque to the implementation
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.

We appreciate the fact that members heard that, for
example, with respect to illicit crops, the Government
faces the following challenge. In 2012, the area under
illicit crop cultivation stood at 102,000 hectares. In
2010, it was 61,000 hectares. The following year, when
the Administration of the former President began, the
number stood at 63,000. In 2017, the year immediately
prior to the start of President Duque's Administration,
the area under illicit crops had reached 171,000 hectares.
In the months after President Duque assumed power,
the number of hectares of illicit crops had reached the
highest ever recorded in Colombia's history at 200,000,
which, obviously, required major efforts on the part
of Colombia.

I thank members for listening to the details of a
major challenge for my country - the unprecedented
regional migration crisis, which also has global
implications. Today, we are addressing it with solidarity
and human sentiment. We are deeply grateful to host
1.3 million Venezuelan brothers and sisters.

I would like to reiterate the commitment of
President Ivan Duque to implementing the agreement
signed by the previous Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Eje'rcito
del Pueblo (FARC-EP). Achieving the objectives
of the pact for Colombia - a pact for equity and
a road map proposed by President Duque for his
Government - is closely linked to the stabilization
of the territories and the consolidation of peaceful
coexistence. The implementation of the agreement
signed in 2016 with the FARC-EP guerrillas is part of
the agenda that the national Government has established
to move in that direction. The "Peace with legality"
plan, which the Secretary-General mentions positively
in his report (S/2019/265), also points to that.

The implementation of the agreement is a
commitment that the Government of President Ivan
Duque has assumed with unquestionable resolve. To
honour that commitment, various measures have been
adopted and concrete actions are being taken, many of
which are acknowledged in the report before us today.
However, the Secretary-General also states that the
peace process in Colombia is at a critical juncture. We
nevertheless consider this juncture to be an opportunity
and view it with optimism, although we are aware that
some of the most difficult tasks in consolidating peace
still lie ahead. Our optimism arises from the firmness of
our commitment, our permanent willingness to engage
in dialogue with all actors involved, our conviction
that consensus can be built amid differences and, in
particular, from trust in our institutions.

The Government of Colombia recognizes and
values the work carried out by the United Nations
Verification Mission, whose mandate includes two
crucial aspects of the implementation of the agreement:
first, the reintegration of the former members of the
FARC-EP into civilian life and, secondly, the provision
of security guarantees for those who participate in
peacebuilding, including human rights defenders and
leaders of social or political movements. In that regard,
allow me to make a few observations.

In addition to the progress made in the political
reintegration of the FARC-EP, whose political party
not only occupies seats in Congress, participates in the
process of developing our laws and will also take part
in regional and local elections next October, progress
has also been made in the area of economic and
social reintegration. The Secretary-General expresses
valid concerns about the need to move forward more
efficiently in various processes, especially in the
provision of goods and public services in the various
territories. In that regard, a rigorous process ofplanning
and budgeting has been put forward, which has made it
possible to align and focus institutional management
around a single road map that will undoubtedly have a
greater impact in less time. We will increase our efforts
to offer demobilized combatants the conditions that
will allow them to carry out their plans for the future,
contribute to the development of their communities and
remain on the right side of the law.

An important milestone in that direction was the
completion and signing, during the reporting period,
of 14 of the 16 territorial development programmes,
thereby completing all programmes included in the
provisions of the final agreement. Such programmes
will benefit 6.6 million Colombians in the 170
municipalities that were most affected by violence and
poverty in the past. Progress has also been made in
approving productive projects for the demobilized, to
the tune of $6.2 million; registering 12,743 people in
our social security and health system and 9,946 people
to receive pensions and providing 1,053 people with
jobs in the public and private sectors and economic
support that will benefit 12,750 people, for a total of
approximately $58.5 million. Those are some of the
many efforts undertaken.

Today, 3,537 former members of the FARC-EP and
7,074 families are settled in the territorial areas for
training and reintegration, which were conceived as focal
points to facilitate the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. As envisaged in the regulations
issued in 2017, the legal validity of that framework
will come to an end in August. However, that should
not generate uncertainty. Although those spaces were
always intended to be temporary, the commitment of
the national Government to offering stable conditions
and certainties to the former members of the FARC is
not provisional. That has been expressed by President
Ivan Duque, in direct dialogue with them and their
families, in the three visits he has made to the areas
of Pondores, San Jose de Oriente and La Fila, where
he learned first-hand the concerns and expectations of
the former members of the FARC-EP and reiterated the
Government's willingness to work, together and hand
in hand with them, to build opportunities for progress
in accordance with the law.

The culmination of the legal framework of the
territorial areas will be addressed through a strategy
that entails, among other provisions, their incorporation
into land-use management. Where that is not possible,
alternatives for the relocation of demobilized
individuals will be identified, and stability, legal and
physical security, the provision of goods and services,
and conditions for productive initiatives and job
creation will continue to be provided.

The Government of Colombia agrees with the
Secretary-General regarding the magnitude of the
challenges we face in guaranteeing the physical security
of individuals involved in the reintegration process,
social leaders and communities in certain municipalities
of the country. Containing diverse manifestations of
violence is one ofthe main challenges faced by societies
going through a process of stabilization and that, in
our case, originate in the activity of organized armed
groups linked to criminal economies. It is significant
that, between 2013 and 2018, the number of cultivated
hectares of coca surpassed all historical records,
rising from about 60,000 to 200,000, according to the
latest estimates. Furthermore, we must not forget that
drug trafficking has fuelled the bloodiest violence in
Colombia for more than 40 years.
Over the past eight months, President Duque has
adopted new policies on security and the fight against
the world drug problem, and has adjusted the existing
institutional architecture and protection mechanisms,
improving coordination among authorities and the
capacity for prevention and appropriate response. In
fact, the verified number of homicides of human rights
defenders fell from nine in August 2018 to five in
January 2019, and to 1 in February, according to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Colombia. According to the same
source, of the 265 cases reported between January 2016
and March 2019, the Public Prosecutor's Office has
identified the authors of 151 homicides, representing
57 per cent of perpetrators. The fight against impunity
has been accompanied by the activation of various
agencies, including the National Commission on
Security Guarantees, under the leadership of President
Duque, at the end of January. Our commitment to
legality and the defence of life is unwavering. We will
therefore continue working tirelessly until we manage
to definitively overcome violence and achieve the full
realization of the rule of law throughout the territory.

I wish to turn now to two additional issues that are
addressed in the Secretary-General's report. As I have
noted previously, on 11 March President Duque decided
to object to 6 of the 159 articles that make up the draft
procedural statutory law of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace. He did so in order to provide the Jurisdiction
with a clearer and more coherent legal framework
that will allow it to respond to the aspiration of all
Colombians to living in peace with legality and without
impunity, and to best serve the rights of the victims and
honour Colombia's obligations under international law.
In accordance with to our institutional arrangement,
the objections are being handled in the Congress of the
Republic, where last Monday the plenary of the House
of Representatives voted against adoption. The decision
of the Senate is pending. The Government will respect
the decision adopted by the Legislature and proceed in
accordance with the national Constitution.

Finally, we have read carefully the observations
of the Secretary-General on the gender dimension in
the implementation of the final agreement. For the
Government of President Duque, women's effective
exercise of their rights and their active participation in
all areas of national life is a priority issue. Therefore,
the national development plan that has been under
discussion since February in the Congress includes a
pact for women's equality. The pact imposes mandates
to strengthen the institutional framework on gender
and to move forward with concrete actions towards
the empowerment of women. First and foremost,
it establishes measures in favour of rural women
and peacebuilding.

Dialogue with women and their organizations
has been a continuous practice of the President and
his Government in all areas where women are actors,
including the implementation of the agreement. That
is why I want to welcome the presence of Ms. Rosa
Salamanca and, through her, express our gratitude
for the fundamental contribution that the women of
Colombia make to the building of a better country and
a more promising future for all.

The magnitude of the task that lies before us should
not make us underestimate the relevance and meaning
of our achievements. We do not, however, deem any
of those satisfactory or sufficient. We will continue
working to build peace with legality for all Colombians.
In that regard, the observations of the Verification
Mission and the members of the Security Council will
always be welcome and constitute an essential guide in
the search for coexistence among Colombians.

Accordingly, on behalf of the Government of
Colombia, I would like to thank the United Nations for
its support, through the Verification Mission headed by
Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and to recognize its constructive
contributions. I would also like to extend an invitation to
the Security Council to visit our country soon so that its
members can see the titanic effort we have undertaken.

