Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Sir, for organizing this important meeting. Our thanks
and appreciation also go to the Assistant Secretary-
General of the Department of Political Affairs and the
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights for their
briefings on the situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

Most of those who have spoken have had to depend
on limited sources of information, because it has been
impossible to carry out investigations and inquiries on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to discover
the situation at first hand inside the country. However,
we find that the picture is very bleak regarding the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, and that it constitutes a menace to
international peace and security. That has been made
abundantly clear by the threat to carry out new nuclear
experiments and to develop, test and launch new ballistic
missiles. All those actions constitute grave violations
of Security Council resolutions and the Charter of the
United Nations through the routine commission of grave
and systematic violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights, including violations of the right
to food, movement and expression, in addition to forced
disappearances, torture and inhuman treatment in the
political detention camps.

The Security Council should not ignore the situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. It should
make every effort to put an end to the serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law in
that country. It should also put an end to the use of nuclear
weapons and the threat of the use of such weapons. We
also call on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
to take tangible and speedy actions in order to meet the
concerns of the international community by allowing
the Special Rapporteur on human rights to visit the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and to permit
humanitarian agencies to work inside the country.

