Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Azubalis and to
thank him for his briefing, which was focused on
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations.

The authors of the United Nations Charter
dedicated an entire chapter - namely, Chapter VIII -
to the role of regional organizations and the
maintenance of international peace and security. This is
proof that the role of the United Nations complements
the role of regional organizations - hence the
importance of cooperation between these organizations
aimed at taking advantage of their relative strengths.

Lebanon welcomes the efforts undertaken by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) in the various conflicts in Europe and Asia
with a view to establishing peace. The role of the
OSCE is directly linked to conflicts that are within its
area of competence and within its geographic area, and
that have common cultural and historical elements.

All of this means that the OSCE has a particular
understanding of the various events taking place in the
region and can consider ways to resolve these conflicts
through peaceful means. The OSCE today includes 56
member States, which can contribute to peace and
security in three stages: before a conflict, through early
warning and preventive diplomacy; during a conflict,
with a view to reducing tensions and containing the
conflict in order to settle it in a peaceful way; and after
a conflict, to contribute to peacebuilding.

Lebanon calls on OSCE to attach particular
importance to the rule of law, respect for human rights
and the dialogue among cultures and religions, without
neglecting efforts to combat terrorism, drug trafficking,
human trafficking and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and small arms and light weapons, as
such efforts have a positive impact on international
peace and security.

Moreover, given their common objectives,
Lebanon believes that it is necessary to strengthen
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia. It is also necessary to work with other regional
organizations with a view to sharing information,
experience and capacities. In this respect, we would
highlight in particular the League of Arab States and
the African Union, as these organizations can make
very important contributions in the area of peace and
security in the Arab world and Africa. Lebanon
supports all efforts to strengthen international peace
and security, given that this is the main objective of our
Organization.

