Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me first of all to express our gratitude
to the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Lord Ashdown, for the report and the
substantive briefing he gave the Security Council. I
would also like to welcome my neighbour here, the
Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Barisa Colak.

We pay due tribute to the work done by the High
Representative in the three years since he assumed his
duties. He has just reaffirmed that he will carry out the
mission entrusted to him by the Security Council until
the end of this year. During that period of time - and
we fully agree with him about this - a great deal of
work still lies ahead in order to move forward on the
path of Bosnia and Herzegovina's transition from the
Dayton era to the Brussels era. That was addressed by
the High Representative himself and by Mr. Colak.

We believe that the Dayton Agreement remains
the cornerstone of the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The overarching objectives that inform
the very philosophy of Dayton are just as relevant
today as they were in the past. Those objectives are,
above all, the strengthening of a climate of trust and
constructive cooperation among the peoples of Bosnia
and achieving consensus among all Bosnian parties in
building a stable State of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We note with satisfaction the progress in
strengthening Bosnian institutions, which was referred
to by Lord Ashdown in his report. In that regard, we
consider it to be of fundamental importance that the
High Representative continue to act in a spirit of
partnership with the Bosnian authorities and focus on
their adopting consensus decisions in an independent
manner.

At the same time, we are firmly convinced that,
along with changes in managing State affairs and
military and police reorganization, there is a need to
give greater attention to ensuring genuine equality
among peoples throughout the territory of the country.
In that context, there is a need to continue to focus on
the issues of local self-government and the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons. The data
cited by Mr. Colak in his statement give rise to a
certain optimism, although it was also stressed that a
great deal of work remains in those areas.

On the eve of the tenth anniversary of the Peace
Agreement, the issue of handing over to the Bosnian
authorities responsibility for the situation in the
country and encouraging them to adopt decisions on
the basis of consensus - which was already
mentioned - remains extremely relevant. In these
circumstances, we believe that the array of sanctions
implemented by the High Representative should to the
greatest degree be used as an extreme measure.
Maximum use should be made of political and
diplomatic mechanisms in working with the Bosnian
parties, including in their cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY).

Here, I should like to stress once again that
Russia, as a permanent member of the Security
Council, a guarantor of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina and a member of the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council, has a clear and
unequivocal position: all individuals responsible for
perpetrating war crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina
must be brought to justice. Our country will continue
to cooperate with the ICTY in the verifications and
investigations carried out at its request under the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the statute of
the Tribunal.

We note with satisfaction that the States of the
Balkan region are participating ever more actively in
the resolution of their common problems. We welcome
the meeting that took place in Sarajevo in January
among representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Serbia and Montenegro and Croatia and the resulting
declaration on the return of refugees and the restoration
of property rights. What is most important now is to
ensure that the agreements reached in Sarajevo are
carried out in practice. Here, the international
presences must also play a positive and encouraging
role.

Finally, there is a separate question: the issue of
maintaining security. When we speak of the need for a
carefully balanced configuration of international efforts
concerning the arrangements for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we are speaking first and foremost about
the link among the various hotbeds of tension in the
Balkans. We believe that the further success of the
processes under way in Bosnia and Herzegovina will
depend in large part on the developments in the
situation throughout the Balkan region.

