Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, and Mr. Alexander Hug, Deputy
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, for their briefings.
Chad is deeply concerned over the resumption on
3 June of Violent encounters between the Ukrainian
army and separatist groups in the area of Marinka,
approximately 30 kilometres from Donetsk. The fighting
with heavy artillery, including Grad rocket launcers
and cannons, has claimed a high number of victims on
both sides. Chad strongly condemns the resurgence of
violence, in violation of the Minsk agreements, which
established a ceasefire and should have opened the way
towards a comprehensive settlement of the conflict
through dialogue. Since 12 February, incursions
have been reported every day, demonstrating that the
ceasefire has merely mitigated the intensity of the
fighting and limited it to certain areas around Donetsk
and Luhansk. Nevertheless, the increased tensions of
recent days in the conflict zone raise fears of a serious
threat of escalation that could thrust Ukraine into civil
war on a larger scale and thereby seriously undermine
the implementation of the Minsk agreements.

Chad is convinced that the solution to the Ukrainian
situation is a political one that largely depends on the
resolve of the parties concerned to commit themselves
to a genuine negotiation process in order to reach
sustainable peace. To that end, we reiterate our appeal
to the parties to return to calm and restraint in order to
avoid a new spiral of violence and to resume the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements.

The human cost of the Ukrainian crisis is very
heavy. More than 6,500 people have been killed, 11,000
wounded and more than 1 million displaced internally.
Chad therefore urges all parties to take the path of a
direct and inclusive dialogue aimed at achieving a
political settlement of the crisis.

In conclusion, we encourage the countries and
organizations that have any influence on the parties
to spare no efforts to bring them to firmly commit to
seeking a lasting political solution to the crisis while
respecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity of Ukraine, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations.

