Ms. Thompson (Barbados): Today I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the 14 member States of
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), which aligns
itself with the statement that will be made later today
by the representative ofBelize on behalf of the Alliance
of Small Island States.

CARICOM. strongly believes that there is a
nexus between peace, security, development and
sustainability - a delicate balance now threatened
by climate change. That threat, which is posed to all
countries, developed and developing alike, cannot go
unanswered, and requires a holistic strategic response
at the national and multilateral levels.

We wish to note, first, that CARICOM. adheres to

the View that the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change should remain the primary United
Nations agency to respond to the phenomena of climate
change. Secondly, while the threat to the peace and
security of the entire human family is real, small island
developing States, including those in the Caribbean
subregion, are in the vortex of an imminent existential
threat, requiring a pre-emptive response that includes
risk assessment, planning and appropriate financing for
resilience and capacity-building. Thirdly, consideration
of this issue by the Security Council should place
emphasis on addressing the full gamut of the risks that
climate change poses to peace and security. Indeed,
a very pertinent issue is how best to coordinate the
panoply of actors at the international and regional
levels to support States in the mitigation of those
security risks.

The Paris Agreement on Climate Change was
historic but, as the Secretary-General reminded us
only last week, while no reversals were suffered in
Katowice, there were no significant advancements
of the cause either. We therefore call on developed
countries to fulfil their financing, capacity-building
and technology-transfer commitments under the Paris
Agreement and to work assiduously and urgently
towards the 1.5°C goal.

In July, the Heads of State and Government of
CARICOM. adopted a declaration on climate change
in which they called for a global effort to close the
mitigation ambition gap and place the world on pathways
for low-emissions, climate-resilient development. They
also urged the international community to continue
to support the Caribbean in its ongoing efforts to
contribute to global mitigation, to adapt to the impacts
of climate change and to build our region's resilience so
as to mitigate and manage the real risk of irreparable
loss and damage and to support the region as it aspires
to become the world's first climate-smart zone.

Understanding of how climate change threatens
peace and security and drives conflicts needs to be
improved across the United Nations system. Only then
will climate policy underpin all other development
planning and initiatives. We cannot lament migration
trends as threatening security without addressing
the push factor of climate change. We must not place
integrated water resources management and general
resources planning outside the context of climate
change. We should not ignore the history of resource
scarcity and its relationship to conflict and war. We
dare not close our eyes to the potential impacts of sea-
level rise coastal inundation on maritime boundaries
and the potential risk for conflict and for State security.
We ought not to speak of global peace, security or
sustainability when climate impacts put development
out of reach.

The inclusion of relevant analysis in the Secretary-
General's regular reporting, risk assessments and early
warning is vital. Accordingly, the States of CARICOM
note with interest the call made by the Pacific small
island developing States on 11 July 11 during the
Security Council open debate on climate security
risks (see S/PV.8307) for the appointment of a special
representative on climate and security, who would not
expand the Council's mandate but instead would serve
the Secretary-General and fill a critical gap in the
United Nations system, while providing the Council
with the information it so badly needs. CARICOM
also supports the call for the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change and the United Nations Office for
Disaster Risk Reduction to brief the Security Council
on climate change security threats resulting from
natural disasters.

In conclusion, CARICOM. again thanks the
Dominican Republic for convening this important
conversation on how the Council could address climate
risks in a security context, if at all it should. For
CARICOM. this represents yet another potent reminder
that we must act collaboratively and in earnest to
combat climate change before we all find ourselves
far beyond any international capacity to cope with
its consequences.

