I thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his very comprehensive briefing. I would also like to thank him for his tireless efforts in pursuit of a lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian question. Throughout its term on the Security Council, Belgium's position has always been guided by respect for international law, including with regard to the Israeli- Palestinian question. We remain firmly convinced that respect for international law is the only way to achieve the aspirations of both parties in a just and lasting manner. The legal framework for the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian question is well known and has been endorsed by an overwhelming majority of the international community. Unfortunately, the most recent report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/1234) demonstrates that it is not the lack of a legal framework but the lack of implementation that is hindering the resolution of this conflict. We therefore call on all parties to comply with their obligations under international law, including resolution 2334 (2016), and recall in particular Israel's obligations as the occupying Power. We also call on the Palestinian political parties to work in good faith for the reunification of Gaza and the West Bank under a single legitimate and democratic authority. We strongly encourage the Palestinian Authority to engage in a democratic and inclusive electoral process based on the rule of law. Despite the outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic last year, the Israeli settlement policy has continued not only through settlement expansion but also through demolitions and evictions, as we just heard from the Special Coordinator. That policy is illegal under international law, including resolution 2334 (2016). Settlements are likely to undermine any prospect and viability of a future Palestinian State. In that regard, I would like to reiterate Belgium's concerns over any plans that threaten the territorial continuity of a future Palestinian State and the future of Jerusalem as a shared capital. In keeping with the consistent position of the European Union, we will not recognize any changes to the lines of 4 June 1967, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties in negotiations. In that context, we also recall the obligation of all States under international law to distinguish between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967. Otherwise, the illegal settlement policy will be further strengthened. Resolution 2334 (2016) calls for immediate measures to be taken to prevent all acts of violence against civilians. However, that obligation is not being met. Human rights defenders, peace activists and journalists, in particular, continue to suffer violations of their civil and political rights and even arbitrary arrests. Today I would also like to particularly focus on violence against children. In recent weeks, we have noted with concern the use of several rounds of live ammunition against Palestinian children, even causing the death of one of them. We call for thorough and transparent investigations. It is also essential that the victims and their families be well informed about the progress of the investigations and their findings. Children must never be the target of violence, and neither should they be exposed to the risk of violence or encouraged to participate in it. In all such cases, the perpetrators must be held accountable. Belgium will continue to support the mandate and the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. The Agency's work is of vital importance to its beneficiaries and is also crucial to maintaining stability in the region. We welcomed the normalization agreements concluded in recent weeks, as they provide opportunities to foster peace and stability in the region. We encourage all relevant actors to seize this opportunity to work actively towards a just, viable and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The only way forward is the resumption of a dialogue in good faith between the parties, with the active support of the international community. For its part, Belgium will continue to be a partner for peace to both Israelis and Palestinians.
