Mr. Biegman (Netherlands): Offering the customary
congratulations on your presidency, Sir, I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The following
associated countries have aligned themselves with this
intervention: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Hungary,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia.

The Union warmly welcomed the signing in
Guatemala City on 29 December of the Agreement on a
Firm and Lasting Peace.

That signing was a historic step in Guatemala's
history, bringing an end to the longest-running conflict in
the region, which had brought immense pain and
suffering to the Guatemalan people. It is at the same time
the culmination of the peace process in Central America.

The European Union has for a long time taken an
active interest in the Central American peace process, in
particular through the San J ose dialogue, and reiterates its
readiness to support the Guatemalan people in
implementing the peace agreements.

We wish to congratulate the Government of
Guatemala and the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional
Guatemalteca (URNG). Their common determination and
the persistent efforts of the United Nations, in particular
of United Nations Moderator Jean Arnault, assisted by the
Group of Friends, have laid the basis for the far-reaching
agreements signed in Mexico, Oslo, Stockholm and
Madrid that entered into force on the occasion of the
signing ceremony in Guatemala City.

The implementation of the Agreement needs the full
cooperation of the parties. We call upon them to fulfil in
good faith the commitments they have entered into,
bearing in mind that it is their primary responsibility to
consolidate the peace and to prevent any resurgence of
violence. The citizens of Guatemala deserve at last to live
in peace.

Guatemala now faces the challenge of building a
democratic society based on the rule of law, open to the
equal participation of all Guatemalan citizens and with
full respect for human rights.

The verification of the peace accords has been
entrusted by both parties to the United Nations. The
European Union therefore agrees with the report of the
Secretary-General of 17 December 1996, which states that
the verification will require the deployment of United
Nations military observers and that, in accordance with
the established practice of the United Nations, such
deployment will require the authorization of the Security
Council, which has consistently supported the peace

 

process in Central America since it first commended the
efforts of the Contadora countries in resolution 530 (1983).
We therefore hope that the draft resolution before the
Council today can be adopted by consensus, as a testimony
of the continued determination of the whole international
community to support the peace process in Guatemala.

We support the Secretary-General's recommendation
for the attachment of a group of 155 military observers to
the United Nations Mission for the Verification of Human
Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala
(MINUGUA).

At the same time, we subscribe to the call contained
in the draft resolution for both parties to honour their
mutual commitments and to cooperate fully with the
verification of the ceasefire agreement and all the resulting
obligations.

