Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Jordanian presidency for
convening today's important and timely debate on the
role of youth in countering extremism and promoting
peace.

In recent years, the youth dimension has emerged
as a critical factor in global counter-terrorism efforts.
Terrorist organizations often grow their ranks by
recruiting young people who have a need to belong.
In this context, it is particularly alarming to observe
that the forced recruitment trend is shifting towards
adherence and that youth are voluntarily joining terrorist
organizations for ideological and/or socioeconomic
reasons. Pseudoreligious and warrior ideologies have
become an effective recruitment tactic, and with the
growth of social media and virtual platforms, developed
and developing countries alike are facing an increasing
risk of radicalization in their societies.

If we are to effectively prevent, protect and
reintegrate youth, we need to better understand the
triggers and catalysts of extremism. Among them, the
following factors appear to be common and pertinent to
different settings.

Unresolved, protracted conflicts and foreign
military occupation undermine the common belief in
the rule of law, human dignity and human life. Such
situations, accompanied by the weak capacity ofaffected
States to control and address the ensuing risks create a
climate of instability, injustice and impunity. A broader
lack of opportunities, in particular socioeconomic
deprivation, leads to an increased sense of insecurity
and despair. Thus, a focus on economic and employment
factors is key to countering the motivation and strategy
of recruiters, and to rewarding the resilience of youth
and societies at large to radicalization.

Racism and related intolerance can permeate
social marginalization and encourage youth to search
for a new, radical identity. Intercultural and interfaith
dialogue is essential to promoting mutual respect and
peaceful coexistence. Ignorance drives extremism,
not religion. Education is Vital to curbing this scourge
and to fostering a culture free from discrimination,
prejudice and stigma. It is important to pursue
youth policy work in a holistic manner and from
multi-stakeholder perspective, and to advance youth
priorities at all levels.

The youth population is growing all over the
world, and it grows it is ever more critical to design
response measures that enable young people to become
productive, rather than destructive members of their
communities. My country, Azerbaijan, seeking to make
a practical contribution to youth policy development and
its implementation with and for youth, in October 2014
hosted the first-ever Global Forum on Youth Policies.
The global event was organized at the initiative of the
Secretary-General, in partnership with his Envoy on
Youth, the United Nations Development Programme,
UNESCO and the Council of Europe. It brought
together over 700 representatives from 165 countries,
with the active participation of ministers responsible
for youth, as well as experts, youth advocates, civil
society representatives.

The Forum adopted the Baku Commitment to Youth
Policies, which, inter alia, calls for further promoting
and supporting the implementation of the World
Programme for Action on Youth, establishing a global
initiative on youth policies to support their development
and implementation, fostering partnerships that enable
inclusive and multi-stakeholder involvement in youth
policies, among other initiatives.

The United Nations has an important role play
in promoting policies that can create and provide the
resources youth need to become active local and global
citizens. In this respect, this year represents a unique
opportunity to promote synergies between youth policies
and broader development policies and frameworks,
particularly in the context of the post-2015 development
agenda and the means of its implementation.

In conclusion, I would like once again to reiterate
our appreciation to the delegation of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan for convening this important
debate. As is often said in the Security Council, we all
shall remain seized of this acute matter.

