Mr. Belle (Belgium) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank the High Representative,
Ambassador Lajcak, for his presentation and for his
report to the Security Council (S/2008/300, annex, enclosure). I should also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
statement.

Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Slovenia on behalf of the European Union.

Like the High Representative, Belgium welcomes
the progress of Bosnia and Herzegovina with a view to
its integration into Euro-Atlantic structures. The
decision by the European Union (EU) to sign a
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Bosnia
and Herzegovina demonstrates that results can be
achieved on essential reforms. Here, I am thinking
primarily of the first phase of the police reform. At the
same time, my delegation welcomes NATO's decision
to accord intensified dialogue to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Belgium is convinced that that progress
will constitute factors of stability not only for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, but also for the region.

Despite that significant progress, there are still
many challenges for Bosnia and Herzegovina to face. I
should like to highlight two of them.

First, Belgium shares the concerns related to the
threats posed by changing the constitutional order
through unilateral actions. Constitutional reform is
certainly necessary to consolidate internal political
stability. Like the High Representative, we note that
the positions of the various communities on this
subject remain diametrically opposed. My delegation
can only call on the major actors to be pragmatic. In
that regard, the agreement reached in Bosnia and
Herzegovina's parliament on holding local elections in
Srebrenica is a positive example. Furthermore,
Belgium will follow very closely the preparations for
the 5 October local elections.

Secondly, my country continues to stress its
commitment to full cooperation on the part of the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular
Republika Srpska, with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Belgium fully supports the 27 February
declaration of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council (see S/2008/300, annex, enclosure), which links a possible closing of the Office
of the High Representative to the fulfilment by Bosnia
and Herzegovina of five objectives and two conditions
set out in that declaration. We thus call on the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement
the terms of the declaration.

Finally, Belgium reaffirms its full support for the
provisions of the Dayton Agreement. We also reaffirm
our appreciation of and support for the work of the
High Representative, who is also Special
Representative of the European Union.

