Ms. Kamara (Liberia): I am grateful for the
opportunity to make this brief statement as the Council
prepares to consider the twenty-second progress report
on the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
5

(S/2011/72). Let me begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Liberia,
Ms. Ellen Margrethe Laj, and Prince Zeid for their
insightful presentations. My Government appreciates
the committed services being rendered to Liberia by
these two eminent persons, in particular their
respective contributions to the process of
peacebuilding and peace consolidation in Liberia.

I would like to also thank the Secretary-General,
the Council, the men and women in UNMIL and the
countries that have contributed them, and the rest of
the international community for their steadfast support
for Liberia. Indeed, many of the Governments which
you, the members of the Council, represent -
including yours, Mr. President - continue to provide
valuable support to Liberia's recovery. It is only
through this combination of global efforts within the
United Nations framework, strong bilateral
partnerships and an unwavering commitment of the
Government of Liberia that Liberians can truly
envisage enduring peace, stability and equitable growth
and development.

When the present Government, under the
leadership of President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, assumed
its responsibilities in 2006, the situation in Liberia was
indeed dire. Significant gains have been made since
then, and in some respects Liberia has achieved certain
goals in record time. In other areas, however, progress
has not met expectations, and many challenges remain.
The report under consideration today presents a
balanced picture of progress and constraints, systemic
weaknesses and critical gaps. It confirms, indeed, that
Liberia still has some way to go.

Liberia's request in May last year to be placed on
the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission was
underpinned by its acknowledgement of those critical
gaps and a determination to address them. The
Commission's engagement with Liberia provides a
platform and framework for accelerating action in the
priority areas of the rule of law, security sector reform
and national reconciliation, areas which are inextricably
6
linked to UNMIL's benchmarks and transition strategy.
It is important, therefore, that activities on both tracks
be carefully synchronized and that decisions be guided
by the realities on the ground.

Liberia has reached a critical turning point.
Critical because Liberians, in a few months' time, will
be going to the polls to choose their leaders in the
country's second post-conflict elections. This exercise
is crucial, as it will test the commitment to democratic
governance and the ability to manage democratic
processes in a peaceful manner.

Against the backdrop of this preoccupation with
national elections, developments in neighbouring C6te
d'Ivoire and the spillover effect of a continuing influx
of refugees into Liberia give rise to serious concern.
Not only do these developments present security
challenges, as the Special Representative noted earlier,
they impose a heavy burden on a Government and a
people whose resources are already extremely limited.
Moreover, the cross-border activities heighten the
country's vulnerability and present risks of
destabilization. We would like to urge the international
community to maintain critical focus on the escalating
crisis in the sisterly country of C6te d'Ivoire, as we
fear that failure to resolve the impasse could
undermine the gains made not only in Liberia, but also
in the West African subregion.

We ask you, Mr. President, and members of the
Council not to allow the situations in Liberia and Cote
d'Ivoire to become forgotten humanitarian crises.
There is an urgent need for resources to enable the
humanitarian community and the Government of
Liberia to prepare an effective response to the growing
protection needs of those who have been displaced
internally and externally.

