Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): Let me start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his extensive
briefing. Let me also underline that Turkey also aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union.

The tragic events at the start of this year have
further complicated the political, humanitarian and
socio-economic aspects of the Israeli-Palestinian issue.
The recent hostilities devastated Gaza, with a heavy
death toll of over one thousand lives, mostly women
and children. The Palestinians in Gaza are now faced
with formidable suffering and hardship. As indicated
by the latest report by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), growing numbers of Gazans live
in extreme poverty, and the numbers of the
unemployed keep rising.

On the other hand, Israeli citizens living in the
cities adjacent to Gaza should also feel safe and secure.
Rocket attacks launched from Gaza have been a
constant threat to them.

Time will not, in itself, heal all wounds. Active
engagement by the international community is
imperative in dressing them. In this context, we are
encouraged by the amount of pledges and the level of
participation at Sharm el-Sheikh earlier this month,

where the international community reiterated its full
support for the two-State solution and expressed its
expectation for strong commitment on the part of all
sides to such a settlement.

In addition to $150 million pledged in Paris in
2007, Turkey announced in Sharm el-Sheikh another
contribution of $50 million for specific reconstruction
projects in Gaza. Moreover, voluntary contributions of
the Turkish people to various donation accounts
opened for Gaza have reached almost $50 million. This
amount will also be used for reconstruction projects in
Gaza.

However, we cannot possibly speak of the
reconstruction of Gaza and the return to daily life until
the blockade completely ends and the crossings open.
There can be no improvement in the socio-economic
conditions of the Palestinians unless restrictions on the
movement of people and goods are lifted, not only in
the Gaza Strip but also in the West Bank. Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) clearly underlines the
need for the comprehensive opening of crossings. That
resolution should be fully implemented. We must also
ensure that the ceasefire is sustainable and respected by
all.

We are increasingly concerned about Israel's
ongoing settlement activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. Turkey has repeatedly made it clear that
settlement-building, which is contrary to Road Map
commitments and the two-State solution, is wrong and
should stop. None of the parties should take any action
that would undermine the peace process and prejudge
the final status negotiations. This also applies to the
Palestinian factions.

In the aftermath of the unfortunate events,
securing Palestinian reconciliation and unity once
again becomes an issue of critical importance and
urgency. We commend President Abbas for his tireless
efforts to achieve that vital goal. The Palestinian cause
would be best served if the Palestinian factions settle
their differences and join hands. That is a must in order
to keep alive and to realize the aspiration for an
independent Palestinian State representing all
Palestinians. We maintain our contacts with and
guidance to different Palestinian groups in this
direction.

Turkey is also committed to the empowerment of
the Palestinian Authority in the context of the State-
building process. We will continue with our
contributions to strengthen the Palestinian Authority
and its institutions and economy.

It is an undeniable fact that Israel's need for
peace, prosperity and security is best served by a
strong and united Palestinian State living side by side
with Israel. The Israelis and Palestinians are bound to
live next to one another. They can do so either as
combatants or as good neighbours and friends. It is
high time that they make the right choice.

We have always emphasized the need for a
comprehensive approach to the issues, since the
problems of the region are all interlinked.

We are ready to assist once again in order to
achieve the resumption of the indirect talks between
Syria and Israel, if the parties so desire.

We welcome the establishment of diplomatic
relations between Lebanon and Syria and the reciprocal
appointment of ambassadors. We are also encouraged
by the current American engagement with Syria.

We believe that the forthcoming elections in
Lebanon will be an important step in taking the
Lebanese people towards a better and brighter future,
consolidating the positive developments in the country.
We have confidence in the wisdom of the people of
Lebanon, that they will not miss this opportunity. For
its part, Turkey will remain committed to contribute to
the stability of Lebanon through its participation in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and, through
its reconstruction projects, to the prosperity of that
country.

We will continue to work for a viable and
comprehensive peace on all tracks of the Middle East
peace process.

