Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Allow me to commend the
presidency for the exemplary leadership that it has
given to the Security Council during the course of this
meeting and to welcome His Excellency the Foreign
Minister personally to this meeting. Allow me to
also welcome the Foreign Ministers of Angola and
Spain, the Under Secretary of State from the United
Kingdom, the Director General from Chile, Patriarch
Sako, and Mrs. Dakhil from Iraq. We also welcome the
participation of the Secretary-General and commend
him for his leadership.

For as long as we can recall, this is the first time
that a religious matter has been debated in the Security
Council in this manner, outside the framework of an
Arria formula meeting. We welcome this initiative of
the delegation of France. Based on the realization that
the deteriorating situation in the Middle East poses a
grave threat to many communities in the region, we
welcome the participation of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in this debate. We call upon his Office
and the Human Rights Commission to intensify their
efforts to offer protection to all endangered minorities
everywhere in the world. We also hope that the scope
of this debate will be extended in the future to cover the
situation of all minorities everywhere, including racial
minorities, such as Africans, people of African descent
and indigenous peoples. The protection of religious and
ethnic minorities must extend beyond the Middle East
and encompass all other parts of the world.
Turning to the Middle East, if history is to be an
accurate guide, we recall that during the centuries of
Ottoman rule in the region a policy of tolerance and
harmony was established by means ofthe millet system.
To a large extent, the miller system accorded ethnic
and religious minorities the freedom to practice their
religions and to live in freedom and relative security.
The harmonious system lasted until the dismemberment
of the Ottoman Empire.

If we are to do justice to this subject, we must look
at the root causes of the phenomenon in the region. The
general instability engendered in the region by foreign
occupation, civil wars fuelled by external interference,
forceful changes of Government, the delegitimization
of national leaders, the imposition of sanctions and
other punitive measures, the free flow of dangerous
and sophisticated armaments to rebels and terrorists,
the financing of anti-Government forces, prolonged
occupation and injustices meted out to people and
several other factors have contributed to the sorry state
of affairs that we are witnessing in the Middle East
today.

The proliferation of small and light weapons and
deadly ordnances of war must also be linked to the
atrocities that are being committed by terrorists like
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIS) and
other illegal armed groups in the Middle East. The
effective imposition of sanctions on proliferators of
weapons of mass destruction must be expeditiously
considered by the Council. The Arms Trade Treaty,
which has come into force, must also be universally
ratified and implemented to check the further spread of
this scourge. The observance of existing international
human rights and international humanitarian law is a
basic prerequisite for the maintenance of international
peace and security and the protection of all minorities
in our regions. Human rights, treaty bodies and relevant
conventions of the United Nations have a role to play in
that regard. We also believe that the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action offer a platform for combating
discrimination, intolerance and xenophobia.

The Security Council's relevant resolutions are
equally critical to addressing this problem. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General's announced initiative
to address the issue of violent extremism. We also
thank France for its leadership and commend Spain for
the proposals that it has put forward. Nigeria hopes to

contribute further to this initiative. We have put in place
a soft approach to countering violent extremism in our
country that we can share with other interested parties.
It is a multidimensional and multifaceted framework
that recognizes that counter-terrorism and countering
Violent extremism must not be limited to military
action alone, but should also consist of other initiatives
that offer incentives to win young people away from the
lure of terrorism and extremist ideology.

Nigeria has always espoused tolerance, mutual
respect and understanding as the glue that binds
together multiethnic, multi-religious and multicultural
societies. Where this is lacking, problems are bound
to occur. Ethnic and religious minorities form part of
the social fabric of the Middle East. They belong to the
region and have lived there for millenia. They have the
right to continue to live in their communities without
let or hindrance, in peace, safety and dignity. The right
to maintain their religious identities and ways of life is
inalienable.

The atrocities committed by ISIS are unprecedented. It
haskilledandenslavedinnocentpeopleindiscriminately,
often with minorities being deliberately targeted. It
has destroyed valued religious and cultural structures
and symbols. It has caused massive destruction of
social fabrics and displaced large numbers of people,
including ethnic and religious minorities, from their
homes, thereby triggering avoidable humanitarian
disasters.

The atrocities of ISIS underscore the urgent need
for the international community to scale up the fight
against terrorism, violent extremism and other forms
of intolerance and xenophobia. A strong and clear
message needs to be sent to all terrorist organizations
acting with utter impunity and callous disregard for life
and property. The international community, led by the
Council, must also show resolve in fighting the forces
of unscrupulous violence and destabilization, and
support all affected populations through the immediate
delivery of humanitarian and other forms of assistance.

The 1999 Constitution of Nigeria recognizes
and accommodates our diversity as a nation along
ethnic and religious lines. The Constitution provides
an inclusive framework in which every citizen is
guaranteed the enjoyment of full freedom and liberty
as a right. Nigeria stands shoulder to shoulder with
your country, Mr. President, and with the rest of the
international community in the fight against terrorism,
violent extremism and other forms of negative and
destabilizing influences.

