Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Let me start by joining
previous speakers in wishing you, Sir, a successful
and fruitful presidency this month. I am also grateful
that the working methods of the Security Council have
become one of the prime issues to be considered by the
Council. I also want to thank both of our briefers for
their useful and important input.

This meeting also has a practical meaning, in the
light of the upcoming election of new Council members
for the term 2020-2021. I am very pleased that, thanks
to the change of election dates, those members will have
sufficient time to get acquainted with practical aspects
of the Council's work in preparing for their term.

Ukraine has always been among the proponents of
a more transparent Council. During our membership
in 2016-2017, we did our best to contribute to further
opening up the Council's activities to the wider world
and enhancing the role of elected members. The
negotiations on updating presidential note S/2010/507
during our membership, had a very practical outcome.
The new document adopted in 2017 (S/2017/507, annex)
is a significant achievement in further streamlining the
Council's practices, and we are pleased to see several
of Ukraine's priorities reflected in it as well, including
on making the Council's field visits more transparent.

Presidential note S/2016/619, regarding the
selection of Chairs of the Council's subsidiary bodies,
has also become another useful instrument for the
elected 10 members (E-10) by making the Council more
transparent and effective. Ukraine aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the representative of
New Zealand on behalf of a number of former elected
Council members. We also encouraged by the joint E-10
statement today. It is important that the E-10 are sharing
the responsibility for the way the Council conducts its
work. From our recent membership experience, I would
also like to highlight some approaches that my country
considers important to retain and further develop in the
Council's practice.

First, the Council should conduct its work in the open
as much as is practically possible. Closed consultations
should be the exception rather than the rule.

Secondly, if consultations are held, the general
United Nations membership deserves to know what
was discussed. To that end, the continuation and
development of the practice of summarizing respective
discussions for further presentations at the media
stakeout would be highly appreciated. It is encouraging
to see that this trend towards greater openness now
enjoys the necessary traction among Council members.

Thirdly, we remain staunch supporters of the
practice of formal monthly wrap-up sessions of the
Council, which we see as an important element of the
proper implementation of presidential note 507. It is
necessary, in that regard, to find a way to seek the input
of Member States on issues they would like Council
members to reflect on during those wrap-up sessions.

Fourthly, we are convinced that the timely
issuance of monthly assessments is not something to
be overlooked, since those assessments constitute a
valuable source for preparing annual reports.

Fifthly, it would be useful for Council members to
consult with the countries concerned and the broader
United Nations membership, if necessary, on draft
decisions under the consideration of the Council,
which could certainly contribute to maximizing the
comprehensive implementation of their provisions by
the States Members of the United Nations.

The working methods of the Council are what
Council members do every day. There certainly are
positive changes, but they are much slower than we
would have hoped. Now I would like to say a few words
about the broader context of the day-to-day functioning
of the Council, including recent developments and
some ways of bringing about short- and longer-
term improvements.

First, we are very much disappointed about the
continuing practice of a particular Council member
of manipulating and misleading the Council with
false information and statements aiming to cover
up its military aggression against Ukraine and its
interference in my country's internal affairs. We are
convinced that the Council should utilize its precious
time more effectively, giving due attention, first and
foremost, to agenda items that seek to uphold respect
for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the States Members of the United Nations;
to addressing and preventing armed conflicts; and to
facilitating the settlement of international disputes by
peaceful means, in accordance with Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Secondly, the use of the veto remains one of the
most divisive issues. Unfortunately, the repeated use
of the veto has tarnished the Council's reputation to
a point almost beyond repair. In particular, we see a
clear lack of implementation of Article 27, paragraph
3, of the Charter, both in the spirit and the letter. In
that connection, while a veto-free Council is still a
distant and uncertain reality, we believe that a Council
member should refrain from using its veto power and
abstain from voting when it is a party to a conflict
under consideration in the Council. How can such a
member be expected to exercise its responsibilities and
privileges in an impartial manner?

We will obviously pursue that issue within the
intergovernmental negotiations process in the General
Assembly, together with Georgia, but any voluntary
pledge or action along those lines in the Council would
be warmly welcomed and could contribute to restoring
the Council's credibility.

In conclusion, let me restate that any effort to
increase the openness and transparency of the Council
will be strongly supported by the wider United Nations
membership, including Ukraine.

