Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate, and the Secretary-General
for his briefing. Brazil fully supports the Secretary-
General's visit to the Middle East. We are confident
that it will help bring about a ceasefire and respect for
international humanitarian law. Brazil also expresses
its appreciation to the Permanent Representative of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of the Observer
State of Palestine for their interventions.

The last time the Security Council held an
open debate on the situation in the Middle East (see S/PV.7164), the nine-month deadline for reaching a
final status agreement between Israelis and Palestinians
was just expiring. On that occasion, Brazil and many
other delegations regretted the lack of progress and
underscored that failing to deal with the fundamental
aspects of the Palestine question would only pose
greater challenges in future. Peace in the Middle
East is so fundamental and the stakes are so high
that we simply cannot allow the future of Israelis and
Palestinians - and therefore of the whole region - to
be dictated by those who choose to perpetuate tension
and conflict.

Brazil strongly condemned the abduction and
heinous murder of the three young Israelis and a
Palestinian youth and the chain of abhorrent Violence
that ensued. Acts of savagery cannot be tolerated.
Beyond punishing those responsible for the recent
excesses, it is necessary to put an end to the atmosphere
of incitement that over the years has encouraged the
perpetrators of such appalling crimes.

We further condemn the Israeli bombardment of
Gaza, along with the disproportionate use of force,
which resulted in more than 600 Palestinians dead
and thousands of wounded, many of them unarmed
civilians and children. We also condemn the firing of
rockets and mortars from Gaza into Israel. We reject
the current Israeli ground incursion into Gaza, which
has led to more death and destruction and represents
a serious setback to peace efforts. The new offensive
could help trigger further instability in the Middle
East and exacerbate the already dire humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. We urge
the Israelis to strictly respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law.

We also consider it necessary that Israel put an
end to the blockade of Gaza immediately. We urge
both parties to establish a permanent ceasefire and
effectively cooperate with the Government of Egypt
and the United Nations in that regard. The international
community must not continue to passively stand by
while gross violations are committed against civilians.
We cannot proceed as if the flare-ups in violence were
unavoidable, and therefore had to be tolerated.

Brazil reiterates its call for the Council to end
its self-imposed distance, to fully carry out its
responsibilities and to actively support and steer the
peace process. Resuming peace talks is as urgent and
necessary as ever. Only the implementation of the two-
State solution will bring durable peace and security to
Israel and Palestine and put an end to the suffering of
the civilian population on both sides.

Let us not forget that the protection of civilians
must be implemented in a universal and non-selective
manner. The commendable emphasis placed by the
Council on the protection of civilians when dealing with
other items on its agenda cannot be sidestepped when it
comes to the responsibility to protect Palestinians, who
bear the brunt of the violence.

Brazil welcomes the formation of a Palestinian
national unity Government. That is a significant
step towards Palestinian reconciliation. It is also
indispensable to building a prosperous and democratic
State that is willing to honour from the outset all the
previous commitments made by Palestine. We urge
all those supporting the Government to abide by the
previous agreements, in particular by rejecting violence
and recognizing Israel.

Turning to Syria, Brazil welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014). The newly found unity among
Security Council members should be extended to the
political track. It is deeply troubling that, while the
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate, the
political process remains paralyzed. The mistaken
belief that a military solution is possible through
the provision of weapons to all belligerent parties in
Syria can result only in more violence, instability and
suffering.

We encourage Mr. Staffan de Mistura and
Ambassador Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy to promote the
early resumption of political negotiations. As recalled
in the Fortaleza declaration adopted at the sixth Brazil,
Russia, India, China and South Africa Summit last
week in Brazil, "national dialogue and reconciliation
are key to the political solution for the Syrian crisis".

Brazil welcomes the removal of the last shipment of
chemical weapons declared by Syria and supports the
ongoing investigation of the alleged use of chlorine gas
against civilian targets.

It is disheartening that the number of deaths,
refugees and displaced people continues to grow,
together with so many broken promises to put an end
to violence.

We strongly condemn the continued violations of
human rights committed by all sides, as consistently
denounced by the Human Rights Council's Independent
Commission of Inquiry.

The recent deterioration in Iraq gives rise to grave
concerns. The sad reality is that the current situation
in that country derives directly from the unilateral
intervention of 2003. The crisis was compounded by,
among other failures, the dismantling and disbanding
of the Iraqi army. As called for by the Fortaleza
declaration, it is time now to

"refrain from interference that will further deepen
the crisis and to support the Iraqi Government and
the people of Iraq in their efforts to overcome the
crisis and build a stable, inclusive and united Iraq."

We urge Iraq's political leaders to expedite the
formation of an inclusive Government and to work
to meet the needs of all Iraqi citizens, irrespective of
ethnicity, religion or sect.

Brazil strongly condemns the recent terrorist
attacks perpetrated in Lebanon and firmly supports the
Lebanese Government in its fight against terrorism.
Brazil's participation in the international conference on
support to the Lebanese Armed Forces, recently held in
Rome, was a clear demonstration of our commitment to
support Lebanon's State institutions.

We also underscore the role played by the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Brazil has been
leading its Maritime Task Force since 2011 and has
supplied a frigate as its flagship.

As in other neighbouring countries, in particular
Turkey and Jordan, the spillover effects of the Syrian
conflict impose a heavy burden on Lebanon, whose
generosity in hosting more than 1 million Syrian
refugees should be not only commended, but also
concretely supported by the international community.

Finally, we would like to reiterate our support to
the policy of disassociation from regional crises agreed
in the Baabda Declaration of June 2012.

