Mr. Hasebe (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my appreciation to Prosecutor Bensouda for
her briefing and report. Japan is committed to the fight
against impunity and to supporting the International
Criminal Court (ICC), including the Office of the
Prosecutor, and we commend the accomplishments
the ICC has made so far. As the ICC's largest financial
contributor, Japan has consistently supported it with
a view to ensuring that it can function effectively
and sustainably in promoting the rule of law, with the
support of the international community.

Japan believes that the ICC has contributed to
steady progress on international justice. However, since
the Court lacks its own enforcement authorities, the
cooperation of States is vital to its success, for it cannot

function effectively or deliver justice without that
cooperation. Against that background, we welcome the
continued collaborative relationship between the Office
of the Prosecutor and the Libyan Prosecutor-General's
Office. Prime Minister Serraj's reaffirmation of
Libya's commitment during meetings with Prosecutor
Bensouda to cooperating with the ICC was especially
encouraging. We hope that positive trend will yield
results in the near future.

Japan is closely following the situation in the wake of
the issuance of the arrest warrant for Mahmoud Mustafa
Busayf Al-Werfalli for alleged criminal responsibility
for war crimes under the Rome Statute. Japan stands
ready to fulfil its obligations under the Statute. With
regard to SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi, it is regrettable that
he is not yet in the custody of the ICC, despite various
efforts by the Office of the Prosecutor. We encourage
the Libyan authorities and the international community
to cooperate fully with the ICC, pursuant to resolutions
1970 (2011) and 2259 (2015).

Japan is committed to supporting the implementation
of the action plan provided by Mr. Ghassan Salame,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya. At the same time, we remain deeply concerned
about the ongoing violence and insecurity in Libya,
including the human rights violations committed by all
sides. That makes it more difficult for the Prosecutor's
investigation to progress. In that context, we note
the Office of the Prosecutor's analysis of possible
investigations of alleged crimes against migrants and
look forward to further updates.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan's
continued support for the activities of the ICC. Japan
strongly believes that if we are to ensure that the
ICC can effectively promote the rule of law around
the world, more countries, including members of the
Council, should join it. At the same time, the ICC and
its States parties should continue to listen to the various
concerns expressed and make efforts to enhance the
Court's universality, so that it can gain stronger support
for its work.

My delegation stands ready to work alongside the
ICC to that end, and we look forward to further tangible
progress on today's agenda.

