Mrs. Gallardo Hernandez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to congratulate the President for
having convened this open debate in the Security
Council on the Peacebuilding Commission report
(S/2007/458) and to allow me to participate.

We would like to recognize the leadership of the
Permanent Representative of Angola, Ambassador
Gaspar Martins, and we welcome the Ambassador from
Japan, Mr. Takasu, and assure him of our full support.

A bit more than 1 year has passed now since the
Peacebuilding Commission was established within the
process of the reform of the United Nations.
Expectations at that time were multiple and different;
this was reflected in the initial meetings of the
Commission because it was a new body. It meant that
member States had to define and agree on the
functions, both of the Peacebuilding Support Office, as
well as the Peacebuilding Fund committee. We needed
to plan strategically and consistently to see how we
were to work, including clear monitoring procedures
for activities that the Commission was to carry out on
the ground.

However, throughout this first year, we have
looked at the achievements with optimism, even
though we are aware of the multiple challenges that our
Commission still faces.

El Salvador's re-election as Vice-Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and our role as Chair of the
Working Group on Lessons Learned mean that, as a
country, we are intensely committed to our mission.

Created to fill a gap in the United Nations system
and to facilitate the transition of post-conflict processes
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, our Commission,
by Virtue of its composition, will give added value to
the assistance that the United Nations will henceforth
have to provide to countries that decide to lay down
weapons and settle their disputes through dialogue and
agreement, with a View to establishing a national
development plan.

Undoubtedly, the presence of donor countries,
which in the past few years have contributed economic,
technical and financial cooperation in various
countries, is complemented by the presence of
countries such as El Salvador. Having overcome
internal violence, we in those countries wish to help,
on the basis of our experiences, to guide possible
decisions or recommendations that the Peacebuilding
Commission could make in the countries under
consideration - currently, Sierra Leone and Burundi.

The first report of the Peacebuilding
Commission, submitted at the end of this year
(S/2007/458), reflects some progress and
achievements, while at the same time indicating
necessary tasks that have yet to be carried out,
particularly on the ground. Indeed, it is on the ground
where the Commission's concrete actions should take
place, because that is where the dividends of peace
trickle down. In our View, the presence of Commission
members on the ground through programme visits is
necessary for the analysis and the strategies that the
Commission decides upon.

Our challenge is to intensify the coordination and
communication between the Commission and the
Security Council, including the possibility of
presenting to the Council - if the Council desires
them - the Commission's opinions on subjects of
common interest. We also consider it appropriate to
formulate concrete strategies, as we did in the cases of
Burundi and Sierra Leone, through the Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding, because that is an added
value and does not duplicate efforts.

The international community is awaiting a
tangible contribution from the Peacebuilding
Commission and - why not say it? - some practical
recommendations in specific areas and contexts. From
that perspective, the Working Group on Lessons
Learned, which El Salvador has the honour to chair,
has endeavoured to analyse and assemble concrete
experiences through various processes so as to
accumulate an inventory of lessons learned by the
United Nations system and the international
community, for when weapons are laid down, there is
an imperative need for new coexistence and integration
into a shared national development project.

While each peacebuilding process has its own
characteristics, and its success certainly depends on the
political will of national actors, the implementation of
lessons learned should benefit the countries under
consideration. Therefore, let us not forget to build a
historical memory that will contribute in the future to
more effective United Nations participation in
peacebuilding activities.

The modality adopted by the Working Group on

Lessons Learned - which connects actors on the
ground with Commission members through
videoconferences - reflects the openness and

flexibility that our work should have. Indeed, it is an
open Group in which all United Nations Member States
are welcome to make a concrete contribution that can
benefit the quest for lasting solutions on the ground in
the countries under consideration.
On the basis of our experience, we believe that
when a country emerges from armed conflict, it is
essential to bring the parties together in order to
identify short- and medium-term priorities and to act
on that basis. At that time, let us not forget, needs are
many and national capacity is sometimes limited.
However, there are certain aspects that, if not
urgently addressed, can set back and jeopardize
political agreements reached by national actors - such
as, to mention only a few, opportunities to reintegrate
and employ former combatants and young people, and
reform of the security sector. Those are among the
issues that the Working Group on Lessons Learned has
identified and analysed.

From the outset, El Salvador has expressed its
firm belief that the Peacebuilding Commission should
not be considered just a forum for financial
cooperation or a mediator between donors and
recipient countries. We believe it is important that
Commission members be aware of areas or
programmes that are seeking financing through the
Peacebuilding Fund. While it is important to listen to
national authorities when they identify their priorities,
the way in which those priorities are financed - as we
have seen in the Working Group on Lessons Learned -
can be far more successful if experiences in other
processes are taken into account.
07-54678

The reality of today's world demonstrates that no
region is spared from the possibility of conflict. That is
why we hope that, in the future, the Peacebuilding
Commission will have to take into account a certain
geographic balance in terms of the countries under
consideration.

Finally, let me add that the inclusion of a country
in the Commission's agenda, as well as a country's
removal from it, should be agreed with the national
authorities. At the same time, the inclusion of new
countries should be decided with the input, or at least
the knowledge, of the Commission members.

