The President: I will now make a brief statement
in my capacity as the representative of Sweden.

I want to thank Ms. Zerrougui and Ambassador
Alotaibi for their briefings and, not least, to say a
special word of thanks to Ms. Bihamba, our civil-
society briefer today. Her remarks to the Council
highlight not only the challenges that the women of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo face but also
their resilience, and her reflection here of women's
desire and determination to be agents of change in their
communities and their country. She also made some
very relevant and pertinent recommendations.

The elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo planned for 23 December represent an
essential step on the path to resolving the political
challenges facing the country. Last week in New York,
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council discussed the situation as part
of their twelfth annual joint consultative meeting.
The communique issued following that meeting
(SC/13430), as well as the most recent statement by
the African Union, the Southern African Development
Community, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the United Nations on the Peace
and Security Cooperation Framework, send a clear
signal and demonstrate the international consensus
on the need to hold credible and inclusive elections on
23 December in line with the Congolese Constitution
and the intra-Congolese agreement of 31 December
2016. The confidence-building measures are especially
important, given the importance of increasing trust and
confidence in the process among all the parties.

The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains dire and extremely
worrying. The outbreak of Ebola virus disease
in Equateur province on 8 May presented the
communities affected with an additional major
challenge. We commend the successful management
by the Government and its international partners of
the outbreak, which was declared at an end earlier
this week. We encourage the same commitment from
international partners with regard to their support for
humanitarian action in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo through the 2018 humanitarian response
plan. The needs are growing, while only 21 per cent
of the response plan's requirements has been met. For
the country's 7.7 million food-insecure people and
2.2 million acutely malnourished children, every dollar
counts. We encourage everyone to try to do more.

With the already appalling levels of human rights
violations and abuse, we are deeply concerned about
the increasing number of violations being reported
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
an increased incidence of sexual and gender-based
violence, as Ms. Bihamba has already told us. The high
percentage of violations attributed to State agents is
particularly worrying. Accountability for such crimes
is essential, both to ensure justice for the survivors and
to promote change by ending impunity. We urge the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with the support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to continue to strengthen efforts in that regard.

Sixteen months after the fact, the murders of
Zaida Catalan and Michael Sharp, two United Nations
experts reporting to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, remain unsolved.
We fully support the work of the United Nations and
the follow-on mechanism established by the Secretary-
General and led by Mr. Robert Petit. We reiterate the
need for the Congolese authorities to improve their
cooperation with him and his team. It is important that
the Sanctions Committee and the Security Council
continue to follow developments in the matter closely
until the truth has been established and the perpetrators
have been held accountable. We are grateful to the
Chair of the Committee for all his work, including the
recurring Sanctions Committee meetings on the follow-
up mechanism.

The year 2018 is a crucial one for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Credible, transparent, inclusive
and peaceful elections can contribute to lasting peace
and stability. It is essential that the Council and the
region continue to stand united and work with the
Government to support the people of the country in the
exercise of their democratic rights.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

