Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 2364 (2017),
which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). However, Uruguay wishes to
express its concern about two aspects that I Wish to
discuss in detail. One aspect is procedural, the other is
substantive.

With respect to the procedural issue, I wish to point
out that the draft resolution did not undergo a silence
procedure. The silence procedure is of particular
importance in the negotiation process for Security
Council draft resolutions. It is a standard practice of
the Security Council, and therefore codifying it and
giving it a framework is one of the topics discussed
in the negotiation process of the new 507 Note by the
President of the Security Council.

With regard to substantive issues, Uruguay was one
of the first countries to sign onto the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians, which aim to address the
internal challenges that missions face and which compel
the entire peacekeeping system to reflect on ways to
improve, to become more efficient and effective in their

tasks and, above all, to avoid a breakdown in adequate
mission functioning.

Without Wishing to refer to a particular
peacekeeping operation, since it is a systemic problem,
I would like to recall that we have been receiving
reports from the Secretariat on shortcomings in various
missions in terms of their functioning. On that point,
Uruguay believes i and has expressed as much on
many occasions - that the peacekeeping personnel
deployed are one of the fundamental actors, if not the
sole ones, in the implementation of operations. As a
result, the existence of undeclared national restrictions,
the absence of effective command and control, the
refusal to obey orders, the failure to respond to
attacks against civilians and a lack of equipment can
negatively affect the shared responsibility of effectively
implementing mandates.

In the very positive and beneficial meeting that
the Council held with peacekeeping mission Force
Commanders nearly a month ago (see S/PV.7947),
many of those shortcomings were highlighted. In the
original text circulated by the penholder, in paragraph
32 the Secretary-General was requested to report on
those aspects so as to be able to find out the level of
implementation of commitments by contingents and
police forces.

Although not all peacekeeping operations are the
same, and each has its own specificities, it is also good
for the Security Council to be consistent and coherent
when approving mandates, including with regard to
patterns and guidelines of a systemic nature. That
was the nature of paragraph 32 as originally proposed.
A paragraph of identical tone was approved for the
latest renewal of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Unfortunately, however, with regard to
MINUSMA, which operates in a tremendously hostile
environment, which has significant vulnerabilities
and which often we refer to as the most dangerous
peacekeeping mission in the world, there are still loose
ends that, if resolved, would have made have given
greater consistency to the mandate of peacekeeping
missions, and to MINUSMA in particular, making it
more effective in its functioning and also in terms of
protecting civilians. Therefore, Uruguay would have
preferred the drafting to be maintained in today's
resolution and would like it to be included in future
mandate approvals in order to improve the efficiency
and accountability of peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, we think it is relevant to recognize
the work of the peacekeepers deployed on the ground
and, in this case especially, of MINUSMA, for
their generous contribution to international peace
and security.

