Mr. McNee (Canada): The success of the United
Nations-supported mission in Afghanistan in providing
security, governance and development is vital to the
Afghan people, but is also vital to the health and future
of the United Nations, as the Prime Minister of Canada
declared in the General Assembly in September.

Canada welcomes the recent mission undertaken
by the Security Council to Afghanistan, which
demonstrated a collective commitment to review gains
made to date and to identify outstanding obstacles. I,
too, would like to thank Ambassador Oshima for
leading this mission so ably, and to thank Japan for
maintaining focus on Afghanistan in the Council.
Canada hopes and expects this level of consistent
engagement by the Council on Afghanistan to continue
in the months ahead.

The mission's report (S/2006/935), combined
with the Secretary-General's report of 11 September
and the biannual progress report of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB), provide
frank and comprehensive assessments of the current
situation. Taken together, they provide all of us with
concrete recommendations to guide our ongoing
efforts.

There has been important progress in Afghanistan
in 2006. Notably, the Bonn process drew to a close this
past January, and the Afghanistan Compact was
launched by the Afghan Government and the
international community. Across Afghanistan,
governance institutions are emerging, including the
Parliament, the Supreme Court and the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission. Development
and reconstruction are occurring, although perhaps at a
slower pace than we would all hope. Significant
challenges, nevertheless, continue to confront
Afghanistan.

Indeed, Canada's commitment to Afghanistan has
been steadfast, and we have deployed our soldiers
where they are needed most. It is clear that they are
now needed in the south, where insurgents are trying to
hold ordinary Afghans hostage by preventing them
from receiving the most basic of services from their
elected Government - health, education and the rule
of law. We encourage all Member States to consider
how they can contribute to meeting Afghan needs in
the south.

Canada is committed to improving the lives of
Afghans. As part of our approach, we have committed
nearly $1 billion in development assistance from 2001
to 2010. Alongside the Afghan Government, the United
Nations, NATO and our other international partners, we
are striving to help establish a stable, democratic and
self-sufficient Afghanistan. At its core, this is all about
restoring normalcy to the Afghan people: girls and
boys attending school, women starting small
businesses, refugees returning home and citizens
feeling free enough to express their Views.

The Afghanistan Compact objectives are
Canada's objectives. They will only be successfully
achieved, however, through concerted international
partnership, building the confidence of the Afghan
people and the Afghan Government's leadership.

The United Nations Assistance Mission to
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is the primary international
institution responsible for stewardship of the Compact,
alongside the Afghan Government. UNAMA has a
crucial role to play in strengthening the emerging
governance institutions of the Afghan State, including
through capacity-building. Canada encourages
UNAMA to enhance its role on the ground in
Afghanistan, particularly in the areas of governance,
human rights and the rule of law. This will involve
additional resources in Kabul as well as in the regional
offices across Afghanistan, including in Kandahar.
Canada will continue to support UNAMA through the
secondment of police and corrections advisors, and
hopes that others will make similar commitments.

Canada, therefore, supports the Mission's
recommendation that the Secretary-General consider
measures to promote UNAMA's coordinating role both
in Kabul and at the provincial and local levels, and
welcomes the ongoing expansion of UNAMA into the
provinces.

Afghanistan's neighbours also have a central role
to play. Instability does not respect borders and poverty
is infectious. High-level regional engagement and
cooperation are critical to stemming the trafficking in
narcotics, finding sustainable solutions for Afghan
refugees and addressing transnational terrorism,
including the cross-border movement of insurgents. In

this regard, we welcome the commitment of both
Afghanistan and Pakistan to a meaningful and
constructive cross-border dialogue. We are also hopeful
that initial discussions, in the context of this recent
mission, with the Government of Pakistan can lead to
concrete improvements.

Canada strongly shares the concern expressed by
the mission regarding the humanitarian implications of
the use of landmines along the Afghanistan-Pakistan
border.

The people of Afghanistan must have faith in
their institutions of Government in order to have faith
in their future. Neither they nor we can tolerate
corruption within the ranks of Afghanistan's national,
provincial or local institutions. We welcome the
Afghan Government's commitment to fighting
corruption, as expressed by the Ambassador here today.
The Afghan people are entitled to an effective,
accountable and transparent Government.

(spoke in French)

Canada strongly supports the Council's
recommendation that collective efforts be redoubled to
build an effective Afghan National Police that can
operate with the confidence of the people throughout
the country. Policing is a priority area for Canada in
Afghanistan. Through our civilian police contingent in
our Provincial Reconstruction Team in Kandahar, we
are providing training and mentorship to Afghan
police.

We also hope that any auxiliary police forces
deployed to southern Afghanistan will be properly
vetted, trained and equipped, and will be fully
accountable and operating under central authority.

Canada welcomes the emphasis in the Security
Council mission report on human rights, including
especially women's rights and the protection of
civilians. Canada has strongly supported the
development of the Action Plan for Peace, Justice and
Reconciliation and looks forward to its formal launch
on 10 December on the occasion of International
Human Rights Day by the Government of Afghanistan.
Ultimately, the Afghan Government's capacity to
provide basic services and ensure good governance is
critical to our collective success. We will continue to
support and expect strong Afghan leadership with
respect to the critical challenges confronting
Afghanistan. This includes Visible and unequivocal
action in the combat against corruption and for the
disbandment of illegal armed groups, among other
things. We would also welcome continued efforts to
extend Afghan national programmes to southern
Afghanistan and to other areas where the need is ever
more pressing.

It is in the interest of every country represented in
this Chamber to help the Afghan people in their time of
need. Afghans are counting on the United Nations and
its Member States to make good on our collective
commitments, as reflected in the Afghanistan Compact.
We commend the Security Council for its decision to
undertake this important mission in Afghanistan and
call on it to keep this issue high on its agenda in the
months to come.

