Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I should like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/127) and Under-Secretary-General Alain Le
Roy for his comprehensive briefing. We welcome the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and wish him success. I
welcome the Ambassador of Afghanistan to the
Council. We would like to commend the report, which
provides a detailed outlook. We agree with its contents
and observations.

The speed of developments unfolding regarding
Afghanistan did not change in the past months. I
therefore wish to emphasize four points: Afghan
leadership, the strengthening of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and its
mandate, regional cooperation, and a civilian approach.

First, the international community has started to
approach the current challenges with a new
perspective. This year is critical. The London
Conference was an important turning point. The key
term will be "Afghan leadership" in the period ahead.
Afghan leadership should be supported by the
international community by all means possible. The
gap between Afghan and international perceptions
should be minimized. There should be a new
beginning. We should empower the Afghan
Administration. A political process is necessary. The
United Nations should have a central role. The
parliamentary elections in September 2010 will be part
of this process. The new Administration should
embrace the whole nation in the period leading up to
the elections. It should focus on national unity and
reconstruction efforts. It should reach out to all ethnic
groups through inclusive policies.

What Afghanistan needs now is the strengthening
of democratic values and efficient State mechanisms to
combat various problems, including misconduct. A
comprehensive approach is needed. It should include
security, governance, the rule of law, human rights and
social and economic development. It should not be
limited only to military means. Four areas need special
attention: comprehensive economic development; a
strong, well-trained and fequipped Afghan military and
police; inclusive national reconciliation; and modern
education and justice systems that can effectively
combat extremism.

Secondly, this comprehensive approach is directly
linked to a strong United Nations. The role of UNAMA
should be strengthened in order to better serve the
Afghan people. For that reason, we are trying to
incorporate the needs of the United Nations into the
current negotiations on UNAMA's new mandate. As
the lead country in the Council, Turkey hopes to reach
consensus and finalize the discussions on the UNAMA
mandate renewal after this debate so that it can be
adopted next Monday. On the other hand, we all need
to help the United Nations address its security
requirements. The continuation of a strong United
Nations presence is of the utmost importance, not only
in the coming transition period but even beyond. We
should therefore all support the Secretary-General in
his efforts to that end.

Thirdly, regional cooperation and dialogue should
be enhanced. Turkey hosted the fourth Turkey-
Afghanistan-Pakistan Trilateral Summit in January,
with a focus on education. We also hosted the Istanbul
Summit with the participation of Afghanistan's
neighbours. The Istanbul Statement is the first
declaration of the region since the Kabul Declaration

of 2002 to emphasize regional ownership. We believe it
provides a solid basis for enhancing regional
cooperation. Regional cooperation was also discussed
at the London Conference. On another note, Turkey
will also host the fourth Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan in Turkey this
year

Fourthly, we would like to stress the importance
of strengthening civilian efforts in the period ahead.
The transfer of responsibilities to Afghan authorities
should not be understood as an exit strategy. On the
contrary, the international community should increase
its civilian presence. In that context, we would
especially like to draw attention to the relevant section
of the Secretary-General's report on the situation in
areas where stability is fragile due to the inequitable
distribution of development aid. We will continue our
efforts to fill that gap.

I would like to inform the Council that at the
provincial reconstruction team (PRT) conference held
in Kabul two days ago, Turkey announced the
establishment of a new Turkish PRT in Sibirgan, the
provincial capital of Cevizcan, at the request of the
Afghan Government. Our new PRT will also cover
Saripul province. We have already completed our
domestic legislative requirements and appointed a
senior diplomat as PRT leader. A site survey was
conducted last week. We plan to reach operational
capability in May. The Turkish civilian-led PRT will
base itself on the successful experience of our first PRT
in Wardak province. It will assume responsibility for
health, education and development efforts in close
coordination with Afghan authorities. It will bring
additional civilian capacity to those two provinces and
complement the ongoing development efforts in the
region. It will also be ready to assist Afghan capacity-
building efforts in the area of security by training the
Afghan National Police.

Finally, we would like to reiterate that, in
addition to our diplomatic efforts, Turkey will continue
its comprehensive contributions in Afghanistan in
cooperation with the United Nations.

