The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the 2 June terrorist bombing in
Beirut, Lebanon, that killed a Lebanese
journalist, Samir Qassir, who was a symbol of
political independence and freedom, and
expresses its deepest sympathy and condolences
to the family of the victim and to the people of
Lebanon.

"The Security Council welcomes the
determination and commitment of the
Government of Lebanon to bring to justice the
perpetrators, organizers and sponsors of this
assassination and determines that this
assassination, like others before it, constitutes a
pernicious effort to undermine security, stability,
sovereignty, political independence and efforts
aimed at preserving civil accord in the country.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
about the destabilizing impact of political
assassinations and other terrorist acts in Lebanon,
and warns that the sponsors of recent terrorist
acts against political leaders and leading
members of civil society in Lebanon should not
be permitted to jeopardize the holding of
parliamentary elections in transparent, free and
democratic conditions.

"The Security Council calls upon all parties
to show restraint and a sense of responsibility
with a view to the successful completion of the
electoral process and government formation in
the country.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
resolution 1559 (2004) and reiterates its call for
the strict respect of the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, unity and political independence of
Lebanon. The Security Council urges all States,
in accordance with its resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1566 (2004), to cooperate fully in the fight
against terrorism."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2005/22.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.
