Mr. Schulz (Germany): I too would first like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime for her comprehensive briefing and Ms. Gilles for her insightful comments. This is the first time that the Security Council is discussing the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) as a special political mission and is a good opportunity to take stock of where we stand. I would therefore like to limit my statement to four aspects in that regard, since previous speakers have already covered a great deal. First, I would like to say that we too are worried about the persistent political deadlock and we urge all political actors to find a lasting solution to break the stalemate and alleviate the suffering of the population. We would like to encourage the Haitian Government and opposition to continue an inclusive national dialogue to reach agreement on arrangements that can build societal consensus on the revision of the Constitution, the implementation of reforms and a realistic electoral framework to allow preparations for credible and transparent elections. I would also like to commend Special Representative of the Secretary- General La Lime, the Organization of American States and the Catholic Church for their efforts to assist the parties to engage in direct talks so as to find a solution to the crisis. Turning to my second point, we are alarmed that the prolonged political stand-off, aggravated by the ensuing economic downturn, has created an enabling environment for gang-related violence. We know that some political actors and businessmen have close ties with criminal gangs. We strongly condemn all actions that undermine the democratic processes and the rule of law and call on all stakeholders to refrain from acts that could contribute to instability. That includes incitement to violence, hate speech and threats. We deplore the scant progress made in pursuing accountability for recent human rights violations, such as the events in La Saline, Bel Air and Grand Ravine, and corruption scandals. In that context, we would like to highlight the important role of civil society in urging the authorities to ensure accountability. I thank Ms. Marie Yolene Gillis for a very captivating briefing in that regard. Let me also say that we condemn all attacks on civil society and all reprisals against civil society for speaking out in support of the truth and recalling facts on the ground. Thirdly, I will comment briefly on the issue of the police. Looking back at the progress achieved over the past 15 years, we welcome and salute the increasing self-sufficiency of the Haitian NationalPolice (HNP) in providing security across the country, while recognizing that certain gaps still exist, for example, in tackling gang-related crimes and managing large-scale civil unrest. We are concerned by reports that underline a lack of trust in the police. It is key that the Haitian National Police improve its relationship with the population through outreach and community- oriented policing and that BINUH continue its efforts in that regard. We are concerned by the Secretary-General's observation that "the Haitian National Police budget has not increased since 2017, leaving the institution unable to address serious financial and operational challenges" (S/2020/123, para. 27). We are also concerned about recent events that point to a tendency of polarization inside the HNP, including acts of violence during public demonstrations of police officers. In our view, it is imperative to further augment the capacity of the Haitian National Police and render it more effective so as not to lose the gains achieved by the peacekeeping operations. Fourthly and lastly, the transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations presence in Haiti clearly occurred at a time when the country found itself in the midst of a multidimensional crisis. It is therefore even more important that all United Nations actors closely coordinate their activities in order to best support the country in overcoming this crisis. Germany emphatically supports the new approach to the benchmarks, which reflects the mutually supportive relationship between the peace and security and development pillars of the United Nations system. We welcome the engagement of the Peacebuilding Fund in Haiti as well as the joint work of BINUH and the United Nations country team in developing an integrated strategic framework to identify the United Nations key areas of intervention in Haiti. Without addressing the root causes of violence and conflict, such as the deeply entrenched socioeconomic disparities, a lack of access to basic services, impunity for crimes, the dire humanitarian situation and continued human rights violations, the return to lasting political stability that Haiti so desperately needs will not be possible. We very much support the work of BINUH - a strategic political United Nations presence that willadvise and assist the Government of Haiti in tackling the many challenges that lie ahead. However, the future of their country clearly lies, first and foremost, in the hands of the Haitians themselves. The international community stands ready to contribute and assist them in their efforts to renew the social contract between the Haitian State and its citizens.
