The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Mindaoudou for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004), concerning Cote
d'Ivoire.

On 29 October of last year, in my capacity as
Chair of the 1572 Sanctions Committee, concerning
Cote d'Ivoire, I briefed the Security Council on the
Committee's work (see S/PV.7292). At the time,
Council members reminded me that I had promised to
brief them again on my return from my visit to Cote
d'Ivoire, which took place from 2 to 7 November.
During the visit I explained its purpose to everyone I
spoke to, which was to emphasize the importance of
the full implementation of the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, gather information first-
hand on the situation in the country and promote
meaningful dialogue between the Government of Cote
d'Ivoire and the Committee. Both President Ouattara
and the ministers I met emphasized how positively
they perceived a visit from the Chair of the Security
Council's Sanctions Committee, a promising sign that
has strengthened cooperation and dialogue between the
Council and Cote d'Ivoire.

The authorities I met were very receptive and ready
to engage in serious dialogue. For example, the Minister
of Defence outlined the needs of all the armed forces
in detail, explaining that many of their security needs
had to do with preparing for the national elections,
scheduled to take place later this year. He described
his priorities and the reasons behind the requests
he had submitted to the Committee for the relevant
authorizations. As I expected, the President and his
ministers expressed their desire to see the sanctions
fully lifted. My response was that my visit was an
opportunity to assess the degree to which the Cote
d'Ivoire authorities were implementing the relevant
resolutions and the difficulties they were encountering
in doing so. I underscored the fact that the measures in
force were carefully designed to support the efforts to
establish peace and post-conflict development that are
under way in Cote d'Ivoire.

In view of the significant changes that have
taken place in the sanctions regime since last year,
particularly the lifting of the embargo on trading in
diamonds and the partial lifting of the arms embargo, I
explained that additional changes would be dependent
upon the progress made in implementing the four pillars
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security-sector reform, national reconciliation and
fighting impunity. Generally speaking, I had the
impression that significant progress had been achieved,
but that more needed to be done for Cote d'Ivoire fully
to comply with its obligations pursuant to the relevant
resolutions, in particular as regards the upcoming
elections in October.

I underscored in particular the Council's concerns
with respect to the lack ofprogress made in reintegrating
former combatants and the need to establish security
forces that are inclusive and responsible, so as to
ensure the stability of the country. In the run-up to the
elections, Cote d'Ivoire will need to have police and
gendarmerie forces that are sufficiently trained and
equipped in order to ensure a democratic and peaceful
process.

In that context, I noted that some ministers were
not fully aware of the changes introduced by resolution
2153 (2014) with regard to the process to be followed to
request from the Committee equipment for the police
and the gendarmerie. During the meetings held at the
various ministries, I explained in detail the procedures
to be followed to submit notifications and request
exemptions to the arms embargo. I promised them that,
together with the Secretariat, I would help them prepare
and present such submissions to the Committee.

With regard to lifting the embargo on the sale of
rough diamonds, it was very useful for me to meet not
only with the Deputy Minister of Industry and Mines,
but also with the local communities that participate in
the production of this important natural resource. When
I visited the areas of Seguela and Tortiya, I saw the
importance of the lifting of the embargo for the larger
local communities. I deplored the fact that the export of
diamonds had not resumed, but I understand that it will
take time to restore the national capacity to ensure the
traceability of sales of this important resource. I trust
that the second visit in the framework of the Kimberley
Process, scheduled for next March, will confirm the
significant progress achieved so that the country and
the local communities can reap the benefits of the legal
trade in this natural resource.

I reiterated to the local authorities the importance
of cooperating with the Group of Experts. I highlighted
its independence and underscored the need to respond
to its requests for information. I explained that the
best way to make the Government's views known was
to respond to the requests of the Group; otherwise,
the Government was closing off an important means
of communication with the sanctions Committee. The
authorities promised to improve their cooperation. I took
the opportunity to provide to the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs a complete list of the communications
or submissions submitted to the Group of Experts that
still had not been responded to. On 5 December, I had
the opportunity to inform the Committee about my visit
to Cote d'Ivoire.

I would like by way of conclusion to once again
express my gratitude to and support for the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, the Group of
Experts and the Permanent Mission of Cote d'Ivoire
throughout my visit. I should like also to thank the
delegation of France and the Secretariat for supporting
me throughout this very important initiative that I
undertook on behalf of the Committee.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

