The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bangladesh, Brazil, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Indonesia,
Italy, Japan, Nepal, the Philippines, Rwanda and South
Africa, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) and
Mr. Spatafora (Italy) took seats at the Council
table; Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh),
Mr. Sardenherg (Brazil), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt),
Mr. Jenie (Indonesia), Mr. Haraguchi (Japan),
Mr. Sharma (Nepal), Mr. Baja (Philippines),
Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda) and Mr. Maitland (South Africa) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of any objection, I
shall take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
any objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Amos Namanga
Ngongi, former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Ngongi to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 14 July 2003 from the
Permanent Representative of Italy to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"Upon instructions from my Government, I
have the honour to request that Mr. Javier Solana,
Secretary-General and High Representative for
the Common Foreign Policy and Security Policy
of the European Union, be allowed to participate,
on behalf of the European Union, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the United Nations Charter and rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council, in the Council's discussion to
be held on 18 July 2003 on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo."

That letter has been published as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/2003/709.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Javier Solana.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Solana to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting.

The Security Council will now hear a briefing by
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, to whom I give the floor.


