Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I would like to begin
by thanking the briefers for their detailed and insightful
presentations. My delegationjoins others in welcoming
the seventh report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/492)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and
I want to reaffirm South Africa's commitment to its
full implementation.

South Africa welcomed the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) as the greatest diplomatic
achievement in the area of nuclear non-proliferation
since the signing of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty in 1996. The JCPOA is a milestone deal,
reached on 14 July 2015 after 12 years of intense
diplomatic efforts and complex negotiations by China,
France, Germany, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom, the United States and the European Union
with the Islamic Republic of Iran. In that regard, my
delegation fully supports the Secretary-General's
view, expressed in paragraph 2 of his report, that such
"diplomatic efforts and hard-won achievements must be
preserved and built upon".

South Africa welcomes the fact that Iran has
complied with all its nuclear-related commitments as
confirmed by the fifteenth report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, submitted to the Council on
31 May. It continues to be crucial for Iran to continue
to comply with the provisions of the JCPOA. It is
important that all the remaining parties to the JCPOA
fully implement and comply with the provisions of
the agreement.

South Africa deeply regrets the decision by
the United States to withdraw from the JCPOA.
Furthermore, we share the disappointment expressed
by the Secretary-General in his report regarding the
decision of the United States not to renew waivers for
nuclear non-proliferation projects in the framework of
the JCPOA. It is our view that the decision by the United
States will affect Iran's ability to fully implement the
provisions of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).
It is important to recall that the lifting of sanctions,
especially on certain nuclear-related materials, was
part and parcel of the JCPOA.

While we commend the benefits of the JCPOA as
an essential instrument of nuclear non-proliferation,
we want to stress that the total elimination of nuclear
weapons is the only guarantee that they will never again
be used by anyone under any circumstances. South
Africa would like to remind the Council that nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are mutually
reinforcing processes. The lack of progress on nuclear
disarmament will inadvertently affect the gains made
on nuclear non-proliferation. South Africa underlines
the importance of respecting the inalienable right of
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes.

South Africa is a staunch supporter of nuclear-
weapon-free zones as one of the major contributors to
nuclear non-proliferation and critical building blocks
towards the goal of a world without nuclear weapons.
In that regard, we want to highlight the urgent need
for the establishment of a zone in the Middle East
free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction. South Africa welcomed General Assembly
decision 73/546 of November 2018, mandating the
convening of a conference to establish such a zone, to
be held in November 2019. We call on all countries of
the region to actively participate in good faith to ensure
that the conference is indeed a success. South Africa
wishes to reiterate the fact that the 1995 resolution
on the Middle East adopted at the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference of the Parties to the NPT, as
well as other agreements made during subsequent
Review Conferences, remain valid until they are fully
implemented by all of us.

Finally, regarding the broader security of the
region, South Africa joins others in expressing its
concern about the growing tensions in the Persian Gulf
and its impact on international peace and security.
South Africa urges all parties involved to exercise the
utmost restraint and not to allow the situation to get out
of hand. The Council must support initiatives aimed at
the restoration of peace and stability, not only in the
Persian Gulf but also in the broader Middle East region.

