Mr. Andambi (Kenya): Kenya aligns its statement
with the statement made earlier by the observer of the
African Union.

On behalf of my delegation, I wish to congratulate

you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of May. I and applaud the manner
in which you have steered the Council as President. I
would also like to express my delegation's appreciation
to you for convening today's open debate and providing
us with a detailed concept note (S/2015/306, annex) to
guide the debate. I am also grateful to the Secretary-
General and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their detailed briefings on the matter.
I also wish to thank all the previous speakers for their
insightful remarks.

My delegation has taken note with appreciation of
the Council's continued attention to small arms and light
weapons as a threat to international peace and security
through its various resolutions, high-level meetings, the
Arms Trade Treaty of 2014 and other thematic efforts
to address the destabilizing accumulation and misuse
of small arms and light weapons, particularly during
armed conflict. In that regard, we wish to reiterate our
support for presidential statement S/PRST/2007/24 and
for resolution 2117 (2013) and its recommendations.
Kenya has taken important measures to fully implement
the United Nations Programme of Action on Small
Arms and Light Weapons. My delegation looks forward
to participating fully in the United Nations Open-ended
Meeting of Governmental Experts on Small Arms and
light weapons in June 2015.

The effects of the availability and misuse of small
arms have long been felt throughout Kenyan society. By
virtue of its geographical location, Kenya has suffered
immensely from the effects of the illicit transfer of
small arms and light weapons, which have caused
monumental human suffering. This is evident from the
various terrorist attacks that have been witnessed in the
country in recent times. Similarly, unprecedented high
levels of illicit small arms and light weapons among
the pastoralist communities in northern parts of the
country have been associated with persistent insecurity
and such criminal activities as cattle rustling, poaching
and armed robberies.

Kenya continues to strengthen its policy and
legislative measures to address loopholes in the law
that make it difficult for the Government to deal with
insecurity. In 2014, we passed the Security Amendment
Act, which amends 22 pieces of legislation aimed at
enhancing the security of the country. The Firearms
Act is one of the pieces of legislation that was amended
to tighten controls on flows of small arms and light
weapons and the costs of non-compliance. However,
national policies alone will not suffice unless stability
in the Horn of Africa, particularly Somalia, is fully
restored. This informs Kenya's deep involvement in
regional peace and stabilization efforts, including
being an integral part of the mandate of the African
Union Mission in Somalia and the mediation effort for
South Sudan led by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development.

My delegation recognizes that the proper
management of national stockpiles of small arms and
light weapons is essential to reducing the risk of the
diversion of weapons to the illicit trade - illegal
armed groups, including terrorist organizations.
Kenya continues to destroy recovered illicit weapons
in order to prevent the risk of diversion and is now
in the process of initiating the marking of civilian-
licensed weapons. However, we strongly believes that
marking at the point of manufacture can have a huge
impact in improving the traceability of the weapons.
To strengthen the implementation of the International
Tracing Instrument, Kenya is taking measures to
improve national marking, equipment acquisition,
coordination, record keeping and training capacities of
entities involved in the interdiction of small arms and
light weapons.

Kenya is keen to foster regional cooperation with
its neighbours to reduce the continued transfer and
misuse of small arms and light weapons in the region,
particularly by criminal groups and other illegal armed
groups. In that respect, we are actively involved and
progressively cooperating with various United Nations
agencies, the Regional Centre on Small Arms and Light
Weapons, the East African Police Chiefs Cooperation
Organization, the East African Community and other
regional efforts and programmes to deal with the
menace, including stockpile management and tracing
programmes. My country has been at the forefront
of initiatives to enhance information exchanges and
intelligence-sharing with neighbouring States on illicit
activities and the actors involved. Similarly, Kenya
has been conducting maritime operations to curtail
trafficking in illicit small arms and light weapons.

Despite the measures taken and the achievements
highlighted, Kenya faces challenges in implementing
its national programme of action on small arms and
light weapons. Instability in Somalia and South Sudan,
and lately in Yemen, continues to pose the risk of
undermining current efforts. Kenya's long and porous
borders with Somalia predisposes it to illicit inflows of
small arms and light weapons irrespective of current
efforts and initiatives to mark the deployed national
stockpiles. The country also has limited forensic and
ballistic technological capacity to profile weapons,
which has impeded its ability to effectively monitor
the use of small arms and light weapons in criminal
activities.

In conclusion, let me assure the Council of my
delegation's continued commitment to support the
implementation of measures and efforts to eradicate
the proliferation ofillicit small arms and light weapons,
for the best benefit of the global community and in the
interest of maintaining international peace and security.

