Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I should like to begin
by thanking Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and Mr. Miroslav
Jenea, the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for their very powerful interventions today.

We welcome the discussion today in the Council on
the human rights situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Serious human rights violations,
such as those described by the briefers should also be
seen in the broader context. A lack of respect for the
human rights ofone's own people is a signpost to a wider
disregard for the international norms and standards
that form the basis of our international community.
In today's Democratic People's Republic of Korea, its
leadership's pursuit of nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles is built on the back of an unparalleled system
of repression directed towards ordinary North Koreans.
The links between a lack of respect for human rights,
humanitarian crisis, and the threat to international
peace and security is clear. Conversely, respect for
human rights in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea would not only contribute to the well-being and
dignity of the people of the country, but also promote
security and stability in the region and beyond.

It is very difficult to obtain comprehensive
information about the human rights situation in the
country. However, the reports of the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, successive reports by the
Secretary-General and other information, including
from civil society organizations, are all consistent in
describing the very serious human rights situation in
the country.

The list of violations is long, and the violations
are systematic, widespread and gross. Violations cut
across all areas of human rights, including civil and
political as well as economic, social and cultural rights.
The list includes reports and witness testimonies of
public as well as extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary
executions; torture, rape and other forms of sexual and
gender-based violence; and systematic violations of the
freedoms of thought, expression and religion. It also
includes a lack of the right to food and the right to health,
leading to severe hunger and malnutrition, which is
hitting women, children, persons with disabilities and
older persons disproportionally hard. Sweden notes the
importance of the issue of international abductions and
remains very concerned at the lack of positive action by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on returning
abducted Japanese and other nationals.

We must make every effort to end impunity, seek
accountability and secure truth and justice for all
victims. Any attempt to achieve lasting peace and
stability demands justice and redress for the victims
of human rights Violations in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. We welcome the report of the group
of independent experts on accountability for human
rights violations in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and its recommendations. We further
welcome the steps identified by the group that can be
taken immediately to contribute to a comprehensive
approach towards accountability in the country.
Despite the time that has passed since the release of
the report of the commission of inquiry on human
rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in
2014 (A/HRC/25/63), the relevance and urgency of the
Commission's recommendations have not diminished,
and need to be implemented.

We welcome the important work carried out by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Seoul and the work of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and strongly urge the Government to
grant the Special Rapporteur and other mandate-holders
full, free and unimpeded access to the country. In that
respect, we welcome the visit of the Special Rapporteur
on the rights of persons with disabilities to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea as a step in the
right direction.

The Council has previously expressed its regret that
the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea diverts critical resources into expensive weapons
programmes despite the fact that the humanitarian
needs in the country remain enormous - not least as
regards food security - as we heard this morning.
The responsibility to protect and uphold the well-being
of its people indisputably falls on the Government
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The
humanitarian crisis is a manifestation of its disregard
for the human rights of its people.
Sweden and other parts of the international
community continue to provide life-saving assistance.
But more is needed, including support for the United
Nations' humanitarian appeal for the country, which
remains severely underfunded. Our embassy in
Pyongyang has been in regular contact with the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea authorities
and humanitarian organizations. We understand that
the ability of those organizations' ability to provide
much-needed assistance has been reduced. Other
reports have confirmed those worrying findings. We
remind the Government of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea of its obligation to provide to
humanitarian organizations the access they need to
perform their work. It is of the utmost importance that
the humanitarian exemptions provided for under the
sanctions are upheld, as underlined by the Secretary-
General through Assistant Secretary-General Jenca
today. Today's meeting of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) is an important
opportunity to discuss these issues further.

Sweden encourages the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to cooperate with the international
community and to engage constructively with the
United Nations system, including the Office ofthe High
Commissioner for Human Rights. The Government of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea must realize
that its system of repression cannot survive indefinitely.
People will always find ways to evade it, gain access
to information and even escape. History has shown us
that the human spirit will eventually triumph. The same
will one day be true for the people of North Korea.

