Mr. Seepanovic' (Montenegro): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate on children
and armed conflict, and commend France's strong
support and commitment to this issue. We also thank
today's briefers for their inspiring presentations.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like, however, to highlight some points of
particular importance to my country.

We are witnessing the dramatic consequences of
the violence affecting millions of children due to the
evolving character of contemporary conflicts. We are
at risk of losing entire generations in Syria, the Central
African Republic, Iraq and South Sudan. Girls and
boys are recruited by armed forces and armed groups,
become the victims of indiscriminate attacks, or are
subject to violent abuse. The Security Council has
made significant progress in advancing the children
and armed conflict agenda, but there is still a lot of
work ahead of us in protecting the rights of children
in situations of armed conflict and ensuring that
perpetrators of grave violations against children are
held to account.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which established
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
It is also the first anniversary of the "Children, Not
Soldiers" campaign that was launched to end the
recruitment and use of children by Government armed
forces by 2016. The momentum and progress generated
by the campaign are encouraging, but the remaining
challenges are enormous to reach our objective. We must
work together and share our expertise and resources so
we can end child recruitment in the next two years.

It is also essential that the Council's Working
Group continue to make the best use of its tools in order
to provide appropriate responses to all types of grave
violations, including those committed by non-State
actors. In this regard, we would like to stress that
Member States need to allow United Nations personnel
access to areas controlled by armed non-State actors
for the purpose of ending violations and concluding and
implementing action plans.

We have seen an increasing trend of attacks on
schools and the use of schools for military purposes,
which we find alarming. Therefore, we welcome
resolution 2143 (2014), highlighting the concern over the
military use of schools. These attacks deprive children
of their right to education and result in unspeakable
suffering for them. We use this opportunity to call on
parties to armed conflict to refrain from these actions.

With respect to United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions and the indispensable role they
play, Montenegro would like to advocate for a strong
child protection component to be incorporated in
mission mandates. This would require peacekeepers,
military and security personnel to receive specialized
pre-deployment child protection training.

There is a need for more action in order to fight
impunity for crimes committed against children.
Therefore, the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
national judicial authorities have an important role in
responding to violations as they occur. It is also vital
that the Security Council, to the extent possible, use
the option to refer situations to the ICC and that the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
further consider modalities to increase the pressure on
persistent perpetrators of human rights violations and
put an end to impunity.

Montenegro remains committed to contributing
to our common and noble objective and providing the
children of the world with a safer future.

