Mr. Gopinathan (India): We extend our warm
felicitations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June. The Security Council and the general
membership of the United Nations will benefit greatly
from your adroit stewardship of the Council at a time
when complex and sensitive issues remain on the
Council's agenda.

Most appropriately, you have chosen to hold a
public debate on the situation in Afghanistan as the
highlight of your presidency. Despite the scale and
complexity of diverse problems it faces, Afghanistan,
under the leadership of President Hamid Karzai, has
made impressive progress in addressing the tasks of
nation-building, political reconciliation and
reconstruction of the economy. It is, however, critical
that the United Nations remain fully engaged in
monitoring and supporting developments in this vital
part of the world.

We understand that while the focus of
deliberations today is on the problem of drugs in
Afghanistan, the debate has been left open to a
consideration of some of the other pressing issues
involving the country.

Let me first address the issue of drugs in
Afghanistan. The United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) has, in its report of February 2003
entitled "The opium economy in Afghanistan: an
international problem", drawn attention to the serious
situation that has been brought about by a rampant
increase in drug cultivation and the threat it represents
to Afghanistan and the international community. Years
of instability, internal strife, mismanagement by the
Taliban and complicity within certain quarters of the
country and outside have contributed to the current
situation whereby Afghanistan has emerged as the
world's largest producer of illicit opium, accounting for
almost three quarters of global opium production. The
report highlights that over the last two decades,
Afghanistan's opium production has increased more
than lS-fold, with production in 2002 at 3,400 tons.

As the report indicates, Afghanistan's opium
economy is not a country-wide phenomenon, but is
limited to a few provinces that have continued to defy
the opium ban issued by President Karzai in January
2002. Almost 80 per cent of all opium production in
Afghanistan is confined to provinces along the
southern and south-eastern borders of Afghanistan.
This small area is the origin of almost three quarters of
the heroin sold in Europe and virtually all of the heroin
in the Russian Federation.

Drugs account for as much as 18 per cent of
Afghanistan's gross domestic product. The UNODC
report has sought to emphasize that the problem of
drugs in Afghanistan can be traced to its socio-
economic roots. The phenomenon needs to be tackled
at a multifaceted level, involving comprehensive action
providing for accelerated development in the provinces
concerned, increasing literacy and employment
opportunities and alternative crop cultivation options
for opium farms. However, none of those medium- to
long-term solutions can be achieved without
facilitating a basic environment of security and
stability.

Discussions at the Paris Conference on drug
routes from Central Asia to Europe, held from 21 to 23
May 2003, highlighted the nexus between drug
trafficking and financing of terrorism, and reinforced
the requirement for an urgent, swift and coordinated
response to the problem. That this form of narco-
terrorism has often been State-sponsored or assisted by
unrestrained agents of State authority have not made it
any easier to control.

India welcomes the efforts made by President
Hamid Karzai and the Afghan Transitional
Administration to implement the decrees prohibiting
the cultivation, production and processing of opium,
including illicit drug-trafficking and abuse. This is a
qualitative step forward from the Taliban regime that
banned production with the intention of inflating
prices. To that end, the Taliban not only failed to
eliminate the large accumulated stockpiles of opium
and heroin under its control, but also allowed de facto
trade in narcotics to continue. President Karzai has
indicated his Government's seriousness in addressing
this issue. His decision has to be supported through the
will of the international community.

India welcomes the significant contribution by
UNODC and the United Nations Drug Control
Programme, as well as individual States, to counter the
threat of drugs in Afghanistan. The Joint Statement
issued at the conclusion of the sixth meeting of the
India-Russia Joint Working Group on Afghanistan, on
28 March 2003, expressed concern over the increased
production of narcotic drugs in Afghanistan and their
illegal trafficking, and emphasized the need for the
development of a comprehensive strategy, with an
appropriate key United Nations role in the process.
India recognizes that most of these projects are long-
term, but vital in the elimination of drugs on a
sustainable basis.

In the statement on Afghanistan made in the
General Assembly on 6 December 2002, India
expressed deep concern over reports of an increase in
poppy cultivation in Afghanistan and the fact that the
momentum for putting in place an anti-narcotics
strategy had faltered. We emphasized the role of the
international community in supporting Afghanistan in
its drive to combat drug cultivation and trade and the
efforts required to extend development plans to
different parts of the country.

In India's view, given the seriousness of the
situation - its dimensions and implications within and
outside Afghanistan - there is a pressing need to
tackle the issue on an immediate basis to supplement
other long-term programmes under implementation or
consideration. Some essential components in such a
strategy could include the allocation of more resources
for the affected parts of the country to bolster ongoing
security efforts; enhancement of the capacity of the
Afghan Government to enforce its ban on opium
cultivation, production and trafficking; identification
and elimination of the chain of trans-border criminals
and their supporters involved in the supply and sale of
drugs, drug-related money laundering, arms supply,
terrorism and illegal immigration; greater cooperation
among the countries concerned on information-sharing,
legal and judicial matters, including the extradition of
drug offenders wanted in other countries and
interdiction efforts; and a strong crackdown on the
warlords concerned and external actors involved in the
facilitation of this illegal trade.

India has fully supported international efforts
aimed at the reconstruction and emergence of
Afghanistan as a peaceful, strong, prosperous, united
and independent nation. We have noted carefully the
progress achieved in the implementation of the
provisions of the Bonn Agreement and the coordination
of various international efforts aimed at rehabilitation
and reconstruction. The agreement reached in May
2003 to enable the Afghan Administration to centralize
revenue collection is an important step towards the
development of an independent resource base and
should be adequately supported by the parties
concerned. India fully supports the broad-based
Government led by President Hamid Karzai and
appreciates his committed efforts at promoting national
reconciliation.

It is towards this end that India has extended an
assistance package amounting to over $170 million to
Afghanistan. This includes a recent commitment of $70
million to upgrade and reconstruct a key arterial road
linking Delaram in Afghanistan to port facilities in
Iran. We have also trained about 500 Afghan nationals
in disciplines ranging from law enforcement,
journalism and civil aviation to the judiciary,
diplomacy and agriculture. Unfortunately, transit-
related difficulties prevented the supply of India's gift
of a million tons of wheat to Afghanistan. However, a
portion of the wheat was converted into high-protein
biscuits for the children's school feeding programme
and is understood to be sufficient to meet the
requirements of one million Afghan schoolchildren for
a period of six months. We intend to build further on
this.

Security remains the most serious challenge to
the process of peace-building and economic
reconstruction in Afghanistan. Reports of increasing
instability in Afghanistan due to the deteriorating
security situation need to be addressed firmly and
resolutely by the international community before
matters run out of control. We extend our sincere
condolences to the Government and people of Germany
for the loss of 4 soldiers during the recent terrorist
attack in Kabul. This incident, taken in conjunction
with several other recent security-related
developments, such as the killing of the employee of
the International Committee of the Red Cross in March
this year, highlights the increasing need for the
international community to address the threats to
regional peace and stability emanating from terrorist
activity in the region.

This escalation can be directly attributed to the
increasingly emboldened subversive and terrorist
activity by elements hostile to the Afghan Government,
including Taliban remnants, Al Qaeda and their
accomplices, and their efforts to regroup with
supporters from outside. Ambassador Brahimi, in his
last briefing to the Council, on 6 May, expressed
concern over reports of hostile elements crossing into
Afghanistan over its eastern and southern borders.
More recent incidents have shown that infiltrations by
terrorist and extremist groups from those areas into
Afghanistan have targeted international aid workers
and coalition forces in a clear design to sabotage
efforts aimed at national reconciliation through
political and economic processes. Serious international
efforts would need to be directed against that threat.

Mutual respect and non-interference in the
internal affairs of Afghanistan constitute crucial
elements in the search for the return of peace and
stability to that country. It is therefore vital that
signatory States adhere to their commitments outlined
under the Kabul Declaration on Good-neighbourly
Relations signed on 22 December 2002. One way to
ensure this would be to entrust the Secretary-General
with the role of monitoring adherence by concerned
States to the Declaration. The Afghan Government
could also provide valuable information towards any
monitoring mechanism set up in that regard.

Another measure to facilitate a more secure
environment in Afghanistan would be to proceed
rapidly forward on the development of indigenous
security structures as a guarantee towards the long-
term unity and stability of the country. That process
needs to be carried out in a calibrated manner without
weakening current resources and strength. At the same
time, disarmament and demobilization processes
should continue forward.

We are at a delicate crossroads in the process of
forming a stable and secure Afghanistan. It is therefore
vital that the international community continue to
engage with the same intensity in the task of
rehabilitating Afghanistan from the dark ages under the
Taliban yoke to the light of a new century under a
stable, democratic order. Referring to the
responsibilities of the international community in this
regard, the Minister for External Affairs of India stated
recently that "the forces of terror, the forces of
darkness, the forces of obscurantism and extremism
will not be allowed to cast their long shadows over the
future of the people" of Afghanistan. For this, the
international community needs to persevere with
commitment, solidarity and generosity.

