Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller for briefing the Security
Council today.

The United States joins others in condemning the
announcement by the so-called Donetsk and Luhansk
People's Republics that they intend to hold what they
call elections on 11 November. Such actions are clearly
illegitimate and have no basis in Ukrainian law. The
sham elections, staged by Russia, run directly counter
to efforts to implement the Minsk peace agreements.
They also obstruct and undermine efforts to end
the ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine, which has
killed more than 10,000 people and causes more
casualties daily. The Minsk agreements state that the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) must supervise elections, which are to be
held in accordance with Ukrainian law and OSCE
standards. The 11 November balloting will satisfy none
of those conditions.

The Minsk agreements also call for the disarmament
of illegal groups and the withdrawal of foreign armed
formations from eastern Ukraine. However, Russia is
using those so-called elections to achieve the opposite.
It seeks to bolster the positions ofthe so-called Donetsk
People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic.
Both entities are inseparable from the illegal armed
groups controlled by Moscow.

We also express our concern about the humanitarian
crisis in eastern Ukraine, with 3.4 million Ukrainians
requiring assistance and more than 1.5 million internally
displaced. The humanitarian crisis will continue until
a ceasefire is implemented and basic commitments
under the Minsk agreements are met. We encourage all
parties to allow affected Ukrainians to have unfettered
access to humanitarian aid and Government services
and to guard against further civilian losses and damage
to critical infrastructure.

Beyond eastern Ukraine, Russia's occupation of
the Crimean peninsula and its aggressive actions in the
Sea of Azov, where Russia is harassing and obstructing
international shipping bound for Ukraine's ports, further
demonstrate Moscow's blatant violation of Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity and its readiness to
undermine regional stability. We greatly appreciate the
efforts of France and Germany in the Normandy format
to push for the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Unfortunately, Russia continues to impede the peace
process and is, we believe, deliberately stalling in those
discussions and in talks between United States Special
Representative Kurt Volker and Russian Presidential
Adviser Vladislav Surkov. We call on Russia to cease
its obstructionist activities and artificial delays.

The United States reiterates its strong condemnation
of Russia's destabilizing actions in Ukraine. We will
continue to impose sanctions against Russia for its
action in Donbas and Crimea until it fully implements
the Minsk agreements and returns the Crimean
peninsula to Ukraine.

