Mr. Mladenovic' (Yugoslavia): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for
his briefing.

The situation in Kosovo and Metohija, the
autonomous province of the Yugoslav constituent
Republic of Serbia, continues to be unsatisfactory. This
is due primarily to the fact that the key provisions of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), especially
those concerning the need to create a secure
environment and to protect Serbs and other non-
Albanians, have not been fulfilled. Constant threats,
violence and armed attacks against the remaining Serbs
and other non-Albanians living in enclaves provide
ample evidence that not enough has been done to put
tensions to rest, to have the expelled Serbs returned and
to create conditions for multi-ethnic life in that
southern Serbian province.

The problem of Kosovo and Metohija is very
complex. It can be solved only through a consistent
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and in cooperation with the competent
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the Republic of Serbia. Attempts to solve it hastily and
inadequately may only exacerbate the situation. Such
an attempt is the holding of so-called Kosovo-wide
elections. We consider that such elections cannot be
free, fair or democratic short of a precise definition of
the authorities they are to be held for and the definition
of the competencies of those authorities, or without the
creation of conditions for a safe return of all displaced
persons. Additionally, the elections should be prepared
in cooperation with the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Serbia.

Also, we consider that it is necessary to find a
just solution for all detained, missing and abducted
persons, which would contribute to building mutual
trust. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will soon
adopt a new amnesty law, which, we hope, will
positively affect the resolution of many issues in this
field. Yet the problem of the Serbs and other non-
Albanians gone missing in Kosovo and Metohija since
the deployment of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) remains.
We demand a more robust investigation of their fate.

I would like to reiterate that the Government of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continues to be
committed to the consistent implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the Kumanovo
Military-Technical Agreement, and it is ready to
strengthen its cooperation with UNMIK and KFOR. It
is also ready to conclude an agreement on their status
in this Serbian province.

The difficult and tense situation in the ground
safety zone, in the municipalities of Bujanovac,
Medvedja and Presevo in southern Serbia, Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, also causes grave concern to
my Government. The way the situation has evolved in
this area demonstrates how dangerous it is for the
region as a whole not to implement Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) fully and consistently. This is
yet another reason for us to ask whether those
responsible have used all the opportunities and
authority at their disposal to fully meet their
responsibilities stemming from that resolution.

The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has repeatedly drawn the Security Council's
attention to the fact that the situation in the ground
safety zone in southern Serbia, brought about by armed
groups of Albanian extremists and terrorists that
infiltrate from Kosovo and Metohija, is unacceptable.
These Albanian armed groups are threatening the lives
and security of local citizens, their fundamental human
rights and the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
the Republic of Serbia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, and thereby peace and security in the
region.

It is therefore necessary for the Security Council
to undertake resolute steps in order to fulfil the
demands contained in its presidential statement of 19
December 2000, calling for an urgent and total end to
violence, the disbandment of extremist groups of ethnic
Albanians and their immediate withdrawal from the
region and from the ground safety zone in particular.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and its
Government recently adopted a plan and a programme
for the resolution of the crisis caused by the activities
of Albanian terrorist groups in the municipalities of
Bujanovac, Presevo and Medvedja. The main
characteristics of this plan include the resolution of the
crisis by peaceful means, with the participation of the
representatives of the Albanian ethnic community and
with the support of the international community. The
goal is to resolve this problem in a democratic and
transparent manner.

The key goals of the plan include the
establishment of the State sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in that part of their territory, the
preservation and development of the multi-ethnic
character of the region, respecting all civil and human
rights of the Albanian ethnic community, the protection
of the basic interests of Serbs in the region and of their
personal property and security, and building a multi-
ethnic society based on democracy, with the viable
economic development of the municipalities of
Presevo, Bujanovac and Medvedja.

The plan envisages a three-phase resolution. In
the first phase, which is under way, an appeal was sent
to the Albanian ethnic community for a peaceful
solution including a request that no terrorist acts be
carried out until the end of the negotiations. For its
part, the army and the police would undertake only
defensive activity pending the end ofthe negotiations.

Agreement on the resolution is expected in the
second phase. This would include the total and lasting
cessation of all terrorist acts, the disarmament of
terrorists and the dismantling of fortification structures.
This would be followed by the withdrawal of military
and police forces, while regular mixed local police and
military units, including border control units, would
remain. This would create conditions to unblock the
roads and enable the free return of displaced persons.
All those who did not take part in violent actions until
the end of this phase would not be prosecuted. Before
starting this phase, it would be necessary to reduce or
totally eliminate the ground safety zone, on the basis of
our previous proposals, for which we expect the
international community's understanding.

In the third and final phase, full security and
peace in the region will be established, which would
enable the Albanian ethnic community to be integrated
into the political, State and social systems and to have
their human rights respected in line with the highest
European standards. The integration of Albanians
would reflect the local ethnic composition in the State
institutions, economy and social activity. This would
entail an appropriate representation of ethnic Albanians
on the executive boards of municipalities and in the
Government of Serbia, the elimination of all forms of
human rights violations through more effective control
of police and other Government bodies and free access
for accredited human rights organizations to examine
the situation in the field. This should create the
conditions for economic and social development in the
region, in accordance with agreed priorities and
projects.

In adopting this plan and calling the Albanian
community in the municipalities of Bujanovac,
Medvedja and Presevo to negotiations, the
Governments of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Republic of Serbia has made a decisive
commitment to resolving the crisis by peaceful and
democratic means. We very much appreciate the
support of the international community for this
approach.

It is now up to the ethnic Albanian community to
demonstrate whether it is truly ready to accept the plan.
We underline that it is necessary to start a dialogue
without delay. With the passage of time, there would be
less and less chance of resolving the crisis in a
peaceful, diplomatic manner. Should that not come
about, the responsibility would rest with the members
of the ethnic Albanian community in southern Serbia,
of which the international community should take
account. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Republic of Serbia cannot exercise indefinite patience,
since maintaining the situation as it is - the status
quo - is totally unacceptable.

