Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (Spoke in French): I
am very pleased to brief the Security Council this
morning, together with my friends Moussa Nebie and,
from Brussels, Koen Vervaeke. 1 am also happy to see
Ambassador Adom.

I am very honoured to be able to address the Council
today to provide an update on the situation in the
Central African Republic since the publication of the
Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2018/922).
I am confident that, despite persistent challenges,
we have laid the necessary foundations for building
lasting peace in the Central African Republic. Such
an objective is indeed achievable, provided that, in the
quest for lasting peace, the region and the international
community as a whole remain committed to our
collective support for the Government and the people
of the Central African Republic. To achieve this result,
however, the Central Africans themselves will have to
take the lead and set an example.

Since the establishment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) in 2014, we
have made significant progress in our efforts to put out
the flames of the devastating intercommunity conflict
that was engulfing the Central African Republic. Our
mandate included protecting civilians, supporting the
transition process and preserving the territorial integrity
of country. The Mission faced a great challenge in
carrying out these tasks. When I took office in August
2015, the security situation was such that simple acts of
crime could turn violent and destabilize entire cities or
even the entire country. The threat of a coup d'e'tat and
State collapse or the fear of seeing the country fall back
into the way it was in the early days of the terrible civil
war of 2013 haunted everyone.

After a little more than three years of work
together, I would like to thank each member of the
Council for the support offered, particularly during the
difficult times that we have been through together. I am
immensely grateful for Council members' empathy and
encouragement, including during the happy moments
we have also shared, such as when the country returned
to constitutional order. I also thank the Council for
the additional troops it authorized at the request of
the Secretary-General. These troops strengthen our
capacity on the ground and bolster the determination
of our civilian and uniformed personnel. 1 would like to
express my deep gratitude to the troops for their work in
the service of peacekeeping, and we pay a solemn and
heartfelt tribute to those who have sacrificed their lives.

Clearly, our work is not yet done. The country

still faces many challenges. The drivers of the conflict
remain, and attacks on civilians persist, leading to
massive population displacements. Half of the country
continues to need humanitarian assistance, and the
provision of such assistance is becoming increasingly
difficult, due in part to violent attacks against
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers. The State
is not in a position to overcome these challenges on
its own.

Nevertheless, although the crisis persists, there is
reason for hope. Thanks to the hard work of the United
Nations and the international community in support of
the Government of the Central African Republic, the
overall security situation has been brought under control,
democratic elections have been held, and the country
has returned to constitutional order. State authority
is being restored in Bangui and beyond. The Mission
prevents atrocities on a daily basis and continues to
preserve the territorial integrity of the State. Security
has considerably improved in several prefectures,
thanks, in particular, to support stemming from local
peace agreements. The prefects and sub-prefects have
been redeployed throughout the country, as have civil
servants from the Ministries of Education, Health,
Agriculture and Livestock, Water, and Public Health.
The national security and defence forces have also been
deployed, and the justice and reconciliation processes
are beginning to take shape.

I am pleased to inform the Council that yesterday,
22 October, the inaugural session of the Special
Criminal Court was held. That is an important step in
the country's commitment against impunity.

In the area of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, half a dozen armed groups have
committed to participate in the national programme and
the Government will begin the disarmament of some of
these groups in the west of the country before the end
of the year. Most importantly, a peace process has been
seriously initiated under the auspices of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, which is the sole basis for peace and
reconciliation in the Central African Republic. My
friend and brother, the Special Representative of the
President of the African Union Commission, Moussa
Nebie, and Chair of the panel of facilitators, will speak
of that shortly.

Beyond the work of MINUSCA, the country has
made progress in implementing the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan, with the support of the
Mission and partners. I am pleased to announce that
the rate of fundamental distribution has increased since
the beginning of the year and that nearly half of the
$2.2 billion pledged by donors has been disbursed.
MINUSCA, the United Nations country team, the
European Union, the World Bank, France and other
partners are collaborating with the Government in
the planning and implementation of projects under
the Plan, which will strengthen peace, security and
reconciliation, basic services, infrastructure and
economic development. Other key bilateral partners,
such as China and the United States, are also making
necessary investments in the aforementioned areas.

(spoke in English)

This progress that we have made together makes
me hopeful that we have laid the foundations needed
to build sustainable peace. Like the foundations of
a house, they yield no dividends on their own, but a
house without foundations will certainly collapse.
Together with the Central Africans, we must now help
move the country from a phase of containment to one
of transformation, in which the dividends of peace can
be felt by all communities and all citizens.

The recommendations of the independent
comprehensive review led by Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes,
endorsed by the Secretary-General and recently
presented to the troop- and police-contributing
countries by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, identify
some critical next steps for the Mission. In the context
of mandate renewal, helping the African Initiative
to succeed must indeed be the Mission's main focus.
I am pleased to inform the Council that, as a follow-
up to the conclusions of the high-level ministerial
meeting on the Central African Republic, held in
New York on 27 September, I have been participating
in the African Initiative panel of facilitators as a full
member. In this new capacity, I have held a series of
strategic meetings and consultations within the panel
and with the Government in preparation for the launch
of the dialogue between the Government and the armed
groups. The Mission is henceforth strengthening its
substantive and mediation support to the Initiative.

The path towards peace and reconciliation will
not be an easy one, as demonstrated by the many
peace processes that have come before in the Central
African Republic, and faltered. We in the international
community must work with the Government of the
Central African Republic to ensure that this peace
process is people-centred and does not fail. We must
be patient, we must be realistic and we must put in
place the critical conditions that will give the African
Initiative the greatest chance to succeed.
First, we must ensure that the parties enter into
negotiations in good faith and with a true commitment
to the dialogue and its outcomes. This means that
parties must be willing to make some challenging
compromises, which will require vision and leadership
on the part of all. It will also require an inclusive follow-
up mechanism to ensure that parties adhere to and fully
implement the agreement reached.

Secondly, the peace agreement must have the buy-
in of the Central African people. Although the agreed
dialogue framework does not allow for the direct
participation of civil society actors, it will be critical
to find innovative ways to ensure that the voices of the
people are heard, especially those of women and youth.
Their engagement in the follow-up mechanism will also
be essential moving forward.

Thirdly, we must put in place security conditions
conducive to the dialogue and the enforcement of
its outcomes. Our engagement must be backed by
credible, effective and sustained pressure, including
military, when and where needed. I therefore ask for
the support of the Council in ensuring that deployed
troops are properly trained and equipped to meet this
task and the challenging operational environment we
are facing daily.

Finally, if the peace process is to succeed, it will
require the unified political support of the members
of the Council, the countries of the region and the
international community at large. We must have a
shared vision and ensure that our engagements with
the Central African Republic are both well coordinated
and coherent.

The success ofthe peace process, though necessary,
will not be sufficient on its own. If the outcomes are
to be sustainable and if transformation is to take hold,
MINUSCA should also support the Central African
Republic in a number of critical areas.

First, we must strengthen the rule of law and
eliminate ungoverned spaces in the country. This
includes helping the Government in the long term to
regain control of mining sites from armed groups,
as failure to resolve this issue will jeopardize the
outcomes of any peace agreement. That also includes
helping the State to rebuild and strengthen its key
institutions, particularly its national security apparatus,
so that it can better protect the country, its people
and democratic institutions. Working closely with
partners, the Mission must expand its support to the
re-operationalization of national defence and security
forces, in close coordination with the European Union
Military Training Mission in the Central African
Republic, the European Union delegation in the Central
African Republic, and other bilateral partners, such as
France, Russia and the United States. These forces have
a multiplier effect on the communities in which they are
deployed. Partners have already provided exemplary
support to the security sector reform process, and this
has yielded remarkable progress. However, short- and
mid-term needs are significant, and we must sustain
and even expand this support to enable the country to
meet its ambitious yet vital security priorities. I seek
the Council's support to ensure that MINUSCA will
have the appropriate mandate and resources to take on
this task and succeed, as requested by the Secretary-
General in his letter to the Council in May (S/2018/463).

Secondly, we must work hand in hand with the
Central Africans to promote a culture of democracy, in
which power is taken through the ballot box and not the
bullet. The upcoming elections represent an important
opportunity in this regard and for building a culture
of inclusion. I again request the Council's support in
mandating the Mission to aid the Government through
the election period, and request its advocacy among
Member States to ensure that we have the resources to
take on this task and succeed.

Thirdly, we must continue to support the Government
in the fight against impunity and the restoration of
the rule of law through the operationalization of the
Special Criminal Court and support for judicial actors
and in the regions. We must also advance the national
reconciliation programme, including by ensuring
that the rights of victims are respected, in particular
the rights of those hundreds of thousands of Central
Africans who have been displaced by the conflict. To
that end, we must help authorities develop an integrated
transitional justice strategy that responds to the needs
and expectations of communities that have deeply
suffered as a result of the conflict.
Finally, the Mission must redouble its efforts to
enable the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
2.9 million people currently in need of assistance
and protection, more than half of whom are children.
Achieving that objective and improving the overall
implementation of the mandate will greatly depend on
the Council's decision to enhance the force's mobility
and flexibility so as to allow us to overcome the
prevailing operational and logistical challenges.

The people of the Central African Republic are
aware that the road ahead will be difficult. Nonetheless,
the steps we have collectively taken so far to help
stabilize the country give hope for the future. While the
current situation remains unpredictable and precarious,
I believe that the progress that has been achieved in
various areas and the foundations that have been laid
are essential ingredients that can help bring about
sustainable peace in the Central African Republic. We
must redouble our efforts to ensure that the remaining
challenges are addressed fully and in a timely manner.
We must do everything possible to ensure that the peace
process succeeds. We owe it to the people ofthe Central
African Republic, who have suffered far too long.

