Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by acknowledging the presence of the
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Integration of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Mr. Leonard She Okitundu. I thank him for
being with us here today. I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui for her very
enlightening briefing, which underscores succinctly
the critical historical moment at which the Democratic
Republic of the Congo finds itself. The electoral cycle,
which is beginning, will indeed be crucial for the
future of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region as a whole. The challenge is enormous, while
the situation is fragile. The serious deterioration of
the humanitarian situation and the recent increase in
intercommunal violence and conflict must move the
Council to act.

The current instability is largely the result of
delays and uncertainties related to the electoral
process, which means that the holding of credible and
transparent elections on schedule, while at the same
time facilitating a peaceful and democratic transition
of power, is crucial to the return to stability in the
country. That is our shared priority. Accordingly,
France stands ready to support the electoral process so
that elections can take place in optimal circumstances
and in close consultation with the Democratic Republic
of the Congo's international partners, in particular the
African Union and other countries of the region whose
role is essential. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) has a crucial role to play in
that context. I would like to highlight three key factors
that will contribute to the smooth holding of elections
before returning to MONUSCO's role.

The first key factor concerns the trust of the
entire Congolese people in the sound preparation of
the technical aspects of the holding of elections and
that the electoral timetable will be respected. Many
uncertainties remain with regard to the holding of
elections, including, for example, finalizing electoral
lists after checking for duplications, while adhering
to the prescribed deadlines; the registration process
and timetable for Congolese citizens living abroad;
the potential use of voting machines and ensuring
that the process is transparent through appropriate
measures; and the circumstances deemed appropriate
for distributing electoral literature throughout the
country. All those issues must be open to discussion by
all stakeholders, including political parties, potential
candidates and civil society.

The Independent National Electoral Commission
has a crucial role to play in that regard, and we encourage
it to work in a spirit acrof transparency and openness
so as to build consensus on the technical aspects of
the holding of elections. In that regard, we support
the effective establishment of a team of international
experts to support the electoral process, which the
African Union, the Southern African Development
Community, the European Union, the United Nations
and the International Organization of La Francophonie
have agreed to dispatch. Trust, based primarily on
transparency in the holding of elections, will therefore
be the first key factor leading to success.

The second key factor concerns the electoral
environment and the return to a spirit of consensus
within the framework of the full implementation of
the 31 December Political Agreement. If the outcome
of the elections is to be accepted by everyone, it is
essential that they be held in an open and peaceful
environment in which every candidate can announce
his or her candidature and campaign freely without fear
of reprisal. In that regard, I call once again for respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms, including,
above all, the right to demonstrate, as well as the need
for the proportional use of force in the context of law
enforcement. It is crucial that the violations observed
during the most recent demonstrations not be allowed to
reoccur and that those responsible for them be brought
to justice. I also take this opportunity to recall the need
to fully implement the Agreement of 31 December 2016,
particularly with regard to measures aimed at defusing
the political situation, such as the release of political
prisoners and ending the prosecution of members of the
opposition so as to allow them to campaign unhindered.
Those measures are needed to provide the conditions
for the holding of credible and peaceful elections.

In that context - and this is my third and
last point - MONUSCO has a key role to play in
supporting the electoral process, contributing to the
smooth holding of elections in a free, open and peaceful
environment, and protecting civilians. Last year, the
Council conferred upon MONUSCO an appropriate
mandate to pursue those two strategic goals. For its
part, the Mission, through its strategic review, has made
the necessary adjustments to better respond to current
issues, be more flexible and responsive and better protect
civilians. This year, we believe that MONUSCO's
priorities must be reaffirmed and maintained. Through
its good offices and its technical and logistical support,
MONUSCO must help ensure that the right conditions
be set in motion for the sound holding of elections. By
acting with resolve, completing ongoing reforms and
adopting a comprehensive approach that integrates all
its components, the Mission must be able to protect
civilians in the country more effectively.

The Security Council must lend its full support to
MONUSCO in realizing those two strategic priorities.
The Council must also provide MONUSCO with the
means needed to accomplish those tasks, including by
maintaining its troop ceiling and supporting it through
solid cooperation with the region so as to ensure the
full implementation of the 31 December Agreement and
enable all Congolese citizens to trust once more in the
process.

In our opinion, those are the conditions needed for
the success of the electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in accordance with the
established timetable. Council members may rest
assured of France's absolute commitment to achieving
that goal.

