I thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate, which is only the second that has been held since the Council was forced to switch to working remotely. We appreciate the progress the Council has made under your leadership in devising working methods that enable the participation of Member States in the Council's open debates. Continued transparency and openness remain key to the Council's effectiveness. The convening of the present open debate also offers an important opportunity; the negotiation of any Council outcome should be conducted in the light of written inputs provided by Council non-members, thereby benefiting from the views of the broader membership. The ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic is creating significant challenges for young people across the world. Many are missing crucial months of their education, deprived of social contact, quarantined in difficult or even dangerous domestic situations, or losing out on important early-career employment opportunities. These challenges will themselves have knock-on effects. The data show that young people out of school are more prone to forced recruitment into armed forces, radicalization, sexual and gender-based violence and teenage pregnancy, and are more vulnerable to modern slavery and human trafficking. For young people living in situations of armed conflict, these issues are even more acute. Many will have to choose between staying in active conflict zones or fleeing to overpopulated areas with insufficient hygiene facilities. The global ceasefire suggested by the Secretary-General is a vital first step to ameliorating the potential damage caused to young people by the pandemic. It must be followed by sustained humanitarian assistance and committed efforts towards negotiated conflict settlements. However, even in situations where a ceasefire is possible and efforts towards broader agreements can begin, young people are often left on the sidelines of negotiations, even though they make up the majority of the population in most situations on the Council's agenda. Efforts to integrate young people into peace negotiations should harness their long-term perspective on peace; they will be responsible for the long-term implementation of peace settlements for longer than the adult signatories to peace agreements and therefore have a far greater interest in forging long-lasting and sustainable peace settlements. Mechanisms such as youth councils strengthen peace agreements by creating a broader sense of ownership across communities. At the same time, youth inclusion helps inoculate young people against radicalization at a time when they may be most susceptible to it, thereby preventing the spread of old hatreds to new generations. Our assistance to the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue on inclusive peacemaking has helped teams engage young people in peace processes in the Sahel, Mali, Senegal and the Philippines in recent years. Engaging young people is also key to long-term prevention, reconstruction and reconciliation. Many States and territories emerging from conflict have placed education reform at the centre of their post-conflict peacebuilding strategies. In particular, attempts to ensure a shared history curriculum have proven important in providing a space for young people to encounter pre-existing grievances in a shared setting, thereby creating the conditions to build bridges between communities, jointly to pursue the right to truth and to help break the cycle of violence. United Nations missions in post-conflict settings have also taken positive steps to engage young people, for example through the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia's creation of a specific youth, peace and security strategy. We hope that this initiative will be mirrored in other situations on the Council's agenda. The leadership of young people on the critical issue of climate justice illustrates the long-term perspective they bring to issues of peace and security, as well as an understanding of the need to take immediate action to secure a liveable world for future generations. We know that the impacts of climate change are exacerbating existing vulnerabilities in fragile situations, and will lead to increased insecurity and instability for all. We extend our wholehearted support to young people who have been front and centre in advocacy for climate action, and hope that the Council will draw from their examples in its efforts to address global warming as an ongoing threat to peace and security.
