Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The delegation of the Russian Federation
considers the resolution just adopted an important step by
the Security Council in response to the extremely dangerous
and alarming situation that has obtained in Croatia for some
two and a half weeks now. Like the other members of the
Council, we forcefully condemn Zagreb's military action in
Sector West and the incursion by Croatian forces into the
zones of separation in the other sectors.

The aggressive actions by the Government forces
throw down the gauntlet to the Security Council and the
United Nations operation it established. It has threatened
the process of restoring confidence, flagrantly violated the
cease-fire agreement of 29 March 1994 and scotched the
implementation of the Economic Agreement. United
Nations personnel have been put in extreme danger. There
have been gross violations of human rights, and the mass
exodus of the Serbian population from Western Slavonia
and the uncertain situation of the people who are still
there forcibly remind us of the concept of "ethnic
cleansing".

The statements by the President of the Security
Council on 1 and 4 May were an important factor in
normalizing the situation in Croatia. However, the
demands set forth in those statements were simply
ignored for a long time; indeed they have not yet been
fully carried out. This forced us to consider the real need
to adopt a Security Council resolution that would
demonstrate that the Council did not intend to go along
with crude violations of its decisions and that attempts to
test the Council's determination in regard to its decisions
had no chance of succeeding.

The process of the preparation of the draft resolution
in the Contact Group and then in the Security Council
had a specific influence in itself on the Government of
Croatia. The withdrawal of Croatian forces from the
zones of separation has begun. However, although we
have heard many promises, that withdrawal has not been
completed.

Our assumption is that the resolution we have just
adopted will send a clear signal that the time for promises
has passed and action is now needed. As we understand
it, the adoption of the resolution will lead to a full
restoration of the mandate of UNCRO, as already defined
in previous Security Council resolutions. It will lead also
to a full withdrawal of the forces of all sides from the
zones of separation and will ensure the presence of
United Nations personnel there. Furthermore, it will lead
to the appropriate implementation of the cease-fire
agreement and the Economic Agreement.

In the resolution, the Security Council

"demands that the Government of Croatia respect
fully the rights of the Serb population including their
freedom of movement and allow access to this
population by international humanitarian
organizations, in accordance with internationally
recognized standards". (resolution 994 (1995),
para. 6)

We expect that the Secretary-General will be able to
carry out effectively the request in the resolution to
prepare a report on the humanitarian situation of the Serb
population in Sector West.

 

We must admit that we would have preferred the
resolution to contain a clearer assessment of the situation
that has arisen as a result of the Croatian attacks.
Unfortunately, the resolution does not reflect such an
important problem as the failure to observe the military
embargo against Croatia, which made it possible for such
a dangerous situation to arise.

Recent events have further confirmed the urgent need
for the Security Council, its sanction Committee, the
appropriate regional structures, and all States, primarily
those bordering former Yugoslavia, to take the necessary
measures to ensure an unconditional implementation of the
ban established by resolution 713 (1991).

The resolution the Security Council has just adopted
does not in any way conclude its consideration of Croatia.
The demands set forth in the presidential statements of 1
and 4 May have not yet been carried out in all their
aspects. Therefore, the Council intends to keep this matter
under consideration - and this includes the situation with
regard to the resolution it has just adopted.

In this connection, it is very important that under
operative paragraph 10 of the resolution the Council

"Demands that the parties refrain from taking any
further military measures or actions and warns that
in the event of failure to comply with this demand it
will consider further steps needed to ensure such
compliance." (resolution 994 (1995), para. 10)

We expect that the parties addressed in that paragraph will
draw the necessary conclusion.

In two weeks the Secretary-General will report to the
Security Council on the implementation of this resolution,
and after that we shall consider whether additional steps are
needed to bring about the full normalization of the
situation. This is especially timely because some of the
most recent statements made by the Government of Croatia
to the effect that there are other means besides political
means to settle the conflict give us cause for serious
concern. We think the resolution just adopted by the
Council makes it obvious that, in spite of such statements,
the Council clearly maintains that there is no alternative to
a political settlement.

