Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special Representative of the Secretary- General and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), for his very sobering briefing on the recent developments in Libya. We applaud his unrelenting efforts to bring about a peaceful solution to the Libyan conflict and express our support for UNSMIL. Likewise, my delegation thanks Minister Mathias Licharz, speaking on behalf of the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, for his briefing on the work of the Committee. We remain deeply troubled by the difficulty in finding a solution to the nine-year long conflict in Libya. Our primary focus has been, continues to be and willalways be the well-being of the Libyan people. Owing to the nature of the conflict, consideration must also be given to all affected neighbouring countries - from countries in the Sahel to some in Europe - as they face serious impacts from the ongoing conflict. As we deliver this statement, the humanitarian situation in Libya continues to deteriorate and hope is waning. The urgency to de-escalate the conflict is already resounding. Last week's Berlin conference was an opportunity for members of the international community, in particulara group of concerned countries, not only to send a clear message of support for the Libyan people but also add impetus and demonstrate commitment to curbing the incessant violence, particularly the attacks against civilian populations. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the efforts of the recent Berlin conference. We acknowledge the tireless efforts of the respective leaders in reaching consensus and encourage the inclusion of all neighbours and affected parties in the process. We reiterate the importance of a Libyan-owned and Libyan-led dialogue, including under the auspices of the United Nations. We also recognize and encourage all dialogue efforts, including those held in Moscow, Algiers and today in the Republic of the Congo. We welcome the decision by the parties to the conflict to nominate representatives to the 5+5 Joint Military Commission (JMC). The designation of the representatives is a positive sign that the parties are ready to constructively engage. We urge them to commence negotiations in good faith for a permanent ceasefire. Accordingly, all States Members of our Organization must fully abide by and implement the arms embargo, in keeping with resolution 1970 (2011) and subsequent relevant resolutions. Since 2011, approximately 19 Security Council resolutions have been adopted on the situation in Libya, but we all know of reports that the arms embargo has been violated with impunity. Let us be very clear: the situation in Libya will not be resolved unless Member States entrusted with the responsibility to uphold international law duly comply with their international obligations. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its stance that there cannot and will not be a military solution to the Libyan conflict. We roundly condemn the ongoing violence in Tripoli and reiterate our call for a permanent ceasefire. We take note of the new report on the July 2019 airstrikes in Libya at the Tajoura detention centre and support its recommendations. Finally, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is cognizant of the momentum garnered in Berlin. The upcoming JMC meeting in Geneva, coupled with dialogue initiatives, in particular within the framework of the African Union and the League of Arab States, are encouraging. It would be foolhardy not to advance on those platforms. Nevertheless, we urge careful deliberation and assessment of the situation in Libya as we decide the next steps, ever mindful that at the centre of the crisis are the Libyan people, who need our urgent help.
