The President (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the statement of its
President of 31 August 1998 (S/PRST/ 1998/26) on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
remains deeply concerned about the continuing
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which threatens peace, security and stability in the
region, and about its grave humanitarian
consequences.

"The Security Council reaffirms the obligation to
respect the territorial integrity, political independence
and national sovereignty of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and other States in the region, including
the obligation to refrain from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations.
It also reaffirms the need for all States to refrain from
any interference in each other's internal affairs, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council, in this context, calls for
a peaceful solution to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including an immediate
ceasefire, the orderly withdrawal of all foreign forces,
arrangements for security along the international
borders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
re-establishment of the authority of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo over the whole
territory of the country, and the initiation of an all-
inclusive national reconciliation process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo which fully
respects the equality and rights of all, irrespective of

ethnic origin, and of a political process which leads
to the early holding of democratic, free and fair
elections.

"The Security Council expresses its support for
the regional mediation process begun by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and of the
Southern African Development Community, and
currently led by the President of Zambia, takes note
of the steps, including the establishment of the ad
hoc liaison committee, that have been taken towards
a peaceful settlement of the conflict and encourages
the President of Zambia to continue his efforts.

"The Security Council welcomes in particular
the initiative taken by the Secretary-General at the
Twentieth Conference of Heads of State of Africa
and France, held in Paris from 26 to 28 November
1998, to bring about an end to the conflict and reach
an immediate, unconditional ceasefire. The Council
welcomes the public commitments made in Paris in
this regard by the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Presidents of Uganda
and Rwanda and the Presidents and heads of
delegation of Namibia, Zimbabwe, Angola and
Chad. It strongly urges them to give effect to these
commitments. To that end, the Council calls on all
the parties concerned to participate at the highest
level possible in the upcoming summit to be held in
Lusaka on 14 and 15 December 1998, and urges
them to work in a constructive and flexible spirit
with a view to the signing of a ceasefire agreement
as a matter of urgency. The Council also encourages
participants at the meeting of the central organ of
the OAU, in Ouagadougou on 17 and 18 December
1998, to use this opportunity to take urgent steps
towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict.

"The Security Council is prepared to consider,
in the light of efforts towards peaceful resolution of
the conflict, the active involvement of the United
Nations, in coordination with OAU, including
through concrete, sustainable and effective measures,
to assist in the implementation of an effective
ceasefire agreement and in an agreed process for a
political settlement of the conflict.

"The Security Council condemns any violations
of human rights and humanitarian law, including
acts of and incitement to ethnic hatred and violence
by all parties. It urges all parties to respect and
protect human rights and respect humanitarian law,

 

in particular the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the
Additional Protocols of 1977, as applicable to them,
and the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide of 1948.

"The Security Council notes with particular
concern that the worsening of tension is resulting in a
deterioration of the food situation for the civilian
population and an increase in the flow of refugees and
displaced persons. In this context, the Council
reiterates its call for safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian agencies to all those in need in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and once again
urges all parties to guarantee the safety and security of
United Nations and humanitarian personnel.

"The Security Council also reaffirms the
importance of holding, at the appropriate time, an
international conference on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region under the
auspices of the United Nations and OAU.

"The Security Council strongly encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to work actively with
the Secretary-General of OAU and with all the
parties concerned to help find a peaceful and lasting
solution to the conflict. It requests him to keep it
informed about efforts to achieve a peaceful solution
and to make recommendations on a possible role of
the United Nations to this end.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1998/36.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.55 p.m.
