Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting of the Security Council, which has made it
possible for us to adopt resolution 2048 (2012). I
should like to take this opportunity once again to
express to you our appreciation for the outstanding
manner in which you have led the Council's work during
this month. Lastly, I should like to express the gratitude
of the delegation of Togo to all the members of the
Council, who spared no effort to make it possible for
Togo to join the consensus that led to the adoption of
the resolution.
12-34487

Togo joined that consensus owing to the efforts of
all members of the Council, especially those of
Portugal, to preserve the unity of the Council on an
issue of concern to the West Africa region. Nevertheless,
we were surprised to note that - barring a misreading
on our part - paragraph 2, which refers to the need for
coordination among the partners concerned in the
situation in Guinea-Bissau, did not figure in the draft
before the Council this morning. Even if that language
poses no problem for the delegation of Togo, we think
that the spirit of transparency that underpins all
negotiations should be respected in the future.

Another aspect of the draft resolution pertains to
the inclusion of the phrase "illicit drug trafficking". In
the course of discussions, and especially those at the
experts' level, Togo noted that the use of such language
was not appropriate to the West Africa region, even
though that phrase is acceptable when it comes to other
regions of the world. A similar position was expressed
in February when the Council negotiated and adopted
the 21 February presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/2).
The delegation of Togo would like to point out that it
agreed to the adoption of the resolution with that
language as a demonstration of flexibility. However,
we believe that, in the future, the Council should
continue to refer to drug trafficking in West Africa
without making a distinction as to whether it is licit or
illicit in nature.

