Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank South Africa
for guiding the work of the Security Council for the
month of January 2012 and for having scheduled this
open debate on the promotion and strengthening of the
rule of law in the maintenance of international peace
and security. I convey my sincere thanks to the
Secretary-General for his statement on this issue.
Allow me also to express my appreciation to the other
speakers who have taken the floor today.

Since the Security Council held its last open
debate on the rule of law, in June 2010 (see S/PV.6347), there have been some important
developments. We welcome the Secretary-General's
latest report on the rule of law (S/2011/634*). A
notable development is the establishment of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. The forthcoming high-level event on the
rule of law, to be held during the sixty-seventh session,
in 2012, will be an opportunity for Member States to
renew their commitment to the universal adherence to
and implementation of the rule of law at both the
national and international levels and to take stock of
the progress made.

Some challenges lie ahead in promoting and
strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security. One of them is to
address new threats to peace and security, for example
piracy, in the framework of the rule of law and justice.
Apart from that, another critical issue is the need to
support and strengthen the rule of law and transitional
justice at the national level as part of mandates. It is
also necessary that the global community increasingly
become more mindful of adhering to the principle of
not violating sovereign rights and to avoid selective
application of the rule of law. Last year, the United
Nations observed the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
right to development as a human right. We appeal the
global community to help nations to achieve that
objective.

My delegation believes that, in order to ensure a
world order based on the rule of law, measures must be
taken to ensure better implementation of international
law, notably through technical assistance and national
capacity-building. The United Nations should increase
the efficiency of such assistance, expand it to broader
areas of international law and focus on the specific
needs of Member States. Measures should be taken to
support institutional development for the promotion of
the rule of law and encourage more States to become
parties to international instruments.

The rule of law is a basic feature of the
Constitution of Bangladesh, article 27 of which
guarantees that all citizens are equal before the law and
are entitled to equal protection under the law. Article
31 guarantees that to enjoy the protection of the law,
and to be treated in accordance with the law, is the
inalienable right of every citizen, wherever he or she
may be, as well as of every other person for the time
being within Bangladesh. In particular, no action
detrimental to the life, liberty, body, reputation or
property of any person shall be taken except in
accordance with the law. All those provisions of the
Constitution are effective for ensuring the rule of law
in Bangladesh.

At the national level, Bangladesh is actively
promoting the rule of law and justice in all spheres of
life, in particular through administrative, judicial and
electoral reforms. The Government of Bangladesh
separated the judiciary from the executive branch of
Government and strengthened its anti-corruption
commission, which functions as an independent
watchdog.

In addition, the Government also established a
human rights commission, thereby ensuring that
international standards of human rights and personal
freedom are maintained in the country. Good news is
that last year it co-organized multiple workshops
throughout the country, with assistance from the United
Nations Development Programme, on issues such as
protecting people's economic, social and cultural
rights, the rights of migrant workers, women's rights,
violations against women et cetera. All of them were
successful in creating mass awareness of those issues.
In addition, Bangladesh is mindful of the importance of
developing accountable and coherent law-enforcement
institutions that operate within the framework of
international legal norms.

In conclusion, may I add that in the area of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding - the area of
engagement - we should further strengthen the rule of
law and system-wide coherence in all aspects.

