Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): Let me take this opportunity
to join other speakers in commending the Malaysian
presidency for convening this timely open debate on
the challenges we face in addressing the proliferation
ofweapons ofmass destruction, their means of delivery
and related materials. We express our appreciation to
Mr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Home Affairs of Malaysia, for presiding
over the meeting this morning, and to the Secretary-
General for his opening remarks.

The need to achieve a world free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction is now
more urgent than ever. As the menace ofterrorism, with
the increasing threat of destabilization of established
States, continues to confront the international
community, there is the danger that weapons of
mass destruction, their means of delivery and related
material will fall into the hands of non-State actors,
with unthinkable consequences.

Our urgent attention must be focused on this
grave issue. There is a dire a need to enhance the
coordination of efforts at national, subregional, regional

and international levels in order to strengthen a global
response to that serious challenge and the threat it poses
to international security. Resolution 1540 (2004), a key
component of the global non-proliferation architecture,
underlines the importance of promoting dialogue and
cooperation among States in addressing the threat posed
by the proliferation of nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons and their means of delivery. This open debate
is an important step in that direction.

Strengthening the disarmament treaty regime is
essential to ensure a rules-based regime for nuclear
disarmament. In that connection, we wish to recall,
and reiterate our support for, the key recommendations
of the Weapons of Mass Destruction Commission
of 2006, specifically with regard to the paramount
value of multilateralism and the overall importance
of treaties and international law in achieving the
goal of disarmament. Apart from the key instruments
in the field of disarmament, such as the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
there is the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material and the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,
which address specific situations involving access to
nuclear material by non-State actors. They provide a
comprehensive normative framework for international
cooperation to address this challenge.

We also welcome the work carried out by Spain as
Chair ofthe Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1540 (2004) in the comprehensive
review of the resolution. This debate will no doubt
make rich contributions to that ongoing comprehensive
review process, which is expected to come up with
proposals by the end of the year for Member States
to strengthen the implementation of the resolution.
The review process must address new challenges that
have arisen, such as the utilization of information
and technological developments, particularly on the
Internet, for proliferation purposes. The challenges
that developing countries face with regard to capacity-
building and training needs in their efforts to achieve
the objectives of resolution 1540 (2004) must also
be addressed.

Sri Lanka's commitment to the elimination of the
threat posed by nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction is reflected in the international
treaty obligations we have undertaken in the field of
disarmament. We believe that a transparent, sustainable
and credible plan for multilateral nuclear disarmament
is required in order to achieve the ultimate goal of a
world free of weapons of mass destruction. Their total
elimination is the only absolute guarantee against the
use or threat of use of these weapons. All States have
an obligation to negotiate in good faith to achieve the
objective of the total elimination of nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction.

We wish to reiterate the centrality of the
international treaty regime, including the NPT, as well
as the Action Plan of the 2010 NPT Review Conference
and the 13 practical steps towards nuclear disarmament
agreed to at the 2000 NPT Review Conference, and the
importance of adherence to all other principal legal
instruments in that field.

