Mr. Pamir (Turkey): At the outset, on behalf of
my delegation and on my own account, I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We wish you every
success in the discharge of your important
responsibilities.

Turkey aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Spain on behalf of the
European Union. Thus, I shall be brief, as I prefer to
highlight only a few points already addressed in the
European Union statement.

Turkey has been unequivocal in its condemnation
of all forms of terrorism and adamant in its belief that
terrorism cannot be construed, let alone understood, as
a potent tool in the pursuit of political ends. Although
we note the decrease in the number of suicide
bombings, we once again join those who strongly
condemn the latest spate of terrorist attacks in Israel.
Violence and terrorism cannot and will not yield
results. Only a negotiated settlement of this conflict
that will also lead to the creation of a democratic,
viable and independent State of Palestine, living side
by side with Israel within mutually recognized and
secure borders, can bring peace and security to the
region. Likewise, full and non-selective
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002) is a prerequisite for embarking
upon a serious and results-seeking negotiating process.

To be precise, both parties should understand -
and should convince the international community that
they realize - that there is no alternative to a peaceful
negotiating process for completely solving the Middle
East conflict by attaining a just, lasting and
comprehensive solution. Coercion and terrorism -
neither of those treacherous twins is capable of
producing the desired results. I am referring to results
that would benefit the long-term and true interests of
the parties and that would reflect the aspirations of
present and future generations, if only they knew how
to intervene or had the power to do so as today's events
unfold.

We therefore call upon the interested parties once
more to embark upon serious negotiations, for which
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002), along with the Madrid and Oslo
principles and the subsequent agreements reached
between the parties, constitute the framework. We
heartily support the efforts of the "quartet" and other
initiatives aimed at helping the parties towards the
noble end of a negotiated peaceful settlement. In that
context, we welcome the formation of a new
Palestinian Cabinet and hope that it is the harbinger of
new vistas of reform. The mutually strengthening
pillars of transparency and the principles of good
governance should guide the reform efforts.

Today, after months of tragic events, we have
reason to hope that addressing the situation in the
Middle East in a serious and constructive manner will
lead to the restoration of peace and to a genuine
political process. Turkey is always ready to continue to
play its role towards that end. We strongly believe that,
once the conditions are right, the city of Istanbul will
offer a venue where every interested party would feel
at home and at ease to work for a future of long-
overdue peace and stability in the region.

