Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Austria associates
itself with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union later in this meeting. We would also in
particular like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe for his substantive and very comprehensive
briefing.

We are confronted with a large number of crises
and new global dangers with a potential to ignite fully
fledged conflicts posing threats to international peace
and security. The complexity of the issues at stake and
the involvement of a wide range of actors underscore
the need to make use of the entire toolbox available to
the United Nations and the international community. In
recent years, the United Nations has conducted and
supported a series of successful mediation efforts -
for instance in Kenya - but Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe has provided us today with an impressive
complete list of the various efforts of the United
Nations in this field.

Mediation should be one of the first instruments
that we resort to because it has proven to be an
effective tool at all stages of the conflict cycle.
Disputes can, of course, best be resolved through
interventions at an early stage. If such interventions are
successful, we can reconcile potential adversaries
before a crisis erupts.

As the ongoing discussions on the reform of
United Nations peacekeeping have shown, we are
confronted with a growing shortage of human and
financial resources. In this situation, the added value of
conflict prevention and resolution through mediation
becomes ever more apparent. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2009/189) therefore rightly underlines the
comparative advantage of mediation in terms of cost-
effectiveness, as opposed to large-scale conflict
intervention and post-conflict reconstruction.

As the Under-Secretary-General's briefing has
shown, successful mediation efforts must go hand in
hand with other crisis prevention and crisis
management activities, in particular peacekeeping and
10

peacebuilding. We therefore support the Secretary-
General's recommendation to make mediation,
facilitation and dialogue expertise available to United
Nations field presences. It is clear that successful
mediation efforts will normally result in compromise
solutions that balance the interests of former
adversaries. That having been said, mediators must
nonetheless make sure that the principles of the rule of
law and the needs of transitional justice are respected.

Resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) urge
Member States and the Secretary-General to ensure
increased representation of women at all levels of
conflict resolution and peace processes. Yet an analysis
by the United Nations Development Fund for Women
shows that, in 13 major comprehensive peace processes
since 2000, not one single woman has been appointed
chief mediator. We hope to see more appointments of
women in the future. For that to happen, it is of course
clear that we, the Member States, must ourselves
nominate more female candidates for such positions.
Also, all mediators need to have adequate expertise in
dealing with gender issues as part of their mandate. In
order to achieve sustainable peace, we must ensure the
availability of adequate resources for gender mediation
expertise in all peace efforts.

Any effective mediator needs to be supported by
the right team, with expertise and thorough knowledge
of the particular situation. We commend the excellent
role that the Mediation Support Unit (MSU) and the
newly established standby team have played over the
past year in preparing and supporting an increasing
number of mediation processes. We would like to see
further consolidation of the MSU's capacities.
Equipping the United Nations with adequate funds and
human resources remains a prerequisite for successful
dispute settlement, since the right timing, readiness and
quick deployment of mediation teams are crucial.

We fully support efforts to intensify cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, and note
in particular the positive role that organizations such as
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Southern Africa Development
Community are playing in this respect. Regional
organizations in many instances have the advantage of
being well acquainted with local and regional
dynamics, but in some cases it must also be said that
proximity and long-standing involvement can work to
the detriment of potential mediators because they are
not seen to be impartial and are therefore not
acceptable to the conflict parties. Depending on
circumstances, the European Union therefore
contributes to mediation processes either as an actor or
indirectly as a supporter to third-party mediation
efforts.

Mediation also creates local capacity in the target
countries, thereby contributing to sustainable and
locally owned conflict settlement. The United Nations
should strive to strengthen operational partnerships
with regional and subregional arrangements and offer
support to mediation partners through the MSU.

Small and medium-sized States without vested
interests in particular conflicts in a region can play a
positive role. Austria, as a neutral country, has a long-
standing tradition of offering and hosting good offices.
In this context, let me also underline the potential of
non-governmental organizations and pay tribute to the
work of such institutions as Sant'Egidio in Italy or
Burg Schlaining in Austria.

In conclusion, let me thank Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe once again for his interesting
presentation. We also highly appreciate the efforts of
Burkina Faso in promoting the issue of mediation and
the settlement of disputes in the Council, and fully
support the presidential statement to be adopted later
today. We look forward to future discussions on this
important matter.

