Mr. Solana (spoke in Spanish): Let me at the
outset thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this public meeting on such an important issue in
current times. I should like to express my gratitude for
the presence of the Secretary-General and extend my
thanks to the members of the Council.

Civilian aspects in recent years have taken on
primary importance in crisis management. Until
recently, conflicts were of an inter-State nature, and
that was the main concern of the international
community. Today internal conflicts are the most
frequent. Although the deployment of forces may still
be necessary in some cases, the objective is broader
and more complex: restoring a legitimate Government
and the defence of the rule of law, as was so eloquently
stated yesterday by the Secretary-General.

The rebuilding of a State has a political as well as
a security dimension. But it also requires - and this is
a key point - the establishment of institutions in
which the population can have confidence.
Guaranteeing security is necessary for a State that has
been ravaged by a conflict to move forward on the path
towards development, making it very clear that
security and development are two concepts that go
hand in hand.

The European Union is convinced that it can and
should make a significant contribution to this very
important task for the international community. The
European Union's security policy from the outset set
out to give the European Union the means to enable it
to deploy not only military but also civilian
instruments, in order to help to substitute for, assist or
strengthen - depending on the case - the capacities
of the recipient country.

Over a very brief period we in the European
Union have developed concepts and established
structures capable of sustaining the deployment of
civilian elements. The member States of the European
Union have committed capacities in various areas - in
the civilian area, 5,000 police officers, more than 200
specialists in the strengthening of the rule of law,
among others. We have carried out expert-training
programmes, as noted in the statement just made by the
Secretary-General.

Indeed, we have been making considerable
efforts. In the past three years, the six operations that
the European Union has undertaken have shown an
operational capacity. Three of those six operations are
civilian, and a seventh operation - also a police
operation - in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is still at the planning stage.

But much remains to be done. As the Secretary-
General has said, obtaining qualified civilian personnel
for deployment in crisis-management operations is
more difficult than in the case of military personnel.
Thus, the international community must build up
mechanisms to have civilian personnel properly trained
and ready for rapid deployment. Our societies need to
rethink the criteria used for the recruitment of properly
trained staff, and be ready to deploy them rapidly in the
civilian component of crisis management operations.

As the discussion paper prepared by the
presidency of the Council rightly recognizes, we also
need to develop new mechanisms - and I would even
venture to say a new culture of coordination -
between the civilian and military aspects of such
operations. We need to make use of all the synergies
that exist and avoid clashes owing to
miscommunication.

The European Union takes the position that
reconstruction teams should be set up before a conflict
is resolved, covering all the necessary aspects, both
military - acting in their security capacity - and
civilian, to be used in policing and, as I said earlier, in
order to secure the rule of law in the country requiring
assistance.

For its part, the European Union, with the wide
array of instruments that it possesses and its particular
nature as an institution, is particularly well qualified to
tackle these challenges. Bosnia and Herzegovina is
perhaps the case in which the EU's capacity for action
is most plainly evident: along with the cooperation
programmes being developed and the dimension of a
relationship of close partnership with the country, is
coupled the deployment of a police operation,
replacing the one initiated by the United Nations. Soon
we will be shouldering the responsibility for a military
operation as well, replacing NATO.

Also, in order to give a more comprehensive
response to the need for civilian-military coordination,
the EU has set up a civilian-military planning cell,
which, in the case of a crisis, can encompass the
planning of both aspects: civilian and military. If we do
a little analysis of recent conflicts, who knows? It may
well be that from the outset there has been a lack of
such planning among the civilian and military aspects
and this analysis will show that that the need for such
coordination is imperative.
The action taken by the European Union in recent
years has as its prime objective the strengthening of
effective multilateralism. Part of EU policy is to work
effectively with the United Nations - the heart of this
multilateral world and the framework within which we
can work most effectively. Around this time last year,
the European Union signed a Joint Declaration with the
Secretary-General to make this cooperation yet more
effective. The experience and resources of the
European Union are ready to serve the international
community.

Following the statement made by my friend Said
Djinnit, I want to underscore more clearly the close
partnership that we have with our good friends in the
African Union. I am certain that that cooperation will
continue and that there will be other needs as great as
the need to make the Darfur operation a success. We
are ready to offer the African Union any assistance and
cooperation that it may require.

In conclusion, the challenges are enormous and
we need to tackle them together. The EU is willing to
do its utmost to make this world a safer and fairer
place for all. I trust, and I am sure, that today's debate
in the Council, which bears the highest responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
will assist us in continuing to make progress in that
direction.

