Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria): My delegation wishes
to express its appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We welcome the
opportunity it provides Member States to exchange
views on the subject and to reflect on the continuing
challenges facing the international community with
regard to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We also thank Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for his important statement.

It is of concern to my delegation that, in spite of
internationally acknowledged mechanisms and legal
instruments that guarantee the safety and protection of
non-combatants and ex-combatants in conflict
situations, the global culture of protection of civilians
called for by Secretary-General Kofi Annan in 2002
regrettably remains a distant prospect. Civilians
continue to pay a heavy toll in the various conflict
situations around the world. All too often, civilians are
subjected to various human rights abuses, including
denial of access to medical and humanitarian aid. In
that regard, my delegation is particularly concerned
that many of the conflicts in the world today occur in
Africa and take place within States.

That unacceptable situation has adversely
affected the social, cultural and economic lives of
millions of people and has highlighted the challenge of
protecting human rights and providing basic
humanitarian assistance, especially to the most
vulnerable members of society. These include the
elderly, women, children, people with disabilities and
those afflicted with serious diseases. The situation is
even more critical and the challenges even more
daunting for civilians in countries in conflict where the
population must confront the HIV/AIDS pandemic, as
is the case in some African countries.

Nigeria believes that the way forward is for
States to adopt, ratify and/or codify in national laws the
various conventions and protocols on the law of armed
conflict and to ensure the implementation of the
provisions of those instruments. Where required,
national Governments should have access to
international support and assistance, upon request, to
strengthen their judicial and security mechanisms. That
would enable them to effectively prosecute and punish
perpetrators of crimes committed against civilians in
times of conflict. We reaffirm the primary
responsibility of national Governments to ensure the
safety and protection of their civilians in times of
peace or violent conflict.

However, the best way in which to protect
civilians is to prevent conflicts in the first place. In that
regard, my country has supported, and will continue to
support, regional efforts to identify the root causes of
the many conflict situations that have erupted on the
African continent. Within the West African subregion,
for example, significant strides have been made by
States members of the Economic Community of West
African States in their determination to bring about the
peaceful resolution of conflicts within and among the
countries concerned. Nigeria has closely coordinated
initiatives with other States members of the
Community in that process. Similarly, the African
Union, through its Peace and Security Council, has
continued to beam its searchlight on potential
flashpoints and ongoing conflicts, and it has proposed
solutions that would address all facets of such conflicts
and ensure the safety and security of civilians.

The international community must continue to
support the efforts of national Governments and
regional organizations as they seek to strengthen the
mechanisms and instruments aimed at protecting
civilians in situations of armed conflict. Such
cooperation and collaboration should include providing
sustained humanitarian assistance and support to
victims and internally displaced persons.

