Judge Mose: It is an honour to address the
members of the Security Council to present an updated
version of the completion strategy of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), submitted to the
Council on 5 December 2005. The Council also has
before it our tenth annual report, covering the period
from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005.

There has been steady progress at the ICTR since
the Prosecutor and I appeared before the Council in
June this year. The number of accused with their cases
completed or ongoing is now 52.

On 13 December 2005, judgment was rendered in
the case of Aloys Simba, a retired lieutenant colonel
and former member of Parliament. He was convicted of
genocide and extermination as a crime against
humanity and sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment.
That brings the number of accused having received
judgments to 26 since the first trials started in 1997.

In the Bisengimana case, the Trial Chamber
accepted a guilty plea from the accused on 7 December
2005 for crimes against humanity, including
extermination and murder. Therefore, following the
sentencing hearing on 19 January 2006, the number of
persons with completed cases will soon be 27. The
Bisengimana case is the sixth guilty plea at the ICTR.

In addition to those two completed single-accused
cases, two new cases started during the past six
months. The Mpambara trial, which relates to a
boargmestre, commenced on 19 September 2005. The
Chamber heard 10 prosecution witnesses over the
course of eight days. Two additional days were allotted
to cross-examination this week. That makes it the
fastest prosecution case in the Tribunal's history. The
defence will present its evidence from Monday
9 January 2006, and judgment is expected in the first
half of 2006.

The second new trial involves Prefect
Zigiranyirazo; it started on 3 October 2005. The
prosecution is expected to have presented all its
evidence by March 2006.

I should also mention the fact that, following the
pre-trial preparations that have been under way in the
past few months, a third new trial is scheduled to
commence on 9 January 2006. That case involves
Prefect Karera.

Turning now to the trials that were in progress
before the June 2005 Security Council meeting, I will
first provide an update with respect to three single-
accused cases. In the Seromba trial, which commenced
on 20 September 2004, there was a need to replace
defence counsel. However, the defence is now
presenting its evidence and will close its case early
next year. The Muvunyi trial commenced on
28 February 2005. Here, too, the defence has nearly
completed the presentation of its evidence. There is
also a positive development in the Rwamaknba case,
which commenced on 9 June 2005 after its accused had
been separated from the other three accused in the case
Karemera et al. The defence will complete its evidence
in early 2006.

In brief, I am very pleased to report that those
three single-accused cases are approaching completion
and that judgments will be rendered in 2006. That will
make room for the commencement of new single-
accused cases. Pre-trial preparations in those cases are
under way.

The five multi-accused trials have continued to
progress steadily in recent months. In the Butare case,
involving six accused, the second accused is now
presenting his witnesses. In the Military I case, with
four accused, over 50 defence witnesses have testified.
In the Government trial, with four accused, the defence
started presenting its evidence at the beginning of
November, just as planned. The two other joint trials
are at an earlier stage. In Military 11, with four accused,
over half of the prosecution witnesses have testified.
The case of Karemera et al., with three accused, started
de novo in September and is advancing well.

I hope to have conveyed a picture of how busy
the ICTR has been these last months, handling 10 trials
involving 26 accused. About 16 accused are being
transported to and from the courtroom every day. All
four courtrooms are in full use from morning to
evening. Let me stress that our fourth courtroom,
funded by voluntary contributions, has proven to be
absolutely vital in order to ensure progress. Everyone
is working extremely hard: the judges, prosecution and
defence counsel, interpreters, court reporters,
courtroom officers, witness protection personnel and
all other staff members who more indirectly, but not
less importantly, contribute to the smooth running of
our cases. Some of our judges even sit double shifts
and hear two trials on the same day.

Still, considerable work remains to be done. It
follows from our completion strategy document that 17
detainees are awaiting trial. As I have explained, there
will be only 15 detainees awaiting trial early next year.
As soon as there is courtroom space and judges
available we will endeavour to reduce that number
further by starting new trials. Let me recall that all the
remaining cases are single-accused cases, which will
make our task easier.

The Prosecutor will provide members of the
Council with an update of his plans to transfer cases to
national jurisdictions. Let me simply note that so far,
the Trial Chambers have not received any requests for
such transfers pursuant to rule 11 bis. Our Prosecutor
will also inform the Council about the indictees at large
and the prospects for their arrest. In relation to those
two issues - transfer of cases and arrest of fugitives - I
would like to stress that State cooperation is absolutely
essential for the ICTR. Impunity for perpetrators of
mass atrocities is not a viable option.

Another area where the ICTR depends on the
assistance of States is the relocation of acquitted
persons. The Council will recall that three of our
accused have been acquitted. In relation to the first,
Mr. Bagilishema, the ICTR is still very grateful to the
French authorities that kindly agreed to receive him
some time ago. At present, two acquitted persons are
still in Arusha in spite of having been acquitted by
judgement of 25 February 2004, in the Cyangngn trial.
During the appeals proceedings, they have been placed
in a safe house pending unsuccessful efforts to find a
country for them. States should consider it a common
responsibility, and an important contribution to
international criminal justice, to find solutions on the
relocation of acquitted persons.

Rwanda has continued to cooperate with the
Tribunal by facilitating a steady flow of witnesses from
Kigali to Arusha and by providing documents of
relevance to the court proceedings. This is appreciated
by the Tribunal. Let me also recall that our outreach
programme remains a prioritized area. Inside Rwanda,
a vital role is played by the ICTR Information Centre
in Kigali. I refer to our tenth annual report
(S/2005/534) for further information about its
activities. Moreover, the Tribunal continues to receive
frequent delegations from many parts of Rwandan
society. Direct observation of trials in Arusha and
discussions with Tribunal officials are essential to
better understand our contribution to justice and
reconciliation.

I would also like to reiterate the need for
capacity-building inside Rwanda in order to strengthen
the judicial system within a country which is faced
with an enormous task. Governmental and non-
governmental organizations are playing a very
important part in that field.

Let me, then, simply conclude by reiterating that
the ICTR is on course in relation to its completion
strategy. We remain committed to the deadline for
completion of trials established by the Security
Council. We also want to express our deep appreciation
to the members of the Council for their continued
support to the ICTR.

