Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: I thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to present the work of the
International Criminal Court regarding the situation in
Darfur.

I would like to start by briefing the Council on
the case against the rebel commanders who led more
than 1,000 troops in carrying out a violent attack
against the African Union Mission in Sudan base in
Haskanita, killing 12 peacekeepers and injuring eight
others. The attackers also destroyed the camp and
looted vehicles, fuel and money. It was the most
serious attack ever against peacekeepers in Darfur,
affecting the lives of millions of civilians under their
protection. This case shows the impartiality of the
International Criminal Court and its commitment to
protecting peacekeeping forces.

On 7 March, the Pre-Trial Chamber confirmed
the charges for war crimes against Abdallah Banda and
Saleh Jerbo. The commanders are not disputing their
actual participation in the attack, and both have
committed to surrendering voluntarily to the
International Criminal Court to face trial and, if
convicted by the Judges, to serve years in prison. They
are claiming that President Al-Bashir also has to appear
before the judges and respect the decisions of the Court
and the Security Council.

On 16 May, the prosecution and the defence
indicated in a joint filing to the Trial Chamber that
certain facts have been agreed by both parties and that
the defence will contest only three specific issues
during the trial: first, whether the attack on the
Haskanita base on 29 September 2007 was unlawful;
2
secondly, whether the accused persons were aware of
the factual circumstances that established the unlawful
nature of the attack; and thirdly, whether the African
Union Mission in Sudan was a peacekeeping mission
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
These are the issues to be discussed in court, and are
highly relevant to peacekeeping operations in the
future. The dates for the hearings are not yet scheduled.

Let me focus on the arrest warrants issued by the
Court against President Al-Bashir, which unveiled and
documented war crimes, crimes against humanity and a
genocidal policy of extermination implemented since
2003 against three ethnic groups: the Fur, Massalit and
Zaghawa. I will also touch on the arrest warrants
issued against Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb.

As detailed in my written report, crimes against
humanity and genocide continue unabated in Darfur.
Air attacks on civilians and direct killings of members
of these ethnic groups have continued over the past six
months. The direct targeting of villages continues,
causing still further displacements. Most of the Fur,
Zaghawa and Massalit now live in camps for internally
displaced persons or refugees. These millions of
displaced victims are still subject today to rape, terror
and conditions of life aimed at the destruction of their
communities, constituting genocide.

The mandate of the International Criminal Court
is to end impunity in order to prevent future crimes.
We share this mission with the Security Council, the
African Union and the Government of the Sudan. The
efficacy of our common efforts will depend greatly on
how we share information with each other and learn
from it. The prosecution is trying to improve its
practice in this area, linking the information collected
with the current behaviour of the suspects.

The work of the Court has documented that the
crimes in Darfur are the consequence of a strategic
decision taken by the highest authorities of the
Government of the Sudan, and are not the by-product
of a conflict, intertribal clashes or even climate change.

One actor who has learned is President Al-Bashir.
He has learned how to continue to commit crimes
challenging the authority of the Security Council and
ignoring resolution 1593 (2005), as well as other
resolutions. He did not stop the commission of the
genocide, but he is blocking the dissemination of
information about the fate of the displaced. President
Al-Bashir and his supporters continue to deny the
11-36705
crimes, attributing them to other factors such as
intertribal clashes, diverting attention by publicizing
ceasefire agreements that are violated as soon as they
are announced, and finally proposing the creation of
special courts to conduct investigations that will never
start.

At the same time, President Al-Bashir is
threatening the international community with
retaliation and yet more crimes. This tactic is not new;
it is the documented practice of perpetrators of mass
crimes - denial, cover-up and threat of repetition.
Paradoxically, President Al-Bashir has successfully
transformed public knowledge of his criminal
behaviour into a negotiating tool. Expelling the
humanitarian organizations in March 2009 was the
epitome of such a strategy. It allowed for concealing
the continuation of crimes, diverting the international
community's attention and continuing the commission
of crimes in the absence of any scrutiny. President
Al-Bashir is now asking for rewards for not
committing new genocides outside Darfur.

The challenge to the Security Council's authority
is further evidence that the extermination of the Fur,
Massalit and Zaghawa, as well as any tribe deemed
disloyal to the regime, is a policy defined by the top
leadership. It is calculated to ensure that the armed
forces and associated militia will continue committing
new crimes, with the same modus operandi, wherever
and whenever they are instructed to do so.

The record of Ahmad Harun provides a clear
demonstration of the risk of impunity and ignoring
information about crimes. During the 19905, Ahmad
Harun used local militias to attack civilians in the
Nuba Mountains in Kordofan. Between 2003 and 2005,
Harun coordinated the attacks against civilians in
Darfur as Minister of state for the Interior and head of
11-36705
the Darfur security desk. That information was
ignored. During the visit of then Secretary-General
Kofi Annan to Darfur, Harun was assigned as Annan's
official interpreter in his meetings with the Fur leaders
displaced in the camps. Harun deliberately
mistranslated their complaints to cover them up.

In September 2005, Harun was appointed by
President Al-Bashir as Minister of State for
Humanitarian Affairs in charge of the same millions of
people that he forcibly displaced. In my seventh report
to this Council, presented an 5 June 2008 (see S/PV.5905), I expressed concern about Harun having
been dispatched to Abyei to address disputes between
the Misiryia and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement and Liberation Army. Following his
dispatch, as I reported, Abyei was burned down, with
50,000 civilians displaced. In my ninth report,
presented on 5 June 2009 (see S/PV.6135), I expressed
concern about Harun's appointment as Governor of
South Kordofan, on 7 May 2009. He is now presenting
himself as an efficient operator, and is dubbed by some
members of the international community as the man to
talk to get things done.

It is the challenging responsibility of the Security
Council to use the information exposed by the
International Criminal Court to stop the crimes in
Darfur and protect the civilians there. The Prosecution,
fulfilling its mandate, is willing to assist.

