Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me to begin
by thanking our briefers today for their very
informative presentations.

Poland welcomes the progress achieved so far in
Somalia towards peacebuilding and State-building
and commends the ambitious reform agenda set by the
Federal Government. At the same time, we are aware
of the fragility of the situation. We are deeply worried
about the growing number of Al-Shabaab attacks and
the increased presence in Somalia of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant.

We are concerned as well about the political
impasse between the Federal Government and the
federal member states and the suspension of cooperation
between the two houses of the Federal Parliament.
The ongoing stalemate puts at risk the gains made to
date in Somalia and threatens the timelines for crucial
reforms, as well as the whole federalization process.
We call on all political actors in Somalia to undertake
reconciliatory and confidence-building steps and
engage in a constructive dialogue for the benefit of the
Somali population. We also call on foreign and regional
actors to provide impartial support for the national
reconciliation process. At the same time, we request
that Somali authorities cooperate with United Nations
actors based on mutual trust and respect.

The protection of human rights and freedoms is
an essential part of democracy. We note with concern
reports on human rights violations committed not only
by A1-Shabaab but also by Government and regional
forces and clan militias. We are particularly worried
about reports concerning the recruitment of children.
We find it unacceptable and call on authorities to
intensify efforts aimed at raising awareness on child
protection and strengthening policies for preventing the
recruitment of children into Somali forces.
Poland believes that the success of the ambitious
reform agenda and the development of Somalia
require the concerted efforts of all actors, as well as
international coordination. We see the comprehensive
approach to security as an important framework for the
alignment of donor support with the priorities set by
Somali authorities.

Let me conclude by expressing Poland's appreciation
for United Nations actors and the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) for their everyday efforts and
sacrifice. On the eve on AMISOM's mandate renewal,
we believe that AMISOM's drawdown plan should
include specific steps and a realistic timetable for
the transfer of responsibility from the Mission to the
Somali National Army. At the same time, the need for
burden-sharing with regard to AMISOM's financing
has become more pressing than ever.

