Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo, Ambassador Tanin, for his
briefing, and welcome the First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica
Dacie, and Ms. Vlora Citaku back to the Council.

My delegation has taken careful note of the
information contained in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2016/407) and in the Special Representative's
briefing about developments in the political and
security situation in the territory of Kosovo. We
welcome the reported improvements - which, unlike
the two previous reports, offer glimmers of hope -but
we regret the continued acts of violence and obstruction
of the smooth course of political life in Pristina. In that
regard, Spain supports and endorses the Secretary-
General's renewed call on all political leaders, including
those in opposition, to act in a responsible manner and
in line with the law, the good practices of democracy
and the rule of law when voicing their political positions
and opinions.

We also listened carefully to the analysis provided
today by the Special Representative on the role played
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). Spain strongly supports the
important work carried out by the Mission and other
international missions operating in Kosovo. We
commend the particular attention accorded by the
Special Representative, in the context of his mandate,
to the promotion and protection of human rights, the
rule of law and enhancing coexistence among the
various communities of Kosovo. Spain believes that
these three aspects are critical and indispensable if we
are to make headway towards genuine reconciliation
in accordance with democratic and European values.
Against that backdrop, we call on all parties to
maintain a constructive spirit and adequate cooperation
with UNMIK and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General as they carry out their work.

It is also essential that progress be made in the
high-level dialogue facilitated by the European Union.
I reiterate Spain's support for the dialogue, which is
consistent with the constructive spirit in which my
country has consistently followed, without prejudice to
our position of principle. We regret the lack of progress
made in recent months at the political and technical
levels. Trust must be fostered between the parties and
constructive and committed dialogue on specific issues
must resume. We cannot lose sight of the fact that this
process was designed to find appropriate and effective
responses that, independent of other considerations,

would promote and fulfil the expectations, desires and
needs of the entire population of Kosovo.

I therefore conclude by calling on the parties to
resume without further delay - in their behaviour and
practice and not just in words - their collaboration
and cooperation with the Brussels process, to which
there is no alternative. The first step to that end must
be the implementation in its entirety and without prior
conditions of the agreements concluded to date, with
particular attention to the effective establishment of the
association/community of Serb majority municipalities.

