Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: As former Costa Rican
Minister for Foreign Affairs Bruno Stagno Ugarte stated
in the Security Council in 2008, the "never again"
promise is being tested in the Sudan (see S/PV.5905).

With resolution 1593 (2005), the Council took the
initiative to refer a situation involving ongoing atrocities
to a permanent, existing court. That was a conscious
decision, namely, that a judicial investigation of the
facts and the identification of those responsible should
not wait for the end ofthe conflict. In fact, the ability of
the Court to implement its mandate immediately was a
crucial factor mentioned by members of the Council in
adopting that resolution.

Investigating Darfur was an enormous challenge for
the Court. There were serious allegations of thousands
of crimes committed in a vast territory by different
parties. The Office of the Prosecutor conducted an
impartial investigation, receiving documents collected
by the United Nations Commission of Inquiry, as well as
reports from the Government of the Sudan itself, which
even authorized us to interview a general as a suspect
in Khartoum. To respect its duty to protect witnesses,
my Office has had to investigate the crimes without
visiting the crime scene. Members of the Office of the
Prosecutor have travelled around the world collecting
hundreds of testimonies of victims and eyewitnesses
who had escaped from the Sudan. Most of our evidence
is confidential so as to protect the lives of the witnesses
and their relatives.

During the previous briefing (see S/PV.6688), the
Sudan challenged the value of the evidence. My Office
is prepared to discuss the matter in the courtroom, at
The Hague, or before the judges. That is where we
discuss evidence.

Ten judges, members of the Pre-Trial and Appeals
Chambers, discussed the value of the evidence collected
by the Office of the Prosecutor. They concluded that the
forces of the Government of the Sudan had committed
war crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur
following a strategy adopted in the higher echelons of
the State apparatus. The Pre-Trial Chamber identified
the individuals who would have to face justice and
issued arrests warrants against a militia/Janjaweed
leader, Ali Kushayb, who reported to the then Minister
of State for the Interior, Ahmed Harun, who in turn
reported to the then Minister of the Interior, Abdelrahim
Mohamed Hussein, who ultimately reported to President
Al-Bashir. I would like to clarify that the responsibility
of those individuals is not a simple consequence of
their official roles. In all the cases, the Office collected
information and there are witnesses that describe in
detail their active participation in the strategy to commit
crimes - in the gathering of forces, in the financing,
in actually committing the attacks, in supervising
operations and in protecting the attackers.

The charges against President Al-Bashir include the
crime of genocide. The Pre-Trial Chamber concluded
that Omar Al-Bashir acted with specific intent to destroy
in part the Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa ethnic groups. In
all of those cases the Pre-Trial Chamber considered that
arrests were necessary in order to stop the commission
of crimes.

The Court fulfilled its judicial mandate. The
evidence collected uncovered the functioning of a State
apparatus used to commit genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. Those who bear the greatest
responsibility have been indicted. The current challenge
is their arrest.

In accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), the
Government of the Sudan has the legal obligation to
implement the arrest warrants. However, President
Al-Bashir is taking advantage of his position of power
to continue with his strategy and to ensure his own
impunity and that of those who follow his instructions.
There is no information to believe that the crimes against
humanity and genocide have stopped.

The report is clear that President Al-Bashir's strategy
includes, first, threats to the international community to
commit new crimes in other areas of the Sudan.

The second element includes the denial ofthose same
crimes and of the rapes in the villages and in the camps,
attributing the killings to banditry and sporadic clashes
between rebel groups or reducing their relevance through
statistical comparisons and attributing conditions in
the camps to different factors, such as drought, lack of
proper seeds or inability to access farm land.

The third factor I would like to mention in the
strategy of President Al-Bashir is the forcing of the
international community into a never-ending negotiation
in order to gain access to displaced victims.

The fourth factor is the permanent promise of
peace negotiations. The international community chases
promises of peace agreements that are systematically
ignored while President Al-Bashir's force commits more
attacks and creates the conditions for new promises of
peace agreements.

The fifth aspect is the announcement of justice
initiatives that are followed only by new announcements,
not by action. After more than seven years of instituting
judicial mechanisms, the Government of the Sudan
has conducted no proceedings relevant to the crimes
committed in Darfur.

The sixth element entails open defiance of the
authority of the Security Council, including through
public announcements that Council resolutions will not
be implemented.

The Council is well aware of this situation.
Recently, on 17 February, resolution 2035 (2012) was
adopted, demanding an end to military action, including
aerial bombardments, and an end to sexual violence and
indiscriminate attacks on civilians. The resolution also
expressed concerns about obstacles deliberately placed
in the way of the work of the Panel of Experts and that
of the United Nations Mission in Darfur (UNAMID).
The resolution also called for the Government of
the Sudan to undertake effective efforts to ensure
accountability for serious violations of international law
and to ensure unrestricted humanitarian access. A few
months ago, the Council also expressed regret that some
individuals affiliated with the Government of the Sudan
and armed groups in Darfur had continued to commit
violence against civilians, impede the peace process and
disregard the demands of the Council.

The situation is therefore clear. Implementing
the arrest warrant issued by the Court will produce a
dramatic change in Darfur. Interestingly, in a normal
criminal case, it is difficult to locate the fugitives; in this
case it is easy. The whereabouts of the four fugitives in
Darfur cases are known. Ali Kushayb remains in Darfur,
Ahmad Harun can be found in the Governor's residence
in Southern Kordofan, Abdelrahim Mohamed Hussein
sits in his office at the Ministry of Defence in Khartoum,
and Al-Bashir can be found in the Presidential Palace in
Khartoum. The next phase in these Darfur cases is to
arrest those indicted.

The failure to arrest and surrender Mr. Harun,
Mr. Kushayb, Mr. Hussein and President Al-Bashir is
a direct challenge to the Council's authority. It is for
the Council to determine the measures to be adopted
to ensure the compliance of the Government of the
Sudan with Security Council resolutions. The reality is
that Council members have to reconcile their national
interests with their responsibilities for peace and
security. I have witnessed where they have done so. I
have witnessed the impact of the Security Council acting
with consensus. My Office would like to contribute by
presenting an option that the Council could explore in
due time.

The execution of the arrest warrants on Sudanese
territory is the primary responsibility of the Government
of the Sudan. UNAMID should not be authorized to carry
out, or assist in securing, arrests. Instead, the Council
can in due course evaluate other possibilities, including
asking United Nations States Members or regional
organizations to execute arrest operations in furtherance
of the arrest warrants issued by the International
Criminal Court. I understand that such decisions would
be problematic, but the victims will receive a message,
namely, that they are not being ignored. The perpetrators
will receive a different, clear message, that is, that there
will be no impunity.

