Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing on
developments in the Middle East, particularly on the
Palestinian question, during the past month. I would
also like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their useful statements.
The Middle East peace process is undoubtedly
passing through one of the most difficult times since
the signing of the Oslo accord. The continuing
stalemate in the peace process is undermining the gains
made so far. In fact, dramatic developments in West
Asia and North Africa since the beginning of 2011
appear to have pushed the Palestinian issue onto the
back burner. Ironically, this is happening at a time
when the international community is supporting the
democratic aspirations of other peoples in the region.

If the present stalemate is allowed to continue
and Palestinian aspirations continue to be denied, we
run the risk of seeing a sharp deterioration in the
situation. The lack of trust between the parties,
primarily due to the intensification of Israeli settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories, needs
to be seriously and urgently addressed. In that regard,
we call for a renewed commitment on the part of Israel
and the Palestinian Authority to the accepted principles
for the settlement of the Palestinian issue, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, the Oslo accords, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet principles.

The parties should take urgent steps to
recommence negotiations for realizing the aspirations
of the Palestinian people to having a State of their own,
living side by side and at peace with Israel. In this
regard, the complete cessation of settlement activities
is of the utmost importance. At the same time, all
Violence against civilians, irrespective of its source and
cause, must stop. The international community,
particularly the Quartet, must redouble its efforts to
bring the parties to the negotiating table. We hope that
the meeting that took place between the Palestinian and
Israeli negotiators on 17 April will facilitate their
efforts towards the commencement of direct talks.

As I have said, if there is one issue that has
become the major hindrance to the peace process, it is
Israel's illegal settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Several reports, including those
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, have clearly shown that the intensification of
these activities is not compatible with the two-State
solution. In fact, it is destroying the very possibility of
the two-State solution. Settlement activities have also
exacerbated the humanitarian problems of the
Palestinian people in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. They have led to violence and an
aggravation of tension between the Israeli settlers and
the Palestinian population. We therefore reiterate our
call for Israel to stop all settlement activities.

Indiscriminate violence not only puts the lives of
civilians in real danger, it also leads to a vicious cycle
of violence. We condemn all such attacks, which cause
harm to the civilian population and damage civilian
infrastructure, and call for their full cessation.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza due to the
continuing blockade and restrictions on exports is
constantly aggravating the livelihoods of the civilian
population. As has been brought out in several reports
by United Nations agencies, poverty and aid
dependency have increased. Demands for emergency
services, such as health, water, sanitation, education
and temporary shelter, have overstretched the resources
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). While
we welcome some steps in easing restrictions and the
blockade, much more is required to be done urgently.

There is also a need to enhance the level of
humanitarian assistance for civilians in Gaza and the
West Bank. That should be done through the
established channels. At the same time, the capacity of
those channels should be increased. On its part, India is
continuing its development cooperation with Palestine
through untied direct budgetary support - $10 million
for the past two years - as well as through the training
of personnel in various areas, an annual $1 million
contribution to UNRWA and projects under the India-
Brazil-South Africa Fund.

The formation of a unity Government and the
implementation of the reconciliation agreement among
Palestinian factions, signed last May, are important for
strengthening the administrative and security
achievements made by the Palestinian Authority in
spite of several financial crises. It will not only bring
all Palestinian factions together, but also ensure the
establishment of a single authority for the whole of the
Palestinian territories. Early action on that front will
help in reaching political common ground - essential
for future democratic processes in Palestine.

The Palestinian question remains at the core of
the Arab-Israeli conflict. The resolution of this issue
should be a priority for the international community.
India has been steadfast in its support for the
Palestinian people's struggle for a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital and living within secure
and recognized borders, side by side and at peace with
Israel, as per the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road
map.

For the achievement of that dream, India will
continue to support all efforts, including those of the
Quartet. At the same time, for a comprehensive
settlement of Arab-Israeli problems, it is also important
not to lose sight of other Arab lands under Israeli
occupation.

