Mr. Koudougou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing. I welcome Mr. Vuk
J eremic' and Mr. Skender Hyseni, Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and the Republic of Kosovo,
respectively, and thank them for their statements.

My delegation notes that the overall situation in
Kosovo has remained relatively stable, despite a
number of inter-ethnic problems that unfortunately
persist in the North of the province. We pay tribute to
the actions of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, in cooperation with local
authorities, to address these differences, and we
welcome the full cooperation of the Kosovo Police
Service with the European Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force.

Regarding the upcoming municipal elections
scheduled for 15 November, the first since the
declaration of independence of Kosovo, we urge all
actors to step up their efforts to ensure the calm
conduct of the electoral process, which we very much
hope will be free, transparent and democratic.

While we commend the authorities of Pristina for
the steps taken to resolve the issues relating to the
minority communities, we urge them to further engage
in the fight against the crimes of aggression, killings
and desecration of cemeteries.

In the opinion of my delegation, the following
challenges should be especially emphasized. First is
the creation of the necessary social, political and
economic conditions to ensure a successful
reintegration of the displaced Serbs in Kosovo, which
would help guarantee lasting stability of the region.
Second is reconstruction of the cultural and religious
heritage sites, which would certainly have a positive
impact on the spiritual life of the Serb minorities in the
region. In that regard, the support and cooperation of
the countries of the region and of the international
community are essential in order to promote
rapprochement and reconciliation between the two
communities. Third and last is relaunching the
economy through creating jobs and improving the
living conditions of the population in Kosovo.

My delegation congratulates the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for its cooperation with the authorities in Pristina and
of Belgrade, despite certain reluctance over its
presence. We wish to recall that the Mission, which
was authorized by the Security Council, should have
the support of the international community to enable it
to play its role fully, in particular that of mediator in
the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade so as to
guarantee security and stability in the region.

We welcome the fact that the EULEX Mission is
fully operational, so it can undertake monitoring,
mentoring and advising activities in the area of the rule
of law. The results of its efforts have already been seen
in the areas of law enforcement, justice and customs.
We also welcome its cooperation with UNMIK in
handling war crimes cases, and we urge the parties and
all national and international actors to cooperate fully
with it in order to find solutions to the region's
remaining problems.

To conclude, Burkina Faso wishes to reaffirm its
recognition of the Republic of Kosovo and would urge
the parties to engage in dialogue so as to find a
mutually acceptable solution to their differences. We
also urge the international community, including the
countries of the subregion, to assist them in that step
towards restoring peace and stability. Finally, we
reiterate our full support for Mr. Zannier and for
UNMIK.

