Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): My delegation, Sir,
commends your stewardship of the Security Council
for the month of June and appreciates the convening of
this particular meeting on Sierra Leone to discuss the
latest report of the Secretary-General.

My delegation also wishes to commend your
predecessor, Ambassador Cunningham of the United
States, for a job very well done during the month of
May.

My delegation would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Oluyemi
Adeniji, for his comprehensive and brilliant briefing
this morning. We also welcome Lieutenant-General
Opande, who is here with Mr. Adeniji.

My delegation welcomes the tenth report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), noting its very candid,
comprehensive and balanced nature. We also note that
the message put forth by the Secretariat in the report is
very encouraging. We also wish to convey to the
Secretariat that the Sierra Leonean people sincerely
intend to make the best possible use of the current
unique opportunity created by the international
community's significant investment within Sierra
Leone.

The relaunching of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme in May
2001, after the Abuja review meeting between the
Government and the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF), has met with considerable success in that a
large quantity of arms and ammunition has been
deposited with UNAMSIL by the RUF rebel forces and
the Civil Defence Force (CDF) and that a sizeable
number of ex-combatants has also been demobilized.
We are especially elated over the release of child
soldiers and abductees so that their lives may be set
back on their proper courses.

However, I must inform the Council that the
reduction in the momentum of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme has
largely been due to the extreme lack of fiscal resources.
The inadequacy of accommodations to encamp the ex-
combatants in various districts within the country in
order for them to be appropriately demobilized is but
one of the many difficulties confronting the pace of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme.

My Government is currently in the process of
coming to grips with the magnitude of the problem of
reintegration, which, as noted in the Secretary-
General's report, is pivotal to the success of the entire
programme.

The Government has currently embarked on a
short-term reintegration programme for ex-combatants,
which should jump-start their respective absorption
into society. But it is imperative to further sensitize
those members of the RUF and the CDF to the fact that
reintegration support is not and will not be a long-term
measure. It must be strongly emphasized to them that
the temporary handouts are not meant to be a
continuous source of funding, as a measure of
dispelling their unrealistic assumptions.

In this vein, we require the commitment and
support of the international community to assist us to
secure adequate resources to enable the Government to
properly achieve this objective.

The World Bank Paris donor conference, held on
11 and 12 June, dampened my Government's
enthusiasm towards the international community's full-
fledged support for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme. However, we have not
lost hope and faith in the push towards concluding this
exercise, since the future of the overall peace process
hinges on the successful implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. The United Nations and, indeed, the
international community must not fail the Government
of Sierra Leone in this respect.

My Government is appreciative of the Secretary-
General's efforts to secure additional troops for the
build-up of UNAMSIL's military component, in
accordance with operative paragraph 2 of Security
Council resolution 1346 (2001) of 30 March 2001.
More importantly, we wish to pay tribute to the troop-
contributing countries for heeding the Secretary-
General's request.

We have taken due note of the fact that there are
almost 13,000 military personnel within UNAMSIL
and that the period of the third phase of operations is
due to commence shortly. However, the current
security of the State, which remains hampered by
capacity constraints, rests on the ability of UNAMSIL
to rapidly react and to enforce preventive measures
before any unforeseen disturbance.

Although we are now treading on the path to
peace, my delegation is of the conviction that the
authorized troop strength of 17,500 military personnel
should be met, especially when UNAMSIL will prepare
to embark on the fourth phase of operations leading up
to the elections.

