Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, we thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Mission in Colombia,
Mr. Jean Arnault, for his briefing and commend him
on his great contribution and that of the Mission to
the peace process in Colombia. We warmly recall our
visit to Colombia and appreciate his help in facilitating
that historic trip. My delegation would like to share the
following observations.

First, Kazakhstan welcomes the many positive
developments that have occurred in fulfilling the Peace
Agreement. We are pleased to know that another major
milestone has been achieved in the peace process when,
on 27 June, 100 per cent of the individual weapons
possessed by members of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) were surrendered, received and stored
by the Mission. We strongly commend the people of
Colombia for their courage and resolve to achieve peace
and stability in their own country. Their commitment to
the peace process is exemplary.

Secondly, we acknowledge the very timely mission
of the Security Council to Colombia in May, which
gave us the unique opportunity to witness at first-
hand the accomplishments made thus far, as well as the
challenges encountered in successfully implementing
the Peace Agreement. We were able to demonstrate the
unified solidarity of the international community with
the Government and the people of Colombia in their
efforts to restore peace, stability and security. Our
presence was therefore a positive affirmation and sign
of support for the determination of the Government
and the FARC-EP to the peace process that benefits
all Colombians.

Thirdly, despite the progress achieved, we are
concerned about the ongoing attacks on community
leaders, human rights defenders and FARC-EP
members and their families. The activities of non-State
armed groups, including the National Liberation Army,
is sufficient cause for alarm. The Government should
take every step possible to prevent such attacks in order
to avoid undermining public confidence. It is absolutely
essential to ensure security in all areas vacated by
the FARC-EP so as to prevent armed groups from
filling the vacuum. The long-term reintegration of the
members of the FARC-EP and the development of areas
affected by the conflict must become high priorities for
the Government.

We strongly support the Government of Colombia
in its resolve to tackle all of those issues on the ground.
However, we understand that it cannot undertake
that enormous task alone, and we therefore call
upon the international community to mobilize the
adequate resources.

Fourthly, in the meantime, it is important not to
lose the positive momentum achieved. We therefore
encourage the parties to redouble their efforts to
implement the Peace Agreement. We join previous
speakers in fully endorsing the Secretary-General's
recommendations towards the establishment of a
second United Nations mission in Colombia.

Finally, once again, we commend the continuing
efforts of the Colombian Government towards the
consolidation and implementation of the peace accord
and encourage it and the international community to
continue to work hard in order to overcome challenges
and facilitate and expedite the establishment of lasting
peace in Colombia.

