Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to begin
by expressing my delegation's appreciation to Argentina,
which holds the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of August, for organizing today's debate. I
thank the Secretary-General and representatives of the
regional organizations present here for their briefings.

Lithuania associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the European Union. In
addition, allow me to make the following remarks.

In recent years, the relationship between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in the field of peace and security has evolved in
terms of both ambition and scope. We welcome such
developments because, as noted by numerous speakers
before me, regional actors possess a unique local
knowledge, can intervene more promptly through
existing standby arrangements and mechanisms and
can ensure regional ownership of conflict resolution
and subsequent peacebuilding processes. Importantly,
the geographical proximity of their members and the
specific regional knowledge and experience of those
organizations can play an essential role in the early
identification ofpotential conflicts and thus in defusing
crises before they occur.

Based on our own experience in preventive
diplomacy, including Lithuania's chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), we encourage the United Nations and regional
and subregional actors to further explore and strengthen
the preventive and confidence-building dimensions of
cooperation.

No two crises or conflicts are identical. Therefore,
as noted in the 2009 non-paper entitled "A New
Partnership Agenda: Charting a New Horizon for
United Nations Peacekeeping", the political and
operational realities on the ground will continue to
demand flexible, case-specific and creative United
Nations partnerships with regional actors, building on
their comparative strengths, ensuring consistency and
complementarity of efforts, and avoiding duplications.

Nowhere has United Nations cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations evolved as much
as on the African continent, with the African Union
(AU), African subregional organizations, the European
Union (EU) and occasionally other players, such as the
International Organization of la Francophonie, taking
part.

Lithuania is proud to contribute to such multifaceted
efforts. Recently, our military advisers joined the EU
training mission for Malian soldiers in the region of
Koulikoro. Earlier this year, Lithuania deployed troops
in an anti-piracy mission off the coast of Somalia, a
country where the United Nations, the AU, and the EU
have joined forces with an aim of restoring peace and
stability to that long-suffering nation.

While welcoming the Council's continued dialogue
and consultations with regional organizations, as well
as joint actions on the ground, we would encourage an
enhanced focus on issues ofjustice and accountability;
tackling impunity for crimes against civilian
populations, including sexual violence in conflict;
and the effective implementation of Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security, and
children and armed conflict.

Regional and subregional organizations have a
vital role in stemming the illegal trade in small arms
and light weapons, which are responsible for countless
civilian victims and damaged lives. My delegation
would like to point out in particular that the recently
adopted Arms Trade Treaty expressly recognizes that
regional and subregional organizations can play a role in
providing implementation assistance through, inter alia,
stockpile management; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes; and developing model
legislation.

In the past 10 years, Lithuania provided assistance
to some 20 projects related to the destruction of
small arms, anti-personnel mines, cluster munitions
and unexploded ordnance, carried out by regional
organizations. Let me also stress the importance of
subregional, regional and international cooperation
in the field of non-proliferation. With that in mind,
Lithuania organized last year a regional seminar on the
implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004). This year the
Lithuanian chairmanship held a thematic OSCE forum
on security cooperation dialogue, with the participation
of the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), Ambassador Kim Sook.

In order to achieve durable peace, it is essential that
the United Nations and its regional partners continue
to take a long-term View aimed at breaking the pattern
of relapse into conflict, which still plagues individual
States. In that context, we welcome consistent
involvement by regional and subregional actors in, and
their ownership of, institution- and capacity-building,
implementing the rule of law and strengthening good
governance and human rights protection mechanisms.

In conclusion, let me note that cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations is not
an end in itself. It must lead to tangible improvements
and prospects for a safe and dignified life for those
suffering from violence and conflict. I am pleased
that presidential statement S/PRST/2013/12 reaffirms
the common determination of the United Nations and
regional actors to work to that effect.

