Mr. Baum (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for having convened this open debate
on small arms.

Switzerland welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General on small arms and the recommendations
contained therein. We appreciate the holistic approach
of the report and agree with its analysis, in particular
on the impact of armed violence on human security,
human rights and social and economic development.

The United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects is
key. Switzerland will continue to support its full and
comprehensive implementation. The upcoming
Biennial Meeting of States will give us the opportunity
to review the achieved results and to further enhance
our implementation efforts. In that context, particular
attention should be given to the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons.

Despite the efforts undertaken to date, the
problem of the illicit trade in light weapons remains
acute. We need to continue to act in light of experience
on the ground.

In recent years, intensive research has been
undertaken into the links between security and
development. The findings confirm, as the Secretary-
General's report notes, that armed violence represents a
major constraint to achieving the Millennium
Development Goals because it diverts means and
resources.

Convinced of the importance of addressing the
problems arising from armed violence in a broader
development approach, Switzerland, together with
other like-minded countries, launched in June 2006 the
Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence and

Development. Open to all States, the initiative has
already been endorsed by more than 70 countries,
which have committed themselves to achieving
measurable reductions in the global burden of armed
violence, as well as tangible improvements in human
security, by 2015. In view of today's debate, the
Geneva Declaration, as well as a short briefing note,
were distributed in advance to all Member States.

Switzerland is pleased to note that the Secretary-
General recommends in his report the identification of
key indicators for the area of small arms. Such
indicators should serve as a basis for setting the
measurable goals needed to achieve progress in the
fight against the scourge of armed violence. In
particular, we share the Secretary-General's View that
developing measurable goals on armed violence
towards 2015 will offer the opportunity to integrate
security-related themes in the follow-up to the
Millennium Development Goals.

In that respect, I would like to mention that the
core group of States promoting the implementation of
the Geneva Declaration - which is coordinated by
Switzerland - is developing a measurability
methodology in the field of armed violence. The core
group has also initiated discussions in view of
developing security for development goals. We hope
that this work will support the United Nations efforts.

