Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me begin by thanking
Ambassador Inzko for his comprehensive and
informative briefing. Germany aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered later by the observer of the
European Union (EU).

I should like to focus my remarks on three key
points today.

First, and most importantly for the Security Council,
the security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
remained calm and stable. Since its beginning in 2004,
the EU-led force (EUFOR) Operation Althea has not
had to intervene a single time to restore peace. Most
recently, the fifth local elections since the end of the
war were carried out in a calm environment.

Authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina have thus
proved capable of dealing with threats to the safe and
secure environment. Based on that assessment, the
reconfiguration of Operation Althea was completed by
1 September. With a reduced number of forces based
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Althea is successfully
focusing on capacity-building and training.

My second point concerns the current political
situation in Bosnia. Ambassador Inzko's briefing and
the latest EU progress report provide a relatively grim
analysis of the state of reforms in the country. It is true
that there is a lack of a shared Vision for the overall
direction of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the part of the
political leadership, and that is worrisome. Yet we have
also witnessed important signs ofprogress, particularly
at the beginning of this year, such as the establishment
of a new State-level Government, agreement on a
national budget, and new laws on State aid and a census.

We have made clear to the political leaders in
Bosnia and Herzegovina that they should place the
interests of their country as a whole and the well-being
of their citizens at the heart of their efforts by moving
Bosnia and Herzegovina steadfastly forward on the
reform track towards EU accession.

An important step in that regard was the agreement
between the political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the European Union on a road map that identifies
key requirements for Bosnia and Herzegovina's path
towards Europe.

The most imminent of the challenges ahead
remains the long overdue implementation of the Sejdie-
Finci ruling by the European Court of Human Rights,
on the right of minorities to be elected to the Bosnian

Presidency and the second chamber of Parliament.
The EU has both the political will and the necessary
instruments to best support Bosnia and Herzegovina
in that endeavour. The increased EU presence in
the field and the strengthened mandate of the EU
Special Representative reaffirm the European Union's
commitment towards Bosnia and Herzegovina.

That leads me to my third and last point, namely, the
international community's engagement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the future. Germany wholeheartedly
welcomes the contribution to peace and stability made
by the High Representative and his Office over the
past 17 years. After the war ended in 1995, the close
monitoring and executive control of the international
community were undoubtedly necessary.

Today, however, such policies serve instead as an
impediment to the accountability of political leaders
to their electorate and to their ownership of the reform
process. Instead of sticking to the institutional set-up of
the past, we need to focus on concepts and instruments
that can initiate forward-looking developments.
With the European Union perspective of Bosnia and
Herzegovina finally occupying centre stage, we can
afford to relieve the Office of the High Representative
of tasks that are better fulfilled by the European Union
and its representatives on the ground. We therefore
welcome the decision to suspend international
supervision in the Brcko District, where the EU has
instead opened a new regional office. Further progress
in that regard is needed.

Allow me to remind Member States of an issue that
is still unresolved - the question of immunity. In order
to safeguard the footprint of the Office of the High
Representative in stabilizing Bosnia and Herzegovina,
a sustainable and comprehensive answer to the question
ofthe immunity ofpresent and former staff ofthe Office
of the High Representative from legal proceedings has
to be found. We hope for early progress on that issue and
invite members to join us in the necessary discussions.

