Mr. Shalgham (Libya): First of all, on behalf of
the Arab Group, I would like to express our great
thanks for the convening of this debate on the Middle
East. Also on behalf of the Arab Group, which it is my
honour to chair this month, I would like to warmly
thank all members of the Council for their ongoing
interest in events in the Middle East, and in particular
the cause of the Palestinian people and the Israeli
occupation of their territory.

The suffering of the Palestinian people under the
yoke of the Israeli occupation requires no further
explanation or discussion. The international media
continually transmit images, sounds, figures and facts
that bear witness to the actions of the Israeli occupying
army and settlers in their repression of unarmed
Palestinian citizens. They confiscate land, disperse
families, establish settlements and commit acts of
physical violence against Palestinian citizens.

I will not go on at length about the number of
Israeli settlements and settlers in the West Bank or
about the rise in violence committed by Israeli settlers
against Palestinians, because a few days ago, before
this body, Ms. Valerie Amos, Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, took the floor to
describe very forcefully Israeli practices in the West
Bank. Those facts and figures are undeniable proof that
Israel does not want peace and that all its proposals on
negotiations are simply stalling tactics intended to
allow them to annex Palestinian lands and to swallow
them up fully. Israel's expansionist policies are
systematic. Their aim is to Judaize the Palestinian
territories, and we all know that.

The Council does not see what is happening on
the ground. The Council does not see settlers taking
over Palestinian land or restrictions being imposed
upon Palestinian citizens, including Mahmoud Abbas,
President of the Palestinian Authority, and the Speaker
of the Palestinian Legislative Council. But the question
we must ask is whether the Council does not see, does
not want to see, or does not want to do anything. Does
anyone in this Council approve of the practices of the
occupying Power, which contravene all international
covenants and instruments? The prevailing suspicious
silence could even be construed as approval of the
crimes that Israel is committing in full view of the
world. The Council needs to assume its responsibilities
and to take strict practical measures to put an end to
these crimes.

The Arab world is experiencing a historic
revolution that marks a decisive turning point in the
life of our peoples. It is a revolution of freedom,
democracy and progress against tyranny and
authoritarianism. This revolution will restore to the
Arabs, who seized their liberty as free people, the right
and the power to make decisions. Now we are able to
usher in true and bold peace. Despots are incompetent;
they are not capable of building peace. Despots yield
only to occupation. They close their eyes to reality and
attack their own people, but the revolution of liberty
embodies in the Arab Spring is democratic and will
pave the way and open the door to liberation. It will
allow us to embark on a path of peace.

Israel, its people and its Government must realize
that free Arabs, who have put an end to oppression and
overthrown despots, are not going to accept that their
brothers in Palestine should continue to suffer the
pangs of oppression, persecution and despotism under
the yoke of Israeli occupation. Israel must therefore
adopt a peace policy. It must reject the annexation of
Palestinian territory and the establishment of
settlements; it must give up the Judaization of
Jerusalem and racist extremism, because those will not
bring us peace; they will only incite to further hostility
and confrontation and lead to political and military
escalation, which would be very prejudicial to world
peace and the global economy.

Humankind seeks to overcome its economic
obstacles to achieve greater cooperation and prosperity,
and people today have made enormous progress in
science and communications. Humankind realizes the
dangers of confrontation, wars and destruction.
Humankind is capable of dealing with problems
through dialogue and compromise because there is no
victory in war. Profiteers may try to attain greater
benefits, but in the Arab Spring of liberty people want
peace, freedoms and progress. They believe in
coexistence on the basis of justice, respect for human
rights and the rejection of oppression, occupation and
authoritarianism. We are prepared to work with the
Security Council to bring about the goals of the United
Nations for the sake of the maintenance of
international peace and security.

