Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura (Brazil): I wish to
thank Special Representative Jessen-Petersen for
providing us thorough information on the current
situation in Kosovo. My delegation continues to
appreciate and support his work and that of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We consider that his balanced technical
assessment of progress in standards implementation
offers an accurate picture of progress made and the
challenges that remain for the future.

There seems to be little doubt that, in spite of
encouraging movements by the Provisional
Institutions, standards implementation is our toughest
challenge in Kosovo. The report of the Secretary-
General before us today refers to tangible progress that
has to be made. We note, in this regard, achievements
in the functioning of democratic institutions, such as
the holding of fair and free elections and the
establishment of a coalition government. We also note
the improvement of the Kosovo Police Service, which
is now fully multi-ethnic. Other noteworthy
achievements are the establishment of ministries for
communication, communities, returns and migration,
and the approval of legislation for economic reform.

In spite of the good progress made over the
reporting period, none of the eight standards which
were laid out for Kosovo by the international
community has been completely fulfilled. Most
refugees and displaced persons are still afraid to return
to their devastated towns and villages. Limited actions,
such as the reconstruction of some houses financed
through the Kosovo consolidated budget, have not been
effective in addressing persistent problems. Fear that
last year's ethnic violence could be re-ignited prevents
minorities from feeling safe in a homeland that is also
their own. Kosovo authorities have already pledged
that such violence will not be repeated, but they must
work harder and in concrete terms towards rebuilding
the confidence that has eroded since last March.

In fact, it is clear that the situation of minorities
continues to be extremely precarious. Their daily lives
are still hampered by restrictions of movement. Their
basic rights are not respected. Access to public services
and economic opportunities is still denied them.
Moreover, sporadic manifestations of hatred against
them show that ethnic rivalries continue to simmer. In
that context, we can understand why the majority of
Kosovo Serbs regard the standard related to the rule of
law as the most important one.

Although we recognize the steps that have been
taken towards democratic reform, we believe that
Kosovo's authorities should do more to ensure
effective participation in governmental structures by
minorities, and especially by the Serb minority.
Kosovo Serbs must also do their part by engaging
actively in the government and in the political process.

Although calm, the security situation remains a
source of concern. Mr. Jessen-Petersen warns that the
state of things in Kosovo is still fragile and that a
period of increased risk of incidents lies ahead. The
Albanian majority must have realistic expectations
regarding the decision concerning the status issue;
otherwise frustration can lead to resentment and
turmoil, which would in fact be detrimental to the
fulfilment of their own aspirations.

We once again urge the Provisional Institutions to
continue to address as their highest priority the issue of
the implementation of standards as a whole. Failure to
do so will obstruct the beginning of the process to
determine the final status of the province. A joint effort
is needed by the international community and the
Kosovo authorities to foster progress in the area of
standards. In that regard, we support the efforts of the
Contact Group to facilitate dialogue between the
parties. We hope that the next meeting of the Group,
which is scheduled to take place this week, can foster
that dialogue.

A more positive contribution by Belgrade is also
needed. The conditions established for the resumption
of dialogue should be reviewed in the light of the
willingness shown by the Kosovo government to
engage in constructive talks. The authorities in Serbia
and Montenegro are about to resume dialogue with
Pristina. We also encourage them to avoid sending
mixed signals that have thus far prevented the Serb
minority from participating in all aspects of the
process.

Brazil remains especially concerned about the
human dimension of the situation in Kosovo.
Uncertainty regarding the political future continues to
mar prospects for badly needed economic recovery. In
that regard, we once again stress the urgency of
tackling unemployment, rural backwardness, gender
disparity and deficits in the education, health and
social welfare systems.

Resolution 1244 (1999) and the "standards before
status" policy constitute a viable path to peace and
reconciliation. In a year in which so many important
decisions must be taken, unwavering political will and
frank dialogue are needed more than ever to lead the
province safely down the path towards a multi-ethnic,
democratic and prosperous Kosovo that is at peace
with its neighbours and that makes a contribution to
stability in the Balkan region.

