Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Special thanks
are owed to Mr. Hedi Annabi for updating us on the
elections. We also appreciate his briefing us on the
post-election scenario.

We are pleased that the long-awaited elections for
forming a provisional self-government in Kosovo have
taken place on schedule. We are also happy that this
has happened without any untoward incident.
Politically motivated violence in the run-up to the
elections was minimal, as were incidents on election
day. These are indications of the success of the difficult
task that was given the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
applaud them, as we do Mr. Hans Haekkerup, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

The minority communities in Kosovo have
considered these elections important. For that reason
they turned out in significant numbers for the voting.
The participation of Kosovar Serbs was an expression
of the importance they attached to the mandate of the
provisional self-government. This is a significant
advance on the earlier boycott by the Serbs of the
municipal elections last year. There is an obvious
realization on the part of the minority communities that
a democratically elected, pluralist government is the
only way to secure a better future. We see this as a
welcome development. UNMIK has undertaken
laudable efforts in reaching out to Kosovo Serbs,
particularly those living outside Kosovo. They raised
awareness among them of the electoral system and the
importance of ethnic representation in the new
Assembly, and have encouraged their participation in
both the registration process and the elections
themselves. UNMIK has also worked to demonstrate to
the Kosovo minority communities the benefits to be
derived through engagement in community life and in
the electoral process. Obviously, these endeavours have
paid off- a fact reflected in the Serb participation.

This is a major milestone for Kosovo in its march
towards peace. The democratic process began with the
holding of municipal elections last year. A
representative government with broad participation of
all ethnic communities and based on greater tolerance
and mutual accommodation of different ethnic entities
is the only option for a peaceful future in Kosovo.
UNMIK took a number of important steps to ensure
security in the pre-election phase. These measures will
continue to be important in the post-election period as
well. Some time will be needed for a stable
institutional structure to emerge. It is important that
vigilance be maintained to avoid violence and to allow
the structure to take firm root.

A major responsibility devolves on the
community leaders in Kosovo, particularly on those
from the major ethnic communities, to forcefully voice
their support for the process and to refrain from any
kind of violence. A number of difficulties still lie in
their path. These can be resolved only through a
constructive engagement of all ethnic communities in a
way that protects the interests of all. The guidelines
established by resolution 1244 (1999) should be
foremost in these inter-communal dialogues. This is an
important point we wish to flag.

The Kosovar political leadership should bear in
mind that peace in Kosovo, as well as in the greater
region, hinges upon tolerance and the mutual
accommodation of different ethnic entities. Despite
some progress in this regard, mistrust is still
widespread and ethnically-targeted violence still active.

We would encourage UNMIK and the Kosovar
leadership to support the civil society organizations,
including women and non-governmental organizations,
in creating what we seek: a state of harmony and
diversity. The only practical way to go is to
significantly improve the environment so that all
communities feel safe and secure. This will lay the
foundation of a truly multi-ethnic Kosovo and help
build a structure of peace and stability in a society that
has suffered much and long.

