Mr. Ngoga (Rwanda): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
address the Security Council on the important issue of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR). We would like to reiterate to the ICTR the full
support and cooperation of the Government of Rwanda
as the Tribunal endeavours to implement the
completion strategy.

My delegation expresses its thanks to Judge
Byron and Prosecutor Jallow for their respective
presentations. We are also grateful for the valuable
work that is being done by the entire staff of the ICTR.
The people of Rwanda appreciate their contribution to
our reconciliation process.

We note and commend the efforts being made by
the ICTR to implement resolutions 1503 (2003) and
1534 (2004), which relate to the completion of the
ICTR and ICTY mandates. We also highly commend
the attention and due diligence that the Security
Council continues to exercise in its bid to ensure the
successful and smooth completion of the ICTR's
mandate.

The crimes falling under the ICTR's mandate
were committed in Rwanda, mostly by Rwandans and
against fellow Rwandans. That makes Rwanda the
most responsible and concerned State in the pursuit of
justice for those crimes. It is in that regard that Rwanda
considers it imperative that it participate fully in the
determination of matters pertaining to the ICTR, in
particular as regards the completion process. We have
continued to improve our institutional mechanisms for
cooperation with the ICTR to keep pace with the
completion process and the associated cooperation
challenges. We are happy to inform the Council that, to
date, we have been able to handle all the requests made
by the various organs of the Tribunal. I note the
acknowledgement in the President's briefing regarding
the situation of cooperation.

In its resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004),
the Security Council directed the two Tribunals to wind
up their activities within specified deadlines. The
resolutions further directed that middle- and lower-
ranking cases be transferred to national jurisdictions,
including that of Rwanda. As a matter of State
responsibility, Rwanda began close consultations with
the Tribunal and began to prepare the ground to receive
cases and conduct trials in some of the cases that may
be transferred from the ICTR.

A comprehensive piece of legislation was passed
in March 2006 to govern the transfer of cases to
Rwanda from the ICTR and from any other State. The
law provides sufficient guarantees for fair trials. It is
specifically based on the ICTR's Rules of Procedure
and Evidence, as well as other best practices
recognized and applied by the ICTR. The law allows
the ICTR to monitor trials and recognizes the ICTR's
primacy and right to call back a transferred case.

Modern courtrooms have been prepared. For the
past two years, a joint programme has been in place
between the ICTR and Rwanda. Under the joint
programme, we have conducted familiarization and
interaction visits between the ICTR and Rwanda,
coupled with workshops for judges, prosecutors,
members of the bar association and other staff
members. A modern holding cell has been constructed
in Kigali to accommodate ICTR detainees who would
be appearing in Court.

Similarly, an agreement for the transfer of ICTR
convicts to Rwanda was signed on 4 March 2008. The
agreement is founded on the requirement provided for
under the ICTR Statute to have sentences served in
Rwanda. We have a modern correctional facility that is
intended to accommodate ICTR convicts sent from
Arusha, as well as ICTR accused who may be
convicted.

The Tribunal's Prosecutor and Registrar have
both conducted a series of visits to Rwanda to verify
Rwanda's readiness and willingness to receive the
ICTR's outstanding workload. They have expressed
their satisfaction with the level of compliance with
internationally recognized standards and norms
attained by Rwanda's judicial institutions. We were
able to make all those preparations with the support of
numerous members of the Security Council. That is
due to the fact that Rwanda has a shared interest with
the Council in ensuring a smooth winding-up process
for the ICTR.

The fugitives still at large are not limited to the
13 appearing on the ICTR's list. We have repeatedly
appealed to the Security Council to see to it that the
conclusion of the ICTR's mandate does not become an
amnesty for those not included on the list, which is
very condensed. My Government appreciates the
efforts of some Governments that have apprehended
some of the fugitives. The proceedings for their
extradition to Rwanda are under way, largely as a result
of the judicial sector reforms and capacity development
taking place in Rwanda and that I have previously
described.

Rwanda's commitment to comply with
international standards of fair trial and judicial
independence is unquestionable, as it is central to my
Government's policy founded on our continued fight
against impunity. We have made significant progress in
that important aspect. The progress made meets the
requirements inherent in the ICTR's completion
process.

Since May 2007, the ICTR Prosecutor has filed
five requests for the transfer of cases to Rwanda for
trial. The five referral applications are pending before
different Chambers of the Tribunal. Rwanda has
discharged its duty to file submissions before the
respective referral Chambers, demonstrating the
willingness and ability to handle those cases.

In spite of all those efforts, my country is
seriously concerned about the direction that the issue
of the referral of cases is taking. We are particularly
concerned that that process has the potential to
undermine the trust and reputation we have
painstakingly built. It is that trust and confidence that
has led certain Governments, including some members
of the Security Council, to apprehend some of the
fugitives found on their respective territories.

Our achievements in judicial reform are not
intangible; they are very visible. Our participation in
the completion process is a response to a call, not a
public relations exercise. We must be judged on the
basis of our conduct and policies, not on the basis of
presumed future misconduct. We expect and hope to
inherit from the ICTR a legacy that complements our
efforts. We expect a legacy that supports the growth of
our institutions.

The ICTR's decisions, including those being
made by judges, are supposed to be specific to the
cases and suspects, and not to be used to undermine an
entire national system. We note with dismay that the
recent decision in the Munyakazi case is inconsistent
with previous reports and the present report of the
Tribunal as regards the level of cooperation between
my Government and the Tribunal. Those reports
unequivocally state that Rwanda cooperates fully with
the ICTR. It is more disappointing to note that the
ICTR judges rely solely on reports by
non-governmental organizations to justify their
decision, in total disregard of Rwanda's views on those
reports. They have misinterpreted the Rwandan
Government's rejection of pronouncements by foreign
national jurisdictions, despite the fact that this is a
sovereign right.

In 1999 Rwanda protested conduct of the court in
the Barayagwiza case. Barayagwiza was eventually
convicted by the ICTR through to the appellate level.
The ICTR has since handed down five acquittals, and
that has not raised any protest from Rwanda. The
Tribunal chose to refer to the 1999 incident and kept
silent on those subsequent acquittals in order to portray
Rwanda as a country that is opposed to acquittals. We
view this as a serious misinterpretation - and one that
has serious consequences. We are dismayed by the
ruling, which portrays our country as one that cannot
be trusted. This is likely to create grounds for fugitives
at large to roam around in different countries with
impunity. We are informed, however, that the ICTR
Prosecutor intends to appeal this decision, and we will
continue to be interested in developments.

Regarding the Prosecutor's decision on the
Kabgayi case, we reiterate our commitment and
readiness to take it through the judicial process in strict
observance of the norms and principles of a fair trial
and in observance of the commitment we have made to
the Prosecutor.

Rwanda is committed to upholding justice and
ending impunity. It is therefore incumbent upon the
Security Council to establish support mechanisms to
help Rwanda in its efforts. Under such mechanisms,
issues related to post-ICTR residual functions could be
addressed as well.

At this crucial juncture, Rwanda still believes that
the major interest, shared with the Security Council, is
to find an amicable conclusion of the ad hoc mandate
of the Tribunal. In this period we need a more
sustainable and long-term mechanism between United
Nations Member States and the Government of
Rwanda, under which the key issues - particularly the
transfer and trial of all remaining ICTR cases, the
pursuit of fugitives at large, the monitoring of the
serving of sentences and the management of archives
- can be addressed. We need a mechanism to ensure
that the set goals do not shift gradually. We need to
guard against endless faits accomplis. It is through
such a mechanism that we can have a smooth and
effective completion process.

As I pointed out earlier, in March of this year
Rwanda signed an agreement on service of sentence.
We have completed all the arrangements for having all
of the convicts sent to Rwanda to serve their sentence.
We can only expect the ICTR to smoothly complete the
remaining part of this agreement.

The issue of the transfer of archives to Rwanda
remains pending; consultations have been going on
with the team designated to study and make
recommendations on the matter. We reiterate our desire
and readiness to take full custody of the archives.
Given that this is a crucial undertaking, the earlier
formal discussions can begin the better.

