Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, we wish like other countries to convey our
condolences to the Republic of Tunisia on the passing of its
former President.

We also wish to congratulate the delegation of
Bangladesh for its excellent work last month in the
presidency of the Council.

We thank the Secretariat for its briefing and the
Ambassador of Argentina for his report on the work of the
sanctions Committee.

We are pleased to see the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Canada, Mr. Lloyd Axworthy, presiding over our
meeting today.

The Chinese delegation wishes to express its deep
regret and disappointment over the continuing conflict in
Afghanistan. We believe that the current situation there is
very precarious. The Taliban and the United Front are
expanding their forces in the North in preparation for war
and sporadic fighting continues in some areas. Now that
spring is here, if the factions in Afghanistan are unable to
resume negotiations soon, that country will very likely be
witness to a large-scale military offensive. We therefore
thank the Canadian Minister for Foreign Affairs for
convening this open briefing today, which was clearly
very necessary and timely.
Following decades of war, the people of Afghanistan
long for an end to the fighting and instability and for a
peaceful life. Military means can never offer a solution to
their problems. Only the establishment of a broad-based
representative Government can promote peace in
Afghanistan.

The Chinese delegation greatly appreciates the
diplomatic efforts made by the newly appointed Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Vendrell,
since assuming his post and supports the good offices of
the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan and
other actors towards a political settlement of the question
of Afghanistan. We believe that the international
community should work hard to break the vicious yearly
cycle in which the Afghan factions negotiate in winter
and fight in the spring. We urge all sides concerned,
including the "six plus two" group and especially the
neighbouring countries with strong influence over the
factions in Afghanistan, to work towards that end. China
will actively participate in the peace efforts of the "six
plus two" group.

Illicit drug production in and trafficking of drugs
from Afghanistan have caused serious damage to many
countries. As has happened in other areas, drugs have
become a means of maintaining warfare. This problem
should be a matter of great concern to the international
community. We highly appreciate the efforts made by the
United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime
Prevention.

We are deeply disturbed by the deterioration in the
humanitarian and human rights situations in Afghanistan.
Long-term war has rendered Afghanistan one of the most
tragic areas of the world. Most unacceptable is that
civilians have become targets of attack. Afghan people,
especially women and girls, have experienced
exceptionally serious difficulties. We strongly urge all the
factions in Afghanistan to implement their commitments
to effectively ensure the security and safety of the United
Nations and international assistance personnel so that the
international community can provide humanitarian
assistance to the abandoned people of Afghanistan.

