Mr. Fowler (Canada): I would like to begin by
thanking Mr. Annabi for yet another excellent and
comprehensive briefing and by extending Canada's
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and all the
men and women of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET), as well as
those involved in the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in both East and West Timor. As a result of their
coordinated efforts to date, as well as the efforts of the
East Timorese themselves, East Timor has made truly
remarkable progress.

We are now beginning to move beyond the most
pressing security challenges to the challenges of post-
conflict reintegration, reconstruction and development.
However, the plight of those still in West Timor remains
a source of serious concern to us. There are persistent
reports that pro-autonomy militias continue to intimidate
refugees in camps in West Timor and are hindering their
return, including through the use of an active
disinformation campaign. We therefore urge the
Government of Indonesia to take further steps to address
the situation so as to ensure that all displaced persons
who wish to return can do so in safety and in dignity.

In this regard we welcome the agreement reached
between Mr. de Mello and the Indonesian Minister of
Defence to establish a joint working group. We anticipate
that this group will move urgently to address the concerns
of the displaced and facilitate their early return and
resettlement.

Mr. de Mello's efforts to streamline UNTAET and
to improve coordination and consultation with the people
of East Timor are especially welcome. We are pleased to
note that the early tension which marked UNTAET's
relationship with the National Council for East Timorese
Resistance (CNRT) appears to have been resolved. The
establishment of the National Consultative Commission
should help to engage the East Timorese more fully in the
process of transition and administration and, of course,
will help to foster indigenous capacity for self-
governance.

 

We understand that, while plans have not yet been
finalized, the transition from INTERFET to UNTAET
should begin in mid-January 2000 and should end by 28
February. As we have stated repeatedly, this mission could
have been and should have been a United Nations
peacekeeping operation from the beginning, and I am
pleased therefore that our Canadian soldiers will wear blue
helmets before they leave at the end of March.

Once established, a peacekeeping operation
commanded and funded by the United Nations will increase
the regional legitimacy of the force and will attract greater
Asian participation. It will also relieve the financial burden
assumed by those that have contributed to INTERFET.
Sharing such a burden among the wider international
community is the essence of our collective security
arrangements, which we believe underpin this Organization.

I do not know whether other members of the Council
will be fully aware of the extent of the enormous financial
contribution which the Government and the people of
Australia have made, on behalf of us all, to this mission, or
of the fact that, in order to pay for the operation, a special
and significant tax has been levied on all Australians above
a certain income level. While this extraordinary generosity
on the part of the Government and the people of Australia
is deeply appreciated - and it is certainly admired by my
Government - this is not the way the United Nations was
supposed to operate.

The establishment of a rapidly deployable headquarters
would, of course, have contributed enormously to the goal
of deploying this and other United Nations peacekeeping
missions more quickly and more effectively; we regret
extremely that progress on this front within the Secretariat
has been so very marginal.

Canada fully supports the efforts of the international
commission of inquiry, as well as those of the Indonesian
National Commission on Human Rights. Anyone found
responsible for human rights violations should, of course,
be brought to justice. We understand that the commission
of inquiry should be submitting its report soon, and we
hope that the commission of inquiry and the Indonesian
National Commission on Human Rights will continue to
cooperate and to share information in order to increase the
effectiveness and credibility of their respective findings.

