Mr. Wittig (Germany): Mr. President, as you said,
I have the pleasure of making various statements
today - three, as a matter of fact. First, I will speak on
behalf of the three subsidiary bodies. Then,
immediately afterward, I will speak on behalf of the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. Finally, later in the
debate, I will make a statement in my national capacity.

On behalf of the Chairs of the three subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004), I have the honour to update the
Security Council on the continuing cooperation among
the three Committees and their expert groups, as
requested by the Council in its resolutions 1989 (2011),
1963 (2010) and 1977 (2011), and earlier resolutions.
For the sake of brevity, I will focus my remarks
on the most relevant strategic aspects. A more detailed
version of this statement will be distributed today in
hard copy and made available on the website of the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011).

Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction continue to pose a serious threat to
international peace and security. It remains important to
maintain close cooperation and effective coordination
between the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) as well
as between their respective groups of experts. The
three Committees continue to attach great importance
to the coordination and cooperation between the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), the Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee and the group of experts assisting
the 1540 Committee.

The Committees welcome the continuing efforts
of the expert groups to cooperate on outreach activities
and country visits within their respective mandates,
enhance cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations, increase exchange of
information, participate in joint meetings and maintain
reciprocal representation as appropriate. I am pleased
to report that cooperation among the expert groups has
increased in some areas. The details are outlined in the
hard copy of this statement to be distributed.

At the same time, the Committees see room for
further improvement regarding cooperation and cost-
effectiveness. The expert groups should further
enhance their cooperation in line with their respective
mandates, in particular with regard to their outreach
activities.

The Committees note with concern that terrorist
groups continue to seek to exploit gaps in the capacity
of Member States to fully implement counter-terrorism
measures. The Committees' groups of experts can play
a pertinent role in advising States that seek assistance
in building counter-terrorism capacity.

The Committees welcome all efforts aimed at
enhancing the visibility of United Nations counter-
terrorism activities and ensuring greater cooperation,
coordination and coherence among United Nations
entities with a View to promoting transparency and
avoiding duplication. The Committees take note of the
12-33504
recommendation of the Secretary-General for Member
States to consider appointing a United Nations counter-
terrorism coordinator, and, in that regard, look forward
to the discussions on that initiative in connection with
their deliberations on further improving cross-
institutional coherence of United Nations counter-
terrorism efforts.

Let me now come to my second statement in my
capacity as Chair of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee.
In today's briefing, as Chair of that Committee, I
would like to provide an update on the activities and
achievements of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities since
my last briefing in November 2011 (see S/PV.6658). In
my remarks I shall focus on what the Committee
considers to be the most important elements: first, the
evolving nature of the threat posed by Al-Qaida;
secondly, enhancing implementation of the sanctions
measures; and thirdly, fair and clear procedures. A
more detailed version of this statement will be
distributed in a hard copy today and made available on
the Committee's website.

My first point concerns the nature of the threat
posed by Al-Qaida. Al-Qaida and its associates
continue to pose a threat to international peace and
security, and this threat continues to evolve. As such, it
is important for Member States to continue making
every effort to fully implement the measures outlined
in resolution 1989 (2011).

At the same time, the Committee remains
committed to ensuring that the Al-Qaida sanctions list
is dynamic and responsive to the changing nature of
the threat. The Committee's decisions related to listing
and de-listing are based on requests by Member States.
In this context, the Committee recalls that it remains
the responsibility of all Member States to ensure that
the list of targeted individuals and entities accurately
reflects the evolving threat posed by Al-Qaida through
the submission of listing and de-listing requests in a
timely manner.

My second point relates to implementation. The
Committee recalls that counter-terrorism measures
adopted under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter are binding on all Member States. The
Committee notes with concern that Al-Qaida and
associated terrorist groups seek to exploit gaps in the
capacity of Member States to fully implement counter-
terrorist measures as requested by the Security Council.
The Committee continues to explore new ways to
collaborate with Member States to support
implementation efforts.

The Committee realizes that the prompt, effective
implementation of sanctions measures is best achieved
when the sanctions list is accurate, up to date and user-
friendly. First, a new format for the list, designed to
facilitate harmonization across all Security Council
sanctions regimes, has been approved by the
Committee. Secondly, the Committee is conducting
reviews outlined in resolution 1989 (2011) in a
streamlined fashion, in particular regarding reportedly
deceased individuals and defunct entities or entries that
lack sufficient identifiers.

The Committee relies on the cooperation of
Member States for the successful conduct of these
reviews. The Committee will continue to make every
effort to devise review modalities that will allow for an
effective and credible review process without
overburdening Member States. The Committee has
held preliminary discussions on the recommendations
submitted by the Monitoring Team in its twelfth report.
The Committee will transmit the Monitoring Team's
report to the Security Council once it has concluded its
considerations, and will provide the Council with the
Committee's position on the recommendations. The
Monitoring Team continues to support the work of the
Committee, including through outreach activities and
by engaging with individual States and participating in
conferences. In doing so, the Team promotes the work
of the Committee to a wider audience and encourages
implementation.

My third point concerns fair and clear procedures.
The Security Council's decision to establish and
enhance the Office of the Ombudsperson continues to
be a milestone in the field of targeted sanctions. The
Ombudsperson is mandated to assist the Committee in
safeguarding the rights of listed individuals in a fair,
independent and effective process. The Committee has
successfully established a transparent practice for
processing recommendations on de-listing petitions
submitted through the Ombudsperson's Office. In
15 cases that were submitted through the Office of the
Ombudsperson, the Committee has completed its
consideration, resulting in 13 individuals and
23 entities being removed from the list. Currently, four
comprehensive reports of the Ombudsperson are under
consideration by the Committee. For further details, I
advise members to consult the website of the
Ombudsperson.

In resolution 1989 (2011), the Security Council
has set out clear guidance for this process, including
the timelines for the Ombudsperson and the Committee.
The Committee remains committed to observing these,
since they are considered to be a fundamental element
of fairness. For the same reason, the Committee
attaches great importance to providing a rationale for
its decisions. In conclusion, the Ombudsperson process
is producing tangible results by further enhancing fair
and clear procedures.

As Chair and on behalf of the Committee, I
would like to thank all Member States for their
continued willingness to cooperate constructively with
the Committee, its Monitoring Team and the Office of
the Ombudsperson. The Committee has brought many
improvements to fruition in recent years, and remains
committed to building upon these advancements.

