Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Austria for the opportunity it has given us
to address once more in this open debate format the
matter of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
France supports the statement to be made by the
representative of Sweden, who will speak on behalf of
the European Union.

As we are celebrating the sixtieth anniversary of
the Geneva Conventions and the tenth anniversary of
the first resolution on the protection of civilians
(resolution 1265 (1999)) , I wish to reaffirm France's
commitment in this field. The respect for international
humanitarian law is non-negotiable. All parties to an
armed conflict - States and non-State groups alike -
must respect this law. Human rights must be ensured,
whether we are talking about the Sudan, Gaza, Sri
Lanka or even, more recently, in Guinea. The growing
likelihood of conflicts occurring in densely populated
areas and against adversaries who are not wearing
uniforms raises additional issues with regard to the
implementation of the Geneva Conventions. That is a
matter that merits the attention of the international
community.

I should like to confine my statement to two
issues, namely, first, peacekeeping operations and,
secondly, combating impunity.
Ensuring the protection of civilians, which is part
of peacekeeping operations, is not limited to carrying
out military tasks to protect against immediate threats
of physical violence. It also encompasses greater and
more complex responsibilities and tasks. It entails the
development of integrated operational directives as
part of comprehensive strategic planning.

We must also define peacekeeping operations in
concrete terms. France has contributed financially to a
Secretariat study on that issue. The recommendations
to emerge from that study should make it possible for
the chain of actors involved in the protection of
civilians - from the Security Council, at the time
when mandates are set out, to stakeholders on the
ground, at the time that instructions are conveyed to
contingents - to have a common and unambiguous
understanding of their obligations. In addition, the
Security Council must ask for what is possible; but it
must subsequently be certain of what has been done.

With regard to that last point, allow me to dwell a
little on the Democratic Republic of the Congo - a
major tragedy of our time that has cost the lives of
hundreds of thousands, and perhaps even millions, of
civilians. The United Nations operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is an illustration of
all the challenges that we must face. Of course, we
have made an attempt to respond by further defining
the mission's mandate through resolution 1856 (2008).
It is also true that we have enacted innovative
initiatives on the ground, including joint protection
teams and the establishment of an early warning
system. However, as non-governmental organizations
are repeatedly telling us today, we should ask ourselves
about the reality on the ground.

Massacres and attacks against civilians are
continuing at an alarming rate. Therefore, when it falls
on us to renew the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo at the end of this year, the Security Council
should demonstrate its determination to implement the
resolution that we have just adopted on the protection
of civilians (resolution 1894 (2009)). France will be
especially vigilant in that regard.

That is what I wanted to say about peacekeeping
operations. Let me now turn to combating impunity. In
that connection, States must prosecute and punish those
responsible for violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. That requires carrying
out impartial and independent investigations. Should
there be a failure to do so, international criminal justice
systems must try the most serious crimes. France calls
upon all States to accede to the Rome Statute and to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court.

Without real punishment there can be no prevention or
discouragement of such crimes. It is for that reason that
the Security Council must study the possibility of
including sanctions for violations of international
humanitarian law when it establishes or renews the
mandates of sanctions committees, including the
prevention of access to humanitarian assistance.

Lastly, I should like to take the opportunity
provided by this meeting of the Security Council to
commend the General Assembly's recent reaffirmation
of the concept of the responsibility to protect. The
Security Council has a special responsibility under that
concept. It is not just a matter of intervening in serious
crises to put an end to the most heinous crimes; it is
also a matter of acting beforehand to prevent such
crimes and of strengthening warning systems for
situations where there is the potential for such crimes.
In its action in the Council, France is always mindful
of that responsibility. We will spare no effort to
operationalize that concept.

