Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
United States presidency for convening this important
meeting on the North Korean issue, which has occupied
the Security Council for many years. I also thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for her very enlightening
briefing. I also welcome the Permanent Representatives
of the Republic of Korea and Japan.

I would like to make three remarks today on the
context, the approach that should guide us and the
ultimate objective of denuclearizing the North Korean
peninsula, on which we should all come together.

Developments in recent months have contributed to
an easing of tensions. The intensification of exchanges
among all parties and the relaunch of the inter-Korean
dialogue are important and encouraging steps. But let
us be clear - we are still awaiting the signs of concrete
commitment on the part of the North Korean regime
concerning the denuclearization of the peninsula. The
International Atomic Energy Agency told us last month
that North Korea was pursuing its nuclear programme.
It is well known that Pyongyang continues to violate
and circumvent sanctions on a larger scale and in an
increasingly diversified and sophisticated way. It is also
well known that Pyongyang is doing that by exploiting
the shortcomings of the system and the gaps in the
arrangements made by certain States, and in some cases
their lack of will. It is not only a question of sanctions
in the area of petrol; all sanctions are involved, from
coal to the financial sector.

The report of the Panel of Experts (S/2018/l7l, annex), which we were able to consider in the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), has confirmed that to us once again. The report
also indicates that Pyongyang is pursuing its nuclear
and ballistic programmes, in violation of Council
resolutions. That observation tells us that there is still
a considerable way to go and that we must remain
collectively vigilant to the highest degree. That is
why the call for unity and resolve that has guided us
so far must continue to prevail now more than ever.
That requirement should entail three areas of focus
in particular.

First, we need the strict, full and simultaneous
implementation of the sanctions. We believe that such
implementation is more essential than ever to preserve
our indispensable leverage over Pyongyang with respect
to serious negotiations on the denuclearization of the
peninsula. That is the strategy we have defined together,
and each of us must stick to it rigorously. Sanctions are
not an a la carte menu from which everyone can pick
and choose according to their wishes and preferences.

Turning to the second area of focus, we need
rigorous monitoring of the actions taken by North
Korea through the Committee and the experts who
support it. In that respect, I wish to assure them and
the Dutch chairmanship of the Committee of our full
support. The Committee and the corresponding Panel
of Experts are the most effective means of providing
impartial information and of encouraging all States to
comply strictly with their obligations. Their publicly
available reports are also an essential tool for verifying
the implementation of sanctions and for deterring
anyone, including North Korea, from engaging in
activities that would undermine the sanctions.

In that regard, France regrets the obstructions to
the Panel's latest report. It is essential that expert panel
reports be published without interference. Let us be
clear. The professionalism and the quality of the work
of the experts are measured neither by our satisfaction
with their content nor by the a posteriori consideration
of our views. The independence and integrity of the
panels of experts are the DNA of sanction regimes, and
there can be no question of altering or manipulating
them. I wish to stress here France's extreme vigilance
against any attempt at manipulation.

Turning to the third area of focus, we must be ready
to toughen sanctions if necessary. They remain the best
tool at our disposal to maintain the necessary pressure
and send a signal of resolve to the regime. That is why
we fully support United States efforts in that respect.

In conclusion, denuclearization discussions
must clearly continue, but certainly not at the cost of
relaxing our efforts. It is up to the North Korean regime
to demonstrate through concrete gestures that it is
sincerely ready to commit to the complete, verifiable
and irreversible denuclearization of the peninsula.
That must remain more than ever our common goal.
France remains resolutely committed to its partners
in that respect, both here and in the framework of the
European Union. I call on the members of the Council
to remain united in achieving this essential goal for
international peace and security. It is my hope that the
General Assembly will help us to move in that direction
together at its next session.

