Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at
the outset to express to you, Mr. President, our sincere
thanks for convening this meeting to consider the issue of
sanctions, which has become a source of concern for the
entire international community, especially in the past
decade - the "decade of sanctions", as it has come to be
known.

 

With the collapse of the socialist bloc at the end of the
1980s, the world became unipolar: the United States of
America, with its use of illegitimate means to affect
international decision-making, has been able to impose its
views and priorities on the United Nations, including
through its extremist use of sanctions. In the period from
the creation of the United Nations to 1990, the Security
Council resorted to sanctions on only two occasions: once
against the racist regime of Rhodesia, and once against the
regime in South Africa. Between 1990 and 1997, sanctions
were imposed against 11 States. The majority of those
sanctions were imposed in implementation of United States
policy. The United States has used the United Nations as
part of its diplomatic arsenal. Indeed, that fact was stated
by Senator Jesse Helms before the Security Council on 20
January this year.

The United States inaugurated its first-ever act of
hegemony over the United Nations on 6 August 1990 by
imposing comprehensive sanctions against Iraq in resolution
661 (1990) - merely four days after the events of 2
August 1990 - without providing the slightest opportunity
to resort to peaceful means to resolve the issue. Those
comprehensive sanctions were unprecedented. They will
perhaps remain unique in the history of the United Nations
and the Security Council. Those sanctions prohibited an
entire State from all forms of import or export. The
exception provided for in resolution 661 (1990), for medical
and food supplies, had no practical application, because Iraq
is prohibited from exporting any products that could earn
the hard currency necessary to cover the cost of food and
medical imports.

Among the reasons why the United States of America
was able to impose its sanctions policy in the Security
Council was the absence of any checks or balances in the
Charter of the United Nations limiting the excessive use of
sanctions. Article 41 of the Charter includes a general
provision relating to coercive sanctions, but no other Article
in the Charter clearly provides for any control over the use
of this blunt instrument. The comprehensive sanctions
imposed on Iraq have led to a humanitarian tragedy: the
deaths of more than 1.5 million Iraqi civilians. The
sanctions have destroyed the infrastructure of the economy
and the foundations of life in general in Iraq.

Paragraphs 17 to 27 of the second annex of
Ambassador Amorim's report to the Security Council dated
30 March 1999 (S/ 1999/356) provide a detailed picture of
the catastrophic effects that sanctions have had on all
aspects of life in Iraq, including the serious decrease in
Iraq's gross domestic product and a reduction in per capita
income. These effects include the severe increase in
mortality rates, particularly among mothers and children;
severe malnutrition among a large proportion of children;
grave deterioration in infrastructure, particularly water
supplies, sanitation networks, electricity grids, hospitals
and medical centres; shrinking of registration of children
in schools to 53 per cent - a cultural and intellectual
paucity as well as the destruction of the social fabric in
general.

Ambassador Amorim in his report concludes that the
humanitarian situation in Iraq will remain in its painful
condition unless considerable revival takes place in the
Iraqi economy that, in turn cannot take place through
palliative humanitarian efforts alone.

Furthermore, many international reports have
described the catastrophic effects of sanctions against Iraq
in detail, including reports by specialized United Nations
agencies such as United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), as well as by non-governmental organizations
and also by those working in the field, including Mr.
Denis Halliday, Mr. Hans Sponeck, Mrs. Burkhardt and,
indeed, many others.

In dealing with the lack of any checks in the Charter
against the indiscriminate use of sanctions, former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali recommended a
study of the issue. An open-ended working group presided
over by the Ambassador of Brazil, Mr. Amorim, was
established, and the General Assembly adopted its
recommendations in resolution 51/242 on 15 September
1997.

It is truly regrettable that the Security Council failed
to take up any of the working group's substantive
recommendations aimed at reforming current or future
sanctions regimes, and specifically the comprehensive
sanctions imposed against Iraq. The group's
recommendations remained a dead letter. Foremost among
them were the following: a specific time-frame should be
set for sanctions regimes; the Security Council should
precisely set out the steps to be taken by the targeted
country for sanctions against it to be lifted; and efforts
should be made to enable targeted countries to obtain
appropriate resources and procedures to finance
humanitarian imports. The objective of sanctions is to
modify the behaviour of the country under sanctions, not
to punish or otherwise exact retribution. The working
group also recommended that there be consideration of
the grave negative effects of sanctions on the abilities and
activities of targeted countries in the field of

 
development; the Security Council should submit regular
reports to the General Assembly on the status of specific
sanctions regimes; measures should be adopted in response
to the expectations raised by Article 50 of the Charter; and,
finally, targeted countries should be enabled to exercise
their right to express their viewpoint before the sanctions
committees.

Thereafter, the President of the Security Council
prepared a note on 29 January 1999, document S/1999/92,
recommending limited improvements to the working
methods of sanctions committees. However, those
recommendations did not tackle the foremost problem,
which is that the activities of these committees are based on
the rule of unanimity. In practice, such a rule allows any
member of a committee to exercise a veto, to prevent a
decision agreed upon by the other fourteen members. This
happens in contravention of the most fundamental rules of
democracy, not to mention the principle of collective
responsibility.

Such a practice has allowed the United States of
America to place a hold on $1.8 billion worth of
humanitarian contracts under the oil for food programme,
for political reasons to boot. Furthermore, that practice
prevented the Committee from reaching agreement on many
ways to improve its working methods. Although limited, the
proposed improvements in the recommendations found no
reflection whatsoever in the sanctions Committee on Iraq.

As an example, many international bodies, many
humanitarian organizations and specialized agencies in the
United Nations have submitted studies on the catastrophic
effects of sanctions imposed against Iraq. However, it
seems that the Iraq sanctions Committee was the last to
listen. That Committee further continued to work behind
closed doors, and because of a United States veto it refused
to invite the Permanent Representative of Iraq to clarify
Iraq's position vis-a-vis the issues before it. Furthermore,
the Committee refused to provide its agenda or summary
records to Iraq.

It is regrettable that the current Chairman of the
sanctions Committee on Iraq has preconceived positions
vis-a-vis Iraq that reflect on the way he presides over the
Committee. Sometimes he is more royalist than the
American king himself. I do not believe that I am really
telling any member of the Security Council anything new
in this regard.

When the Security Council imposes coercive measures
against States, it must keep in mind the interconnectedness
of international obligations and responsibilities according
to international treaties and conventions which as a whole
are an integral source of international law as well as
international humanitarian law. In the case of Iraq, the
United States has forced the Security Council to impose
comprehensive sanctions that are in contradiction to many
international treaties and conventions, including merely as
an example, the Convention on the Prohibition and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, of 1948, which
defines genocide as acts perpetrated with intent to destroy,
in whole or in part, a national, ethnical or religious group
through the killing of individual members of the group,
causing physical or psychological harm to members of
that group or the imposition of living conditions on that
group leading to its physical destruction in whole or in
part. According to that definition, the comprehensive
sanctions imposed against Iraq are a crime of genocide by
any standard.

Secondly, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, article 25, paragraph 1, provides that "Everyone
has the right to a standard of living adequate for the
health and well-being of himself and of his family".

Thirdly, the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, article 1, paragraph 2,
provides that "In no case may a people be deprived of its
own means of subsistence."

Fourth is the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their
Protocols. Article 54, paragraph 1, of the first Protocol
provides that "The starvation of civilians shall not be used
as a means of war."

Fifth is the 1959 Declaration on the Rights of the
Child and the 1989 Convention on the Rights of the
Child.

Today some circles are floating the idea of replacing
the current sanctions regime against Iraq with a smarter
one. This call is ill-intentioned. It has no basis in reality.
Among other objectives, it is aimed at entrenching the
sanctions and rendering them an objective in and of
themselves. This is an attempt to rewrite the Security
Council decisions and to turn Iraq into a permanent
laboratory of sanctions regimes. Sanctions were imposed
against Iraq through Council resolution 661 (1990)
because of the events in Kuwait. Thereafter the issue of
weapons of mass destruction was added in resolution 687
(1991).

 

Iraq has satisfied the requirements of both resolutions.
Iraqi forces withdrew from Kuwait on 28 February 1991.
The issue of weapons of mass destruction has been settled
for years. The now defunct United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) and the United States of America
have been unable to provide one iota of truth to the
contrary. The latest testimony to that effect comes in the
statements made by the former inspector, Mr. Scott Ritter,
to the journalist John Pilger in a programme aired by the
British ITV channel on 6 March 2000. A copy of the
videotape has been distributed to Security Council
members. Scott Ritter, certainly no friend of Iraq's, stated
the following:

"In 1991 Iraq had significant capability in areas of
chemical weapons, biological weapons, nuclear
weapons production capability and long-range
ballistic missiles manufacturing capability. But in
1998 the chemical weapons infrastructure had
been completely dismantled or destroyed by
UNSCOM. or by Iraq in compliance with
UNSCOMS's mandate. The biological weapons
programme had been declared in its totality late
in the game but it was gone. All the major
facilities were eliminated. The nuclear weapons
programme was completely eliminated. The long-
range ballistic missile programme was
completely eliminated. All that was left was the
research and development and manufacturing
capability for missiles with a range of less than
150 kilometres, a permitted activity. Everything
we set out to destroy in 1991. The physical
infrastructure had been eliminated. So if I had to
quantify Iraq's threat in terms of weapons of
mass destruction, the real threat is zero, none."

