Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
join previous speakers in congratulating the Chinese
presidency for organizing this debate, as well as for the
concept note (S/2017/574,annex), which was circulated
in a timely manner. I would like to particularly thank
the Secretary-General for his statement, his detailed
report (S/2017/454) and his emphasis on prevention as a
central part of peacekeeping. I am also grateful for the
briefing by Mr. Smail Chergui.

Uruguay believes that, as part of enhancing
African capabilities in peace and security, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations is a fundamental aspect.
Such organizations are playing a greater role in
building global peace and security. In the particular
case of Africa, cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union is crucial and urgent, given the
existence of conflicts in very complex contexts, where
there are asymmetrical threats, the spread of violent
extremism and terrorism and, where in many cases,
they must tackle humanitarian crises and massive
human rights violations.

In that respect, Uruguay values the efforts that
the African Union is putting forth with vigour and
enthusiasm to achieve peace and development in Africa,
playing a positive role in peaceful conflict resolution.
For that reason, we encourage the African Union to
continue to contribute constructively to addressing
the different conflicts on the continent, including the
question of Western Sahara, the last remaining vestige
of the decolonization process still unresolved in Africa,
and where one of our oldest peacekeeping missions is
deployed in Africa - the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara.

The willingness of both organizations to further
deepen their strategic alliance when it comes to peace
and security has been reflected in several documents,
among them resolution 2320 (2016) and the road map
signed on 19 April, which the Secretary-General
described in detail a few minutes ago. We would also
like to acknowledge the report of the Secretary-General
issued in May (S/2017/454) on options for authorizing
and resourcing African Union peace support
operations. The greatest challenge lies in the practical
implementation of all of those documents.

Uruguay highlights the importance of Africa for
peacekeeping, and vice versa. The statistics are clear:
out of 16 peacekeeping operations, nine are deployed
in Africa, and those missions include more than
80 per cent of all of uniformed personnel and approved
financial resources. Out of the 30 main countries that
provide uniformed personnel to the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, 19 ofthem are African States.
As was pointed out a few minutes ago by Ambassador
Rycroft, 50 per cent of the entire uniformed personnel
in charge of a peacekeeping come from member States
of the African Union. We also acknowledge that the
peacekeeping personnel at the United Nation is not
always in the best position to respond to a crisis in
Africa, especially when there is no peace to maintain
or when armed groups threaten civilians. But it is
also reality that given such cases, the African Union
itself does not have sufficient capacity to respond to
those situations.

With regard to African Union peace support
operations, I would like to underscore three factors
that we believe to be decisive in ensuring that the
partnership with the United Nations achieve its
full potential: planning and establishing mandates,
financing African Union operations and developing
personnel capabilities.
First, with regard to the process for planning and
establishing the mandates of joint African Union-United
Nations peace support missions authorized by Security
Council, Uruguay believes that close cooperation is
essential with a view to ensuring effectiveness and
efficiency. It is key to continue with efforts aimed
at improving the joint efforts of the organizations
throughout the entire life cycle of a mission, which
includes, among other things, the initial assessment of
the crisis and the joint strategic assessment, the launch
ofthe mission andjoint assessments of compliance with
the mandate and accountability.

Secondly, with regard to financing African Union
peace support operations, we have observed that a
lack of financing and predictable and sustainable
support for such operations has undermined the
capability of the African Union to take action and
respond to a crisis situation. Uruguay believes that
the different financing models presented in the report
of the Secretary-General issued in May offer viable
alternatives to the use of voluntary contributions
through trust funds. Therefore, we encourage the
Secretariat to continue working on the basis of those
options in close consultation with Member States. It is
also important to point out that the financial support of
the United Nations would be an additional contribution
to the financing that the peace operations will receive
from the African Union Peace Fund.

Thirdly, with regard to developing the capabilities
of African Union personnel deployed in peace
support operations, as a country that has spent
many years participating actively in peacekeeping
operations, Uruguay attaches particular importance
to the responsibility of troop- and police-contributing
countries. They are the ones that carry out actions
on the ground and must implement the mandates of
the operations. In that context, we highlight that any
force outside the United Nations that is authorized
by the Security Council, including an African Union
peace support operation, must comply with the
same requirements as United Nations peacekeeping
personnel in terms of capabilities, performance,
conduct, discipline and accountability. We point out
that the African Union is making efforts to finalize its
frameworks on human rights and for compliance with
conduct and discipline standards in order to ensure
that its peace support operations are conducted in
full compliance with international human rights and
international humanitarian law standards, as well as to
ensure monitoring and accountability.
Lastly, I would like to recognize the different
efforts undertaken by the African Union in the area of
facilitation and conflict mediation- for example, in
South Sudan and in the Central African Republic. We
trust that an even closer alliance with the United Nations
would also contribute to enhancing the effectiveness of
such tasks.

