I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his comprehensive, in-depth briefing on the situation in Mali and the work of MINUSMA, and I welcome the participation of Mr. Tiebile Drame, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, in this meeting. I am pleased to see the positive developments in the overall situation in Mali, including in the political, security and economic dimensions, which are moving in the right direction. Regarding our efforts in connection with the next step, I would like to make the following three points. First, it is hoped that the positive progress made in political dialogues, especially with respect to the implementation of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, can be translated into more concrete outcomes. The relevant parties in Mali need to step up dialogue and cooperation and to invest more energy into consolidating the progress and made and continuing to implement the Peace Agreement. Secondly, a holistic and integrated approach is necessary to bring about long- term stability in Mali. While we see progress in many areas, challenges remain. In addition to deploying political and security efforts, the international community must support the Malian Government in achieving sustainable development and improving the livelihoods of its people. Thirdly, close attention should be paid to the security situation in northern and central Mali, in particular as concerns the threat of terrorism. The international community should enhance coordination and cooperation and provide greater support for the Malian Government so as to build its capacity to combat terrorism, better protect its people and restore national peace and stability. MINUSMA has played an important role in the peace process in Mali. China will continue to support the work of the Mission, and we encourage the United Nations to provide it with additional resources and support in order to build its capacity. China is following closely the situation in Mali with respect to the coronavirus disease and has been providing assistance to the best of our capacity. In March, China organized a video conference with more than 20 African countries, including Mali, to share best experiences. On 27 March, the first batch of 100,000 masks, 1,000 gowns and face shields, and 20,000 testing kits arrived in Mali. We will join hands with the international community to continue providing the necessary support to the Malian Government.
