Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me begin,
Mr. President, with warm congratulations and thanks
to you and to your whole team for a very successful
presidency. Once again, it has been a busy month. I am
therefore glad that you have made time for this wrap-up
session so that we may capture the lessons learned from
the past few weeks and share them transparently in this
open meeting. I very much agree with our colleagues
from Uruguay and Spain who said that it would be
even more effective if the session were to be interactive
and informal.

In keeping with the useful concept note that the
President circulated, I will focus on three points today:
the Council's visit to Somalia; the situation in Syria;
and our work on appointing the next Secretary- General.
I believe that all three are examples of the need for us
to take an action-oriented approach so that we can exert
pressure and make a real difference in the world and
foster progress in a way that goes beyond our usual
business of adopting resolutions and products. Let me
take each briefly in turn.

Our visit to Somalia formed part of a good month
for cooperation with regional bodies, joining the visits
from both the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the European Union Peace and Security
Committee to New York. Those are important load-
bearing relationships that we must continue to invest in
and to strengthen for the future. But the visit to Somalia
also demonstrated something else. It reaffirmed that
Security Council trips to countries on our agenda can
have a positive, tangible influence. It reaffirmed that
we speak with a powerful voice when we are united
and when we urge progress in the name of peace and
security. As our Japanese colleague just said, we saw
that when the Somali President approved the electoral
model to be used in this year's crucial elections
shortly after our departure. In doing so, he overcame
an important hurdle to the democratic, representative
future that he people of Somalia so urgently deserve.
I therefore encourage future presidencies to mirror the
example set by the Egyptian presidency and arrange
more visits to countries on our agenda.

If Somalia shows how we have got it right this
month, sadly, Syria typifies the opposite. Following
the powerful debate on health care workers in armed
conflict (S/PV.7685), it was right that the Council met
to discuss the deteriorating situation in Aleppo. In
doing so, we helped contribute to the public pressure
that eventually brought about a recommitment to the
cessation of hostilities. But even that simple act was
far too difficult to achieve. Even as Aleppo burned, the
Council took too long to agree to hold a simple meeting.

Actions outside the Chamber - such as removing
medicine from convoys, stopping urgent medical
evacuations from besieged areas, or denying basic aid
to those most in need - speak louder than the words
within it. Those are the actions of the Syrian regime,
and they are deafening in comparison to the words
of the Security Council. So our response must not be
limited to calling another meeting. It cannot be even
more words. That is why we fully support the call from
the International Syria Support Group for air drops to
besieged areas, should access not be granted by land
by tomorrow. That deadline is looming fast. Should the
regime continue to prevent aid from reaching those who
need it, we will all have to work to turn the Support
Group's pledge into action.

My final point is about our work on the appointment
of the next Secretary-General. I would like to pay
tribute to you, Mr. President, for beginning informal
discussions on how the Council will conduct that vital
selection process. The General Assembly hearings
have set a high bar for us to follow. There are huge
expectations, both inside and outside this building. I
therefore look forward to a Council process that builds
on the Assembly's excellent work on the hearings last
month and next month, too, no doubt. In doing so, I
believe we will build on the steps taken this month
towards fostering a more open and responsive Security
Council. This has not been about votes, negotiations
or discussions, but about showing that we are in the
business of getting things done. I look forward to our
efforts continuing, both under the French presidency
and others to come.

