Mr. Spinellis (Greece): At the outset, since this
is the first time I have an opportunity, I would like to
extend my warm congratulations to the newly elected
members of the Security Council - Angola, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela - and to wish them every success.
Furthermore, allow me to express our deep appreciation
to Chile for taking the initiative to convene this
pertinent and timely debate. I would also wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador Patriota
of Brazil and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Leymah
Gbowee for their comprehensive briefings.

Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, as well as with the
statement delivered by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the Human Security Network. I would also
like to convey some additional points from a national
standpoint.

Recent events around the world are serve as a
pointed reminder of the imperative of addressing the
underlying and root causes of conflict by promoting
sustainable development, inclusion, equality, the rule of
law and respect for human rights and inclusive political
processes. It is undoubtedly well-established common
knowledge that security and development are closely
interrelated and mutually reinforcing in attaining
sustainable peace. Furthermore, building sustainable
peace is inescapably linked to inclusive development.
On several occasions, the Security Council has
underlined its readiness to strive for sustainable peace
in all situations under its consideration.

Sustainable peace requires that we ensure that
no person is denied universal human rights and basic
economic opportunities, while, at the same time, the
needs of the most disadvantaged and vulnerable are
respected. The economic and political integration
of marginalized populations is a determining factor
for peace and security. Fundamental freedoms must
be respected, protected and fulfilled, including the
freedoms of expression, association and the media,
while democratic governance and the rule of law should
prevail.

Furthermore, Greece, being a member of the
Human Security Network, believes that the human
security approach can make a significant contribution
to today's discussions. When confronting the multiple
vulnerabilities that affect different countries and
communities, through its multidimensional and
comprehensive vision, human security addresses those
challenges through the elements of peace and security,
development and human rights - the three interlinked
pillars of the United Nations system.

Inclusive development diminishes the risk of
conflict and enables long-term stability and sustainable
peace while ensuring equal opportunity and equitable
access to basic services, which are indispensable for
social development and inclusive societies. The United
Nations is key in promoting inclusive development. The
Security Council in particular has a unique opportunity
to implement inclusive development policies through
its peacekeeping operations, which play a major role
in rebuilding and developing societies in the wake of
conflict.

Moreover, it should be noted that the security-
development nexus is also relevant as we seek to
address the very pertinent threat of terrorism. In that
sense, we recognize that concrete progress in the areas
of security, justice, human rights and the rule of law are
critical both for tackling terrorism and for achieving
sustainable development.
Situated in the Eastern Mediterranean, a region
that has witnessed great political turmoil in recent
years, Greece is a strong advocate of inclusive and
sustainable development as an enabler of long-term
stability and sustainable peace. Therefore, we are
strongly committed to continuing to promote the
placement ofpeaceful societies at the centre of the post-
2015 development agenda.

