Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I am
especially pleased to be first on the list of speakers on
the subject oftoday's debate, and all the more so because
I spent several years in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I saw
the people of that country suffer. I saw them regain
hope and confidence. And, immediately following the
trauma of war and the destruction that it produced, I
saw a country imbued with promise and tolerance and
willing to put aside the past and hope for a better life.

I would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
introducing his semi-annual report on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2013/263, annex). The
overall impression one comes away with from the
report is one of political stalemate and an entrenchment
ofpositions on the part of Federation partners. That has
resulted in a deterioration of the situation and creates
the danger of the disintegration of the institutions put
in place by the Dayton Agreement. The Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to experience
a constitutional and political crisis at the federal and
cantonal levels. That is undermining the cohesion
and sovereignty of the country while endangering
its territorial integrity and delaying its Euro-Atlantic
integration.

On the political front, the report refers to the
political power struggle that has characterized political
life in Bosnia and Herzegovina and led to paralysis
in the functioning of the Federation's institutions, in
particular its Constitutional Court, which is so crucial
for ensuring respect for the rule of law. The nationalist
rhetoric and provocative statements with regard to
Bosnia's institutions, as well as unilateral actions, are
weakening the very foundations of the Federation and
jeopardizing 17 years of painstaking achievements in
building on the arrangements produced by the Dayton
Agreement. At the same time, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been unable to make progress in meeting the five
objectives and two conditions required in order to
proceed to close the Office of the High Representative,
in particular when it comes to the issue of property and
the Brcko district.

Those negative trends have a direct impact on
people's daily lives, as well as on improving their
social and living conditions. Far from serving the long-
term interests of any constituent part of the Federation,
this situation is damaging to all communities in that
it serves to emphasize differences, pit the various
interests against one another and erode the prospects
for much-desired national reconciliation.

Given that scenario, which is worrying in
many ways, the holding of regular sessions of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the adoption
of several budgetary and defence policy decisions,
the holding of regular Council of Ministers meetings,
the implementation of the results of local elections of
October 2012, and the symbolic election of the first
non-Bosniak mayor of Sarajevo are all reasons for hope.
Those developments show that the path of compromise
is viable, so long as there is political will and the rule
of law is respected.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a country that
emerged from a long and painful conflict that struck
the conscience of the international community and
permanently marked the people of this friendly country.
The Dayton Agreement, which was the outcome of
a historic compromise, needs to be preserved and
strengthened, not weakened or made to fail. We hope
that all members of the Federation can resist the
temptation of, and attempts at, unilateralism. We also
hope that they will relaunch a responsible political
dialogue in order to continue to build today and to
construct a common future. Clearly, that is in the
interests of all communities that make up Bosnia and
Herzegovina, just as it is in the interest of the stability
of the entire region.

