Mr. Franco (Colombia)(spoke in Spanish): We
are gratified that this open debate has been convened to
assess recent events in the Middle East. It is with great
sorrow that we take the floor today to record our most
vigorous condemnation of the indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force against civilians.

The attack perpetrated by Israel in Gaza amounts
to an unacceptable extrajudicial killing that has caused
indiscriminate deaths among civilians, including
children, and undercuts the emerging possibilities for a
political process. This act deserves full and emphatic
condemnation. This condemnation has been expressed
by the international community, including the United
Nations.

Israel's attack could not have taken place at a
worse political moment. There appeared to be positive
signs that might have served to halt the cycle of
violence and terrorism of recent months. We trusted
that it would be possible to re-establish cooperation
machinery in the area of security. We heard
encouraging announcements about the real possibility
of ending the suicide attacks. We supported the
collective efforts of the "quartet" and of each of its
members to develop a political process that would
secure the backing of other States of the region.

However, following the military attack in Gaza,
there is now the feeling that the situation might well
grow out of all proportion. As never before, we are
duty-bound to make a collective and individual
contribution within our own possibilities to prevent the
situation from degenerating into an uncontrolled spiral
of violence.

In this respect, we wish to state once again that
we respect Israel's right to provide for its own security.
We condemn the acts of terrorism that have been
systematically committed on its territory, and which
have affected the lives and the physical integrity of its
citizens. While we say this, we wish also to state that
we fail to understand how a military attack, in a
densely populated area of Gaza, contributes either to
Israel's security or to the peace efforts to which a
number of international political actors are committed.

These difficult times should be turned into
opportunities. We make an anguished appeal to revive
the chances of a comprehensive solution to the conflict
between Israel and Palestine, a solution that would
include not only security aspects but also other vital
issues, such as the economic and humanitarian
situation of the Palestinian people, the withdrawal of
Israel, the occupying Power, from the Palestinian
territories, and the creation of the Palestine State.

At this critical moment, we must more than ever
be mindful of our common objective of achieving a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace throughout the
region on the basis of resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002) and the principle of land for
peace.

