Mr. Eliasson: To me, the summary that you
made, Sir, in your national capacity reflects very well
the views that I have heard expressed around this table.
I want to express my deep appreciation, and I think I
speak on behalf of my African Union counterpart and
friend, Salim Ahmed Salim, in thanking you for the
wide, deep and full support that you have given us in
our work. It strengthens our hand considerably and we
very much appreciate that expression of confidence.

On a personal basis, I also want to express thanks
to several participants here, with whom I have worked
in other capacities. I am glad to see them in this
incarnation, as our colleague from Slovakia said.

I think it is important that we understand the
importance of creating conditions conducive to peace
and a political process. That is why there is a
relationship, after all, between the humanitarian
situation, the security situation and the political talks.
They mutually reinforce each other or, if negative, hurt
each other. So I think we have to see the issues in their
totality.

I am also glad that our colleagues from South
Africa and Slovakia brought up the situation in the
camps. If I were to look back at this 11-month period
in which I have been working on that issue, the most
serious word of warning that I would want to extend to
the Council concerns the situation in the camps. It is a
situation of frustration and anger. Members can
imagine life with fathers not going out into the fields,
mothers being worried about what happens if they go
out to pick up firewood, and youths growing up for
nearly four years in some of the camps, radicalized,
and with arms also coming into the camps. That is the
new danger that we face, along with the tribal clashes,
which are new phenomena that we have to analyse very
carefully.

I do not know whether members are aware of
this, but there are more people dying in tribal clashes
than in clashes between Government units and the
movements. Over 700 people have been killed in tribal
clashes this year. Those are the new realities and new
dangers in Darfur that we have to follow very closely
and try to prevent from exploding.

The different points made here reinforce my and
Salim's work in getting all parties to engage. It is very
important for the credibility of the political talks that
we have wide and full participation in those talks and
that all assume that responsibility. I hope that those
representatives of movements who hesitated to come
now find themselves in positive and constructive
discussions among themselves of how and when they

will enter the process. I think and believe, from some
of the contacts we have, that they will do so. We need
to have a critical mass of participants from the
movements to make the talks meaningful, and therefore
everything the members of the Security Council can
do, collectively and individually as representatives and
Member States, is very important at this stage.

We have to deal with the basic problems of
Darfur. The humanitarian operation is a $700-million
operation employing 12,000 people. The peacekeeping
operation, as Jean-Marie Guehenno will probably
expand upon, is a huge enterprise, also costing
enormous amounts of money. We need to be able to
deal with the basic issues so that we will not carry on
with measures that do not deal with the root causes.
Everything the Council can do to make all parties
engage and prepare for the talks is very important.

I also hope that the Government of the Sudan will
be clear with respect to its delegation and that it will be
able to deal with the problems that I think it knows are
there in terms of making sure that the delegation is one
representing a Government of National Unity. That is
important, again, for the strength of the negotiation
process.

A cessation of hostilities is extremely important,
and I regret again that the absence of some of the
movements did not make it possible to reach a
meaningful cessation of hostilities agreement. We
welcome the unilateral declaration of the Government,
and we hope that the movements will now follow suit.

We have, of course, a problem with monitoring,
because we do not have the capacity yet to do the
monitoring. We have not reached the level of
deployment of troops to have a strong verification and
monitoring mechanism, but I hope that will come with
the deployment of troops. At this stage, that is
therefore very much a political commitment that I hope
the parties will all make.

I am also very grateful for the Security Council's
support for the inclusion, to the extent possible, of the
voices of the people of Darfur - the civil society
component. It was striking, I should like to say, how
enthusiastic the representatives of civil society were at
the meeting in Sirte. That positive image did not come
out so strongly in the world press, but it was quite
comforting to me, who had been travelling a lot in
Darfur, seeing the camps and the villages out in the
country, to hear those voices expressing the hope,
longing and dreams for peace. I think we should keep
in mind all the time what the people of Darfur really
desire. I am glad that we, in a transparent manner, have
been able to discuss that participation with the
Government of the Sudan and also with the
movements. We will want to have their voices heard,
but of course it will be done in such a way that the
negotiation structure is not changed considerably. But
we certainly need to have their voices at the table in
different forms of consultations. We worked together,
both with the Darfur-Darfur dialogue and with our own
civil affairs component, the United Nations, which is
well represented in the field.

I take to heart the advice of some here about
finding a chief mediator under the Special Envoys to
do the day-to-day negotiation. We have, for the time
being, two excellent chief mediators, Taye-Brook
Zerihoun of the United Nations and Sam Ibok of the
African Union. We will discuss the proposal made
here. I understand that it goes in the direction of
finding a joint chief mediator. It is an interesting
proposal that we will carry forward.

The threats against individual nations directed
from different movements is something I, too, take
seriously. I will travel myself to Darfur after the
regional meeting in Sharm el-Sheikh. I will go out to
the field and hope to meet as many of the movements
as possible. I will also be in contact with other
stakeholders and I will certainly send that message of
the needed respect for the peacekeepers and for the
authority of the United Nations and the African Union.

That is an extremely interesting and fascinating,
but difficult, task: working together in the spirit of
Chapter VIII of the Charter and having the African
Union and United Nations performing a common task,
both in the area of peacekeeping and in the area of
political talks. It is a difficult theatre, as we have seen,
in which we have chosen to prove the importance of
that cooperation, but we will certainly do our best to
move this process forward. We must also remember
that, in the end, everything comes back to the political
will of the parties.

There were questions on timelines and on
enforcing sanctions. Those are the most difficult
questions, which I have saved for the end.

It is always desirable to have clear timelines and
set deadlines, but it is also dangerous to set artificial
deadlines when there is a political dynamic that we

must respect. Mr. Salim and I will try to combine the
sense of urgency that is definitely needed with making
sure that we get the critical mass of representation at
the talks. We will have the regional meeting, which is
going to be important, as the meeting in Eritrea was.
After Sharm el-Sheikh, we will go directly to the field
and work with the parties. We may then possibly be in
a position where a meeting of the Arusha style is
necessary and desirable, and then we hope to move as
quickly as possible to the substantive talks. But I do
not think that I want to put that in terms of exact dates.

On the issue of enforcing the sanctions, it is not
for the Special Envoys - and I know I speak on behalf
of Mr. Salim on this point too - to either encourage or
discourage, from our side, the sanctions. I note the
presidential statement of 24 October by the Council
(S/PRST/2007/4l), in which it supports the peace
process and speaks about the risks involved in
undermining the peace process and peacekeeping
operations, if I recall the text. I can say that when I am
travelling and talking to both the Government of the
Sudan and the movements, they are deeply aware of
the fact that I will report what I learn during those trips
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who follows these
issues extremely closely and with deep engagement,
but also that we will report those developments to the
Security Council. That usually makes an impression, if
I may put it diplomatically.

It is therefore up to member States to draw
conclusions from the facts as we present them. I would
hope that we now find ourselves in a process in which
most of those who have hesitated to join the talks
would come to the conclusion that they should join the
talks, in the interest of peace for their people, and that
we will have a quick and meaningful negotiation
thereafter. If we have complete defiance of that
process, it is up to member States to draw the
conclusions that they find the most appropriate and that
will help the process to succeed in the end.

