Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Tadamichi Yamamoto for his briefing, as well as
to express our full support for the important role
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and all United Nations agencies
in supporting Afghanistan and coordinating the
international community's assistance to that country.
Our special thanks go to Ms. Sima Samar, the first
woman to brief the Security Council on Afghanistan.

While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to
be made later today on behalf of the European Union, I
would like to raise several points in my national capacity.

Ukraine remains committed to supporting the
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led national reconciliation
process aimed at bringing lasting peace to Afghanistan.
We commend the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan and its international partners in creating
an environment conducive to overcoming the stalemate
in the peace negotiations and reaching a sustainable
resolution of the decades-long conflict in the country.

Yet there can be no tangible progress towards
stabilization without the readiness of other regional
players to set aside differences and to exert influence
on Taliban leaders by denying them shelter and forcing
that terrorist group to renounce aggression against
Afghanistan. As reported by UNAMA, the situation
remains tense. The Taliban, Al-Qaida, the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and their affiliates continue to
maintain their presence in certain parts of Afghanistan.
Their armed assaults and recurring suicide attacks
continue to claim a high death toll and to have an
adverse impact on the country's political, economic and
security situation.

We are concerned about the acts of violence and
attacks against diplomatic missions and their personnel,
as well as humanitarian and medical facilities, which
impede international efforts to aid the people of
Afghanistan. We are also alarmed by the continued
flagrant violations of human rights, maltreatment of the
civilian population, summary executions, deliberate
abuses and continuing discrimination against women
and girls, as well as the use of child soldiers on the
territories under Taliban and other terrorist groups'
control. In that regard, putting the current Taliban
leadership under increased pressure takes on additional
importance. We believe that can be an effective
tool in persuading them to earnestly participate in
peace negotiations.

A successful example of such practice is the peace
deal signed with Hizb-i Islami, which greatly contributed
to the restoration of normal life in the territories under
the control of that group. We call on the Government
of Afghanistan to continue the implementation of the
agreement in order to build upon achieved results.

We also commend the Afghan Government for
implementing its commitments to fight corruption,
which hinders the country's development, while also
promoting good governance, the rule of law and human
rights, continuing electoral reform and strengthening
coordination between security forces and law-
enforcement agencies to ensure that they can effectively
tackle existing security threats.

Cooperation with relevant international financial
and trade organizations, as well as regional forums
such as the Heart of Asia and the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, should
continue so as to further the implementation of the
Government's economic reform agenda.

The implementation of the national action plan on
women and peace and security is also of paramount
importance for the sake of creating a stable future for
the country by eradicating gender-based violence and
elevating women as full and equal partners. We also
believe that women's voices have to be included in
peace and security decision-making, particularly given
the sustained violence against Afghan women leaders
and human rights defenders. We ask UNAMA to
support the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan
in promoting the standards I mentioned while fulfilling
the respective national action plan.

