Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I, too, would
like to join my colleagues in welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Eamon Gilmore, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of
Ireland, to the Security Council this afternoon. I thank
him for his comprehensive briefing on the activities of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and his priorities in the months to
come.

India supports the role of regional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security
and their cooperation with the United Nations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter. Article 54 of the Charter
enjoins those organizations to keep the Security
Council fully informed of their activities for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
therefore warmly welcome the briefing by the OSCE's
Chairperson-in-Office.
Mr. Gilmore covered a wide canvas of issues,
several of them concerning our immediate and
extended neighbourhood. Naturally, those are of great
interest to my delegation. We appreciate the work that
the OSCE has been doing to promote security in its
political, military, economic, environmental and human
dimensions. It has addressed a wide range of security-
related concerns, including arms control, confidence-
and security-building measures, human rights, national
minorities, democratization, policing strategies,
counter-terrorism and economic and environmental
issues. The OSCE has contributed to managing some of
the most important problems in the post-cold war
period and world.

In the past decade or so, the OSCE has expanded
its activities significantly in our neighbourhood, under
the Asian Partners for Cooperation and the Asian
Contact Group. We have noted the OSCE's cooperation
with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Regional Forum, of which India is a member, on
matters related to confidence-building measures and
preventive diplomacy. We also welcome the OSCE's
partnership with Afghanistan in border security
management and electoral assistance.

We wish the OSCE great success in its efforts and
activities towards the promotion of understanding,
peace and security among member and partner
countries. We also extend our good wishes to the Irish
chairmanship of the OSCE and to Mr. Gilmore
personally. We hope that, under his stewardship, the
OSCE will continue its important work.

