Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the European Union
(EU). The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, and the European Free Trade
Association countries Liechtenstein and Norway,
members of the European Economic Area, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

Given the time constraints, I will shorten my
statement. The full version is now being distributed
and constitutes our official statement.

The creation of the African Union (AU) and its
organs has been one of the most promising
developments in recent years. It is therefore highly
appropriate to focus this discussion on Africa. The very
presence of such distinguished guests adds particular
weight to the significance of today's debate.

I would like especially to thank the Secretary-
General for his remarks and his personal commitment
to promoting dialogue between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations.

The European Union is firmly committed to, and
actively supports, effective multilateralism. In that
context, the importance of regional organizations and
their potential in preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping,
peacemaking and post-conflict peacebuilding has
grown considerably over the past years. It is only to be
expected that their contribution in the foreseeable
future will continue to increase steadily.

The development of a stronger international
society, well-functioning international institutions and
a rules-based international order with the United
Nations at its core is a central objective of the
European Union, which recalls the primary
responsibility of the Security Council to maintain
international peace and security. Regional
organizations can reinforce and complement United
Nations efforts through an active role in maintaining
international peace and security, in the spirit of Chapter
VIII of the Charter, as was also stressed in resolution
1631 (2005).

The European Union seeks to strengthen
cooperation with the United Nations on, inter alia,
areas of crisis management and peacekeeping
operations, counter-terrorism, human rights,
sustainable development and climate change. In recent
years, the European Union has made significant
progress in the development of its own crisis
management structures. This has allowed the EU to
deploy numerous civilian and military operations,
many of them in support of or at the request of the
United Nations.
Under the framework of the European Security
and Defence Policy, and in addition to individual EU
member States' commitments, the European Union
continues to support peacekeeping efforts in Africa,
particularly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guinea-Bissau, Chad and the Central African Republic,
in line with substantial European Commission support.
We remain committed to further developing our
relationship with the United Nations, especially by
working closely together in implementing the joint
statement on United Nations-EU cooperation in crisis
management signed in June 2007.

The second European Union-Africa Summit, held
in Lisbon in 2007, laid down the foundations of a
strategic partnership. We have reached a new milestone
in our cooperation. In the field of peace and security,
the first priority of the partnership aims at
strengthening dialogue to reach common positions and
implement common approaches on challenges to peace
and security in Africa, in Europe and globally. The
second priority is to work together towards the full and
effective functioning of the African peace and security
architecture, in particular through the African standby
force, the Continental Early Warning System and
regional mechanisms and organizations. The third
priority is to provide predictable and sustainable
financing for Africa-led peace support operations, to
ensure that the AU and regional mechanisms will be
able to plan and conduct peace support operations.
Substantial support has been provided to capacity-
building at the regional and subregional levels, as well
as to specific African-led peace operations, including
in Darfur, Somalia and the Central African Republic.
These operations have been supported by the Peace
Facility for Africa, through which €350 million has
already been committed, and by bilateral contributions
of EU member States. Furthermore, we are working
with the Group of Eight (G-8) and other members of
the international community to contribute to the
funding of African-led peace support operations.

A culture of prevention is indeed gaining ground,
as is the understanding of the need to strengthen and
support the tools used when responding to situations
that could potentially lead to violence. In parallel,
more attention has been given to addressing the root
causes of conflict. The sooner we act to prevent
conflict, the greater the chances of success.

The EU recognizes the importance of different
conflict prevention tools, as highlighted in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2008/ 18). The use of quiet
diplomacy and preventive mediation, such as the
Mediation Support Unit of the Department for Political
Affairs, as well as the effective use of sanctions and the
Secretary-General's good offices, are essential in de-
escalating potential violent conflicts.

The European Union believes that it is essential
to include civil society in conflict prevention, as it
promotes encouraging links between civil society and
Government, as well as local ownership. Moreover,
women should play a positive role in conflict
prevention, and they are still underrepresented in
formal stages of conflict prevention. Similarly, the
implementation of resolution 1612 (2005) on children
affected by armed conflict continues to require further
application.

The European Union considers the Peacebuilding
Commission to be an important achievement of the
United Nations reform process. We welcome the
engagement the Commission has shown in Burundi and
Sierra Leone in the first year of operation, and
welcome the placing of Guinea-Bissau on its agenda.
Through the European Development Fund and other
European Commission instruments, the EU plays a
major role in assisting those countries in meeting their
peacebuilding challenges. The recent launch of the
European Security and Defence Policy mission in
support of security sector reform in Guinea-Bissau
further reaffirms the EU's readiness to use its full
policy mix of instruments in support of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The European Union remains committed to
international justice, which is particularly relevant in
conflict areas. We firmly believe that there can be no
impunity, in particular for the most serious crimes, and
that there can be no long-standing peace without
justice.

While the primary responsibility for conflict
prevention rests with Member States, the international
community is crucial in providing much-needed
support, especially through regional and subregional
organizations. The recent support provided by the
United Nations and the EU to such organizations in
their efforts to improve relations between political
parties in Kenya, as well as ongoing international and
regional efforts in dealing with humanitarian and
security situations such as those in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and Somalia, only
reaffirm the need to further cooperation with regional
organizations.
The European Union remains very concerned
about the political situation in Zimbabwe and will
continue to closely monitor the situation on the ground
and support efforts towards ensuring democracy,
stability, economic recovery and respect for human
rights. The European Union supports the call launched
at the special summit of the Southern Africa
Development Community for the expeditious release of
the presidential election results, in accordance with the
due process of law. It reiterates its concern at the
prolonged and unexplained delay in releasing the
presidential results, which is undermining the
credibility of the process.

In conclusion, I would like to thank South Africa
for its leadership in convening this debate. Let me
reaffirm that it is a priority for the European Union to
continue providing its expertise and resources to peace
and stability in Africa as a partner of both the United
Nations and the African Union.

