Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): The first
question asked, I believe, was posed by the
representative of Cameroon, who wondered about the
possibility of making Bunia a weapons-free town as a
model for future disarmament operations.

I think that the example of Bunia clearly
demonstrates that, in the current phase, the
disarmament of Congolese forces will be a key element
of progress towards peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) will surely play an enhanced role in that
respect. At the same time, we clearly see that even a
strengthened MONUC will be unable to have the same
presence in each locality of that large country that the
Interim Emergency Multinational Force has in Bunia
today. Disarmament will therefore have to go hand-in-
hand with a political process of sustained pressure on
all who might contemplate continuing to arm militias,
so that together with the positive encouragement given,
there will also be a strong incentive from the
international community not to continue on the military
path.

(spoke in English)

With that I am beginning to answer the question
raised by the Ambassador of Chile on the likelihood
that the armed groups would eventually disarm. We
believe that a combination of measures will lead to
disarmament. Certainly a more robust MONUC, a
MONUC that wherever it is deployed cannot be easily
pushed, will send a very important signal. But that
more robust MONUC will also have to be supported by
sustained political pressure from the Council on the
various players, so that all players become convinced
that there is no alternative to a peaceful process.

Many ambassadors have raised questions on the
role of MONUC in human rights. I will defer to
Mr. Ramcharan on many issues and will say a few
words on some specific issues that were raised with
respect to MONUC.

What can military observers do, as far as human
rights is concerned? Let me first point out that
whenever there is an investigation, whenever a special
investigation team is deployed, they consult very
closely with the military observers who have been
present in the region. All the information the military
observers might have on the situation is shared with the
multidisciplinary teams of MONUC, in which various
elements of MONUC are represented, including
civilian police personnel. Since military observers
report on a daily basis on the situation in their area of
operation, including on violations of human rights,
they would report such violations if they become more
systematic.

That raises another question that was posed to the
Secretariat with regard to the protection of
investigators. It is difficult to take a position of
principle on this particular issue because each situation
is specific and the level of security varies considerably,
not only from one area to the other, but also from one
week to another. The security level has to be
continually monitored by MONUC, and we certainly
would not exclude, in specific circumstances, having
some military resources devoted to the protection of a
particular team, if we feel that would make the
difference between the possibility of an inspection and
the absence of an inspection. But that cannot become a
general procedure, because we certainly would not
have the resources for that. Nevertheless, some
activities should be and can be escorted.

A question was raised on the future national army
and the screening of the soldiers and officers in a
national army. This raises the broader issue of the
security sector, because the same question applies also
to the police.

Concerning this issue, I am pleased to report that
because of the very quick decision of the distribution
of the senior military force, our understanding is that
these new posts should be filled shortly so that the
operation of the new army - from the top, at least -
should start in earnest.

I think MONUC will have to consider how to
support that process so that there is some screening of
those who join the new armed forces or the new police.
This is essentially a responsibility of the Congolese.
But as in many other areas related to human rights,
we'll have to find the balance between the need for
national ownership of the process and at the same time
active monitoring so that those crimes which should be
neither forgotten nor forgiven are not, indeed, forgotten
or forgiven.

Questions were asked about the future role of
MONUC with respect to human rights. We are entering
a new phase with the appointment of the transitional
Government of national unity. As you are aware, in that
new phase there will be new institutions that will be
specifically focused on human rights: the truth and
reconciliation commission, and the national
observatory for human rights. There was a question as
to how we can support those institutions. Indeed, we
see those institutions playing the central role in the
consolidation of human rights in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. But as fledgling institutions
they will need the active support of the international
community. I would use the opportunity of this meeting
to launch an appeal to the international community to
give support, including financial support, so that
experts can be deployed to give the kind of practical
support that these institutions will need to link up with
the organizations in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that are already quite active in the area of
human rights.

One is always very impressed when visiting the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by the courage and
commitment of the many national NGOs, which report
and denounce violations and very actively make sure
that no human rights abuse remains unknown or
unaddressed. Unfortunately, many are not addressed,
but in the future, the knowledge, the information and
the awareness of such abuses will certainly facilitate
taking the right measures. MONUC sees its human
rights section playing a very active role both in
mobilizing international support and then liaising with
these national institutions in order to develop the
national capacities to uphold and sustain human rights
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Lastly, we believe that justice and human rights
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be a
long-term effort. Ambassador Williamson reminded us
of previous egregious violations of human rights that
have remained unaddressed. It will certainly be the role
of the international community and its institutions to
address such violations and to remind all of those who
can bring justice to bear that these violations have not
yet been addressed. It will then be for the Congolese to
build up their own national and judiciary institutions so
as to address the situation.

