The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for his statement.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of his recommendations to the Council entitled
'Small arms' (S/2005/69) of 7 February 2005, and
reaffirms the statements of its President of
19 January 2004 (S/PRST/2004/1), of 31 October
2002 (S/PRST/2002/30), of 31 August 2001
(S/PRST/2001/2l) and of 24 September 1999
(S/PRST/1999/28).

"The Security Council recalls its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In this regard, the Security
Council recognizes that the dissemination of
illicit small arms and light weapons has hampered
the peaceful settlement of disputes, fuelled such
disputes into armed conflicts and contributed to
the prolongation of such armed conflicts. The
Council reaffirms the inherent right of individual
or collective self- defence in accordance with
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations
and, subject to the Charter, the right of each State
to import, produce and retain small arms and light
weapons for its self-defence and security needs.

"The Council encourages the arms-
exporting countries to exercise the highest degree
of responsibility in small arms and light weapons
transactions according to their existing
responsibilities under relevant international law.
It also encourages international and regional
cooperation in identifying the origin and transfer
of small arms and light weapons in order to
prevent their diversion, in particular to Al Qaeda
and other terrorist groups. The Council welcomes
the significant steps that have been taken by
Member States and international and regional
organizations in this regard. The obligation of
Member States to enforce the arms embargo
should be coupled with enhanced international
and regional cooperation concerning arms
exports. The Council encourages Members to
undertake vigorous actions aimed at restricting
the supply of small arms, light weapons and
ammunitions to areas of instability.

"The Security Council takes note that the
United Nations Second Biennial Meeting of
States to consider the implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects will be held
July 2005, and encourages Member States to fully
cooperate with the Chair of the Meeting to have a
successful outcome.

"The Security Council notes with
appreciation that regional actions on illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects
have been strengthened in recent years, and
encourages the continuation of assistance at
national, regional and international levels that
would fit the needs of Member States to
implement the recommendations contained in the
Programme of Action adopted by the July 2001
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects.

"The Council welcomes the ongoing efforts
by the open-ended working group established by
General Assembly resolution 58/241 of
23 December 2003 to negotiate an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace,
in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms
and light weapons, and calls upon all Member
States to support all efforts aimed at this purpose.
It expresses the wish that the ongoing work
within the group will lead to a positive
conclusion at its third session as scheduled.

"The Security Council welcomes the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 59/86
of 10 December 2004, by which, among other
things, it requested the Secretary-General to
continue broad-based consultations on further
steps to enhance international cooperation in
preventing, combating and eradicating illicit
brokering in small arms and light weapons with a
View to establishing a group of governmental
experts to consider the issue.

"The Security Council welcomes the
inclusion of man-portable air defence systems

(MANPADS) on an exceptional basis in the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms.

"The Security Council further encourages
Member States that have not already done so to
establish the necessary legislative or other
measures, including the use of authenticated end-
user certificates, to ensure effective control over
the export and transit of small arms and light
weapons.

"The Security Council renews the support
given to the plan of ECOWAS to strengthen the
moratorium signed in Abuja on 31 October 1998
on the import, export and manufacture of small
arms and light weapons and to replace it with a
mandatory convention. It welcomes the decision
by the European Council on 2 December 2004 to
significantly support this initiative and calls upon
all States and organizations in a position to do so
to support this endeavour.

"The Council calls upon all Member States
to enforce all Security Council resolutions on
sanctions, including those imposing arms
embargoes, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, and to bring their own domestic
implementation into compliance with the
Council's measures on sanctions. The Council
calls upon all Member States to continue to make
available to the sanctions committees all pertinent
information on any alleged violations of arms
embargoes and to take appropriate measures to
investigate such allegations. The Council urges
Member States in a position to do so to provide
assistance to interested States in strengthening
their capacity to fulfil their obligations in this
regard.

"The Security Council underlines that the
issue of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons must be addressed together with the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process in the post-conflict phases. The
Council recognizes that DDR is closely linked
with the long-term peace and security in a post-
conflict situation and recalls that a growing
number of peacekeeping missions contain the
DDR element as part of their mandate. In this
regard, the Council stresses the importance of a
comprehensive international and regional
approach to DDR that is not limited to the

political and security aspects of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants, but addresses also its social and
economic aspects, including special needs of
child soldiers and women.

"The Security Council, while bearing in
mind that the issue of the illicit small arms and
light weapons has a multidisciplinary nature,
encourages Member States in a position to do so
to provide assistance and support to the United
Nations Coordinating Action on Small Arms
mechanism.

"The Council continues to recognize the
need to engage the relevant international
organizations, non-governmental organizations,
business and financial institutions and other
actors at the international, regional and local
levels to contribute to the implementation of arms
embargoes and to the wider objective of
preventing illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to update the Council on
28 February 2006 for its earliest possible
consideration of the implementation of all the
recommendations contained in his report entitled
'Small arms' of 20 September 2002 (S/2002/1053)."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/7.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5p.m.
