Ms. Kaur (India): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of October.

I am honoured to speak in the debate. Let me also
express our appreciation to you for convening the
quarterly open debate, which allows the Council to
take stock of recent developments in the Middle East,
including the State of Palestine. I would also like to
thank the Under-Secretary- General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffery Feltman, for his comprehensive briefing.

The resolution of the Palestinian question remains
an urgent and key issue for the international community.
It is a prerequisite for building a sustainable and lasting
peace in the Middle East region. Given the evolving
situation in the region and its inherent fragility and
unpredictability, it is necessary that there be no more
delay in the resolution of the Palestinian question.

We are encouraged by the ongoing direct talks
between Israel and Palestine, facilitated by the United
States. We hope that the direct talks, which have resumed
after one of the longest periods of stalemate since the
signing ofthe Oslo Accords, will lead to concrete results
within the time frame of nine months envisaged by the
United States Secretary of State, Mr. John Kerry. In this
context, it is necessary to address the issue of Israeli
settlement activities, which are continuing unabated.
Those activities are not only illegal, but also pose a
serious threat to the two-State solution. We join others
in urging Israel to stop settlement activities.

The blockade of Gaza has had serious consequences
for the lives of Palestinians. It has also adversely
affected essential services, economic activities and
infrastructure development. We continue to hold that it
is necessary for Israel to lift the blockade on Gaza and
allow normal and unrestricted movement of persons
and goods within Palestine.

India remains steadfast in its support for a
negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue that
results in a sovereign, independent, viable and united
State of Palestine, living within secure and recognized
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital, side by
side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in the Quartet
road map, various United Nations resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

Given the financial difficulties that the Palestinian
Authority continues to face, India remains committed
to supporting the Palestinian Authority bilaterally as
well as through the India, Brazil and South Africa
(IBSA) fund. Bilaterally, we continue to partner with
the Palestinian Authority by providing development
support and assistance through direct budgetary
support, contributions to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, training and more. Through the IBSA fund,
we will continue to undertake capacity-building and
infrastructure projects that are prioritized by the
Palestinian Authority.

As demonstrated over the past six decades, including
during its memberships in the Security Council,
India also stands ready to support all measures that
the Palestinian leadership may take towards political
resolution of the final status issues.

Before I conclude, I would like to express our
deep concern about the situation in Syria. While we
welcome the adoption of Security Council resolution
2118 (2013), on the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme, and the presidential statement on
the humanitarian situation in Syria (S/PRST/2013/15),
we are concerned at the continuing violence and the
worsening humanitarian situation. We have long held
that there is no military solution to the conflict. We
continue to think that an inclusive political dialogue to
resolve the crisis should remain the focus of the United
Nations, including the Council. We look forward to an
early holding of the "Geneva II" conference, which
should help commence a Syrian-led inclusive political
dialogue that resolves the current crisis and meets the
legitimate aspirations of all sections of Syrian society.

