Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, Madam President,
let me thank you for organizing today's debate on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis, and
Ambassador Tanin for their briefings.

While the text of my statement is being circulated, I
will, in the interests oftime, make a shorter presentation.

Let me begin by paying tribute to the former first
Vice-President of Afghanistan, Marshal Mohammad
Qasim Fahim, who passed away on 9 March. His
contribution to fighting the forces of terrorism and
extremism and to the stabilization and reconstruction of
Afghanistan will always be remembered. Mohammed
Qasim Fahim was also a close friend of India and made
personal contributions to nurturing and strengthening
the India-Afghanistan strategic partnership. The
Vice-President of India led the Indian delegation to his
funeral.

I would also like to pay tribute to the four members
of the United Nations family who lost their lives on
17 January in the ghastly attack in a restaurant in Kabul.
We condemn that barbaric act, which was perpetrated
by the Taliban. On 13 March, a suicide bomber, whose
target was the Indian Consulate in Kandahar, was killed

by Afghan security forces just outside the Consulate
building, preventing a major terrorist act.

The presidential election, which is scheduled for
5 April 2014, is the most important upcoming event
in the political transition of Afghanistan. We should
look for an election process that has credibility with
the Afghan people and culminates in the choice of an
Afghan President who is acceptable to all Afghans. We
note that numerous election rallies and meetings are
being organized across Afghanistan, and we applaud
the Afghan people's confidence and their desire to
participate in free and fair elections.

On the security situation, we note with distress the
mention in the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/163)
that provinces in the east and south of Afghanistan
faced intensified attacks from an array of groups,
including from Tehrik-e Taliban, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba,
and Lashkar-i-Jhangvi, in addition to the Afghan
Taliban. Our assessment is that intimidation in the
southern and eastern parts of the country is a threat to
smooth elections.

We want to stress the fact that terrorism, which
emanates from beyond Afghanistan's borders, is the
main threat to Afghanistan's security and stability.
It is that terrorism that promotes terrorist activities
against Afghan interests, as well as against friends of
Afghanistan, like India. It is unfortunate that terrorist
sanctuaries and safe havens and the financial and
tactical support structures for terrorism still exist.

It is necessary to demystify the notion that the
problem in Afghanistan is one of rivalry among
various ethnic or tribal groups. The real problem is that
Afghanistan continues to face terrorism, which seeks
to erode the efforts of Afghanistan and its friends to
reconstruct the socioeconomic fabric of the country. We
need to look at the sources of insecurity and violence
in Afghanistan. We stand firmly with Afghanistan in
confronting the threat and challenge posed by terrorism.

Turning to the reconciliation process, we believe that
it must remain Afghan led, Afghan owned and Afghan
controlled, while respecting the agreed red lines. We
do not endorse any effort to treat the Government of
Afghanistan on par with the Taliban. We have always
maintained that the success of economic transition in
Afghanistan is as crucial as the success of political
and security transitions. It is the view of my delegation
that the mandate of UNAMA should be to support
the political institutions of Afghanistan, besides
mobilizing international focus on the reconstruction of
Afghanistan.

We believe that UNAMA should also harness
its strength in the humanitarian and developmental
work, where its ability to reach the remotest corner
of Afghanistan is well proven. UNAMA should
concentrate on capacity-building. In that regard, we
would like to assure the Council of India's fullest
cooperation.

We note the important references in the resolution
adopted today by the Council (resolution 2145 (2014))
on UNAMA to the major processes that underpin the
attempt by the international community to support
Afghanistan. At the regional level, we would like to
draw the attention of the Council to the senior officials'
meeting under the Istanbul Process on Regional
Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable
Afghanistan held in New Delhi on 17 January and the
visit of the Minister of External Affairs of India to
Kandahar on 15 February to inaugurate, with President
Karzai, the Afghanistan National Agricultural Sciences
and Technology University.

Those recent events are part of India's long-
established policy of, and commitment to, assisting the
people and Government of Afghanistan as they build
a peaceful, pluralistic, democratic and prosperous
Afghanistan. India does not have the luxury of an exit
strategy in Afghanistan, which shares a civilizational
linkage with India.

We do not share the negativity and pessimism
portrayed about the future of Afghanistan. Afghanistan
is going through political, security and economic
transitions at the same time. The uncertainties
associated with the transitions pose real challenges.
The progress that has been achieved by the people and
Government of Afghanistan in the past 12 years in
the social, political and economic spheres has taught
us that, with sustained support from the international
community, Afghanistan can successfully overcome
those challenges.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that, at this
critical juncture of transition and transformation, we
want to express our full support to the political, social
and economic transition taking place in Afghanistan.
We would like to convey, a few days before Nowruz,
our best wishes to the people of Afghanistan for the
upcoming electoral process and would like to assure
them of the sincere support of the Government and
people of India.

