Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
Permanent Representative of Austria, in his capacity
representing the Presidency of the European Union, will be
making a statement later in this debate, with which the
United Kingdom fully agrees.

Mr. President, you were right to schedule a further
open debate on this subject, and I pay tribute to Sweden's
forward role on it. Since we last addressed the issue, we
have seen yet more evidence in far too many conflicts that
a culture of impunity still surrounds attacks on the
provision of humanitarian assistance. We have seen the
murders of United Nations staff in Afghanistan and
Burundi. We have seen the deaths of humanitarian
personnel in the conflict in Kosovo and in Tajikistan. We
have seen hostage-taking in the Caucasus. And we have
seen attacks on those local populations who have turned to
the international humanitarian organizations for shelter and
protection. All of this is unacceptable.
But it is not enough simply to say that this is
unacceptable. We need an agenda for action. It is in this
context that I would particularly like to thank the Secretary-
General for his focused and action-oriented report,
supported by the clear and insistent statement of the Deputy
Secretary-General this morning.

I will not address each of the recommendations in
the Secretary-General's report, but I would like to address
one or two key issues.

First, the international community should take
seriously its responsibilities under international law. In
this context, we welcome the adoption in Rome of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court. We hope that
this will help end the culture of impunity and so make the
world a safer place for everybody, including humanitarian
personnel. We particularly welcome the explicit reference
to humanitarian personnel in the list of war crimes within
the jurisdiction of the Court. The work which United
Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations and
others do, often with great personal courage, to bring
humanitarian relief to those caught in conflicts, is too
important for us to take a complacent or routine approach
to this question. The United Kingdom would also like to
take this opportunity to urge all States to ratify the 1994
United Nations Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel without further delay.

Secondly, host countries should fulfil their
obligations towards humanitarian personnel. The
Secretary-Generals report notes that solidarity and
burden-sharing are important in encouraging States to
respect humanitarian principles and obligations, but they
are not prerequisites. Host countries should make every
effort to bring those responsible for violations of these
principles to justice.

Thirdly, the Security Council should make every
effort to ensure that humanitarian assistance is given
adequate protection. The United Kingdom would be very
willing to discuss further the five suggestions made this
morning by the Acting Permanent Representative of the
United States. The Secretary-General's report rightly
makes clear the importance of providing clear, realistic
and appropriate mandates to United Nations troops in
support of humanitarian operations.

Providing such support cannot be a soft option. The
force must be properly equipped to respond to the threats
it may face and receive suitably robust rules of
engagement. All too often, we have asked the military to
do the impossible and failed to give them the resources
they need.
Furthermore, I support the view expressed just now
by the Permanent Representative of Brazil that the role of
military forces in such situations may have to be assessed
against the need to address the causes rather than just the

 

symptoms of a conflict. This needs further analysis and
debate.

This debate will have a lasting value only if it is seen
as part of a continuous process. The Council is looking at
some of the recommendations contained in this report in the
context of the follow-up to the Secretary-Generals report
on Africa. My delegation stands ready to play a full and
active role both in that process and in support of any other
action to address the problem.

