Mr. Martin: I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on this prompt fulfilment of the commitment Kuwait
made as a candidate to highlight the improvement of
the working methods of the Security Council.

It is a privilege for Security Council Report to
be invited to brief the Council for the first time. The
declared mission of our organization is to advance
the transparency and effectiveness of the Security
Council. For a little over 12 years now, a small team,
first headed by a former Permanent Representative who
had served on the Council, Ambassador Colin Keating
of New Zealand, has been able to report publicly and
independently on the activities of the Council and its
subsidiary bodies, thanks to the cooperation we have
received from all its members. That has included
following closely both the Council's discussion of its
working methods and their evolution in practice, and
the four research reports on working methods we
have published over the years, we hope, have made a
contribution to institutional memory. The adoption
of last year's note by the President S/20l7/507, which
represents a further achievement of the sustained
efforts ofJapan during its successive terms chairing the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, provided a trigger for the most
recent of our reports.

Some recent developments in the Council's practice
that are now codified in note 507 certainly seem to us
to be advances in transparency and effectiveness. The
move to earlier election of non-permanent members
was of course a decision of the General Assembly, but
the subsequent decision of the Council to invite newly
elected members to earlier observation of Council
meetings has been a significant contribution to their
ability to prepare for membership. The commitment
to earlier designation of the chairs of subsidiary
bodies allows for the more effective handover of
those responsibilities. The undertaking of informal
consultations regarding those appointments jointly by
two members - understood to be one elected and one
permanent member - rather than designation by the
permanent members alone, represented a compromise
in negotiations, but some improved recognition of
the voice of elected members in the allocation of
their responsibilities. Security Council Report seeks
to make its own contribution to the preparation of
elected members by offering its knowledge and
experience - including on working methods - to any
and all of them.

Note 507 declares, in its first paragraph, that the
members of the Council are committed to implementing
the measures in its annex. Yet as one of the Council's
then members observed in the last such open debate,
agreements may be reached but then are simply not
implemented. I want therefore to focus on some areas
of stated agreement that, in the opinion of Security
Council Report, would, if implemented, contribute
significantly to the effectiveness of the Council.

Previous open debates display repeated concern
regarding the operation of the penholder system. It is
a relatively recent practice, which Security Council
Report has witnessed becoming entrenched during our
short lifetime, and Member States that have returned
to the Council after a decade or more of absence have
noted the closing down of space for initiatives of elected
members. The joint statement of six elected members
from six regions in the October 2015 open debate (see S/PV.7539) noted that the system has

"diminished the opportunity for wider Council
engagement, especially by the elected members"
and "cuts across the principle of collective
responsibility that underpins the Charter."
(S/PV. 7539, p. 8)

Since 2014, notes of the President have
institutionalized penholdership as a recognized, if
informal arrangement, yet without any process for the
Council itself to designate or review its allocation.
Note 507 reiterates that any member of the Council
may be a penholder, and also that more than one
member may act as co-penholder. But in practice three
permanent members remain today sole penholders on
the overwhelming majority of country situations on the
Council's agenda. Initiatives by elected members - on
the humanitarian aspects of the Syrian conflict, on
the protection of medical personnel - have shown
What they can achieve, but remain all too rare.
Co-penholdership would surely be a way of drawing
more fully on those who chair the relevant sanctions
committee, or have regional or other strong expertise
on a country situation.

Closely linked to the penholder system is the
manner of negotiations, which Security Council
Report observes closely and reports on. The quality
of negotiations and their outcomes are of supreme
importance to the effectiveness of the Council.
The latest note 507 addresses this more fully than
its predecessors. It stresses that drafting should be
carried out in an inclusive manner that will allow the
participation of all members; that penholders should
engage in timely consultation with all members with
openness and flexibility; that there should be at least
one round of discussions with all members; and that
penholders should provide a reasonably sufficient time
for consideration by all members. Moreover, there
should be informal consultation in an early manner
with the broader membership.
This might seem an obvious statement of good
practice, but it is far from being the reality we have
often observed. As one of the then members described
it in the Council's last open debate,

"[p]enh01ders routinely take zero drafts straight
to meetings of so-called experts. This precludes
any real effort at building genuine consensus
on the key policy questions to be considered.
Non-penholders have to choose between accepting
a text largely as presented, or risk being accused
of torpedoing important documents if they wish to
make substantive policy proposals. Those practices
are neither effective, sustainable nor respectful
of the perspectives of other Council members."
(S/PV. 7740, p.9)

The year 2016 saw the greatest-ever number of
non-consensual resolutions in the post-Cold War
period, and in some cases this explicitly reflected not
just political differences but unhappiness with the
negotiating process. In 2017, other than the high number
of vetoes - the highest since 1988 - the Council
achieved greater unanimity, and it is to be hoped that
this reflected better negotiating practice.

The quality of negotiations is never more important
than when the Council is adopting or revising the
mandate of a peace operation, and in this context
troop- and police-contributing countries have a special
stake. Our most recent report tracks the long history
of efforts to improve the Council's engagement with
such countries, which began as far back as 1994. It is
depressing to me, as a former member of the High-
level Independent Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations, to contrast the repeated commitments
to enhanced interaction over two decades with what
our report described as a lack of effective dialogue
generating frustration on all sides and affecting
mandate implementation. Given the Council's current
focus on strategic reviews of peace operations, and the
serious crises faced today by so many operations, there
could not be a more important time for the Council to
give effect to the commitments made again in note 507
to timely consultations, information-sharing and more
interactive and focused informal consultations among
Council members, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries.

Note 507 seeks to encourage, in a number of ways,
information from the Secretariat being presented in
the most helpful manner and greater interaction with
its briefers. However, during the negotiations on the
note, members were unable to agree on a reference
to situational awareness briefings - the most recent
effort to find an appropriate format for the Council to
receive early warning of situations that may require
its consideration. At a time when the Council and the
Secretary-General are focused on the prevention of
conflict, it seems important that Council members
should reach agreement among themselves and with the
Secretariat on how the Council wishes to be kept well
informed and therefore to be ready to engage promptly
on emerging threats to peace and security.

For several years now, Security Council Report
has had the privilege of accompanying almost all
Council missions and informing the wider membership
about them in real time. That experience makes us
firm believers in the value they can have, in their
impact both on interlocutors and on the Council's own
understanding of situations it is addressing.

I have a more personal appreciation going further
back, to 1999, when as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in what was then East Timor, I
received five members ofthe Council on its first mission
for five years in a United Nations compound under siege
during post-ballot violence - a mission that played an
important role in obtaining Indonesia's invitation for
international assistance to restore security.

With five missions in both 2016 and 2017, the
Council itself is clearly convinced of their value. That
could surely be enhanced not just by the standard
formulation of terms of reference and subsequent
briefing, as described in note 507, but by more strategic
prior discussion of the objectives around which the
Council can unite and subsequent discussion of the
follow-up.

There are many other aspects of working methods
that I cannot take more time to discuss. Security Council
Report made suggestions for greater synergy in the
relationship between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission in another of our recent reports, consistent
with but going beyond the general importance of
communication and interaction enshrined in note 507.

Perhaps this is a good way to end: by emphasizing
that successive notes 507 have been valuable
codifications of existing agreements regarding Council
practice, but advances in that practice depend on the
constant creativity and initiative of members of the
Council. We have described in our most recent report
how elected members and the wider membership have
contributed to past developments, and I trust that this
open debate will give impetus to further developments
in the transparency and effectiveness of the Council.

