Mr. Raytchev (Bulgaria): First of all, I should
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
open meeting on general issues relating to sanctions
and on the final report of the Stockholm Process on the
Implementation of Targeted Sanctions. Let me also
express our gratitude to the State Secretary for Foreign
Affairs of Sweden, His Excellency Mr. Hans Dahlgren,
as well as to the Swedish Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
under whose auspices the final meeting of the
Stockholm Process was held. We appreciate the
presentation by Assistant Secretary-General Turk,
which was insightful and has been helpful for this
discussion. We are also grateful to the academic
circles - especially those from Uppsala University -
as well as to the diplomats, international officials,
scholars and independent experts working in the area
of sanctions and, last but not least, to the non-
governmental organizations that took part in the
Process.

As an active participant both in the preparatory
discussion and in the final meeting, held at Stockholm
in November 2002, Bulgaria shares and supports the
conclusions, guidelines and recommendations laid
down in the final text of the report. The inclusion of a
special section dedicated to unintended consequences
of sanctions implementation for third States and to the
need for direct or indirect compensation for damages
caused to them was backed by the experience of
Bulgaria as a State severely affected by the sanctions
imposed on the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
Libya and Iraq.

We support the final report of the Stockholm
Process as a whole. I should like, on behalf of my
country, only to add the following comments. Bulgaria
supports the View that the imposition of compulsory
measures by the Security Council under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations against States and/or
other entities whose actions represent a threat to
international peace and security shall be done on the
basis of a preliminary comprehensive assessment of the
situation. That should allow for the adequate focusing
of targeted sanctions on responsible decision makers
while minimizing unintended side effects, such as
negative consequences for the population of the
targeted State, its neighbours or third States. In that
connection, the Stockholm Process provides valuable
practical guidelines on how to improve sanctions
methodology.

Secondly, humanitarian impact assessment should
be included as a standard requirement in the regular
reports of the expert groups, which is the practice
developed under Security Council resolution 1408
(2002), on Liberia. Such assessment should be
conducted in accordance with preliminary criteria,
based on, for example, the methodologies developed by
the Inter-agency Standing Committee of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and reflected
adequately in the reports of the Expert Groups on
Liberia.

Extremely useful, in our View, is the regular
assessment of the unintended impact of enforced
sanctions, which allows for distinction between the
effects of sanctions and other causes of humanitarian
and economic crises in the targeted State. We also
support the proposal for the establishment of an
autonomous uniform mechanism for sanctions-
monitoring within the framework of the United Nations
Secretariat aimed at improving coordination and
avoiding duplication in the work of the ad hoc expert
groups.

Coordination between the expert groups and the
sanctions committees, on the one hand, and the
relevant technical and regional organizations, on the
other, should also be improved. We also believe it
would be useful to have regular coordination between
the sanctions committees, including the holding of joint
meetings aimed at facilitating their work and ensuring
consistency and continuity among them. In our View,
the need to improve the management of information
related to the implementation of sanctions is also to be
stressed. The putting in place of a centralized and
accessible database and the establishment of an
integrated institutional memory would ensure
continuity in this work and provide timely relevant
background information on the implementation of
sanctions.

The main objective of the planning and
implementation of targeted sanctions should be that
they be well focused on the targeted actors. In that
regard, the final report of the Stockholm Process
contains useful observations and guidelines.

Finally, an important issue related to the negative
side effects of the implementation of sanctions is the
practical implementation of the provisions of Article
50 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
provides for consultations between the Security
Council and third States confronted with special
economic problems arising from the carrying out of
preventive or enforcement measures in compliance
with Chapter VII of the Charter. In our View, although
that issue has been extensively discussed in the General
Assembly's Sixth Committee, in the Security Council
and during the Stockholm Process, there are still
aspects to be clarified. Work on those aspects should
continue in the future.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
confidence that the outcome of the Stockholm Process
provides answers to key problems having practical
importance for the work of the Security Council in the
area of implementing sanctions. We believe that the
steady and purposeful work of the participants in the
Process will contribute significantly to our common
efforts to devise better-targeted and more effective
sanctions aimed at more efficiently preventing future
threats to international peace and security.

