Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Slovenia cosponsored the draft
resolution submitted for action to the Security Council
today and supports the extension of the mandates of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) and of the United Nations
operations and activities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In addition, we would like to take this opportunity to
refer to some of the basic aspects of the peace process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is encouraging to note that the necessary building
blocks of statehood are being put in place in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and that we seem be approaching the point of
irreversibility in the peace process. However, some essential
conditions for achieving lasting peace still need to be met:
the return of refugees and displaced persons, reconciliation,
comprehensive minority protection, the democratization of
society and institutions, and economic recovery. The United
Nations has and will continue to have an important role in
fulfilling all of these conditions.

The return of refugees is the single most important
task in 1998. There are still more than 1.4 million refuges
and displaced persons. Only about 100,000 have returned so
far, most of them to areas where their national group is
now a majority. Comprehensive refugee return, especially
minority return, is, however, crucial to lasting peace. The
role of the International Police Task Force (IPTF) in
democratizing and monitoring the reformed local police is
of the greatest importance. We expect that the necessary
security backing for the returning refugees will be provided
by the enhanced SFOR ability to respond to civil disorder.

Political democratization is another important
condition for irreversible peace and one closely linked to
refugee return. The elections scheduled to take place in
September this year will therefore have a special
significance.

Another important aspect of the effort to build a
democratic society is national reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Reconciliation is also a conditio sine qua
non of lasting peace. In this regard, we are pleased to
note that the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia has taken steps to establish its
coordination office in Banja Luka and that cooperation
with the Tribunal is at last gaining momentum. The
improved cooperation of Bosnian Serbs with the Tribunal
is welcome but not yet sufficient. More needs to be done
to bring the remaining indictees before the Court. The
process of reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina will
be significantly constrained until all war criminals,
including the major ones, are brought to justice.

An additional and essential segment of national
reconciliation is the need to clarify the fate of more than
19,000 missing persons, including the fate of 7,000
citizens from the United Nations designated "safe area" of
Srebrenica.

We note with satisfaction that the international
community has initiated its engagement in the
development of an educational curriculum that will
eliminate hate propaganda in history and language. We
share the View of the Secretary-General that this is one of
the key future tasks in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
would like to restate again that, in this context, special
attention should be paid to the policy of minority
schooling and, in that regard, the policy of equality of use
of both scripts should be effectively pursued.

Demining is one of the areas that Slovenia considers
an especially important condition for the return of
refugees. Against that background, the Government of
Slovenia established the International Trust Fund for
Demining and Assistance to Mine Victims in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in March this year. I am pleased to inform
the Council that the Fund will start its activities by the
end of this month, June 1998.

SFOR has made a decisive contribution to peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. But despite
encouraging progress made recently in the implementation
of many aspects of the Peace Dayton Agreement of 1995,
a number of critical problems remain. Therefore, we
welcome and support the commitment of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to assist further in
the implementation of the Peace Agreement. Slovenia
itself will continue to participate in SFOR activities in the
future.

 

IPTF is making an important contribution to lasting
peace and to respect for human rights in the country. IPTF
has a crucial role in building a democratic police force, in
monitoring local police operational activities and in
investigating human rights abuses. We would like to stress
the importance that IPTF continue with the independent
investigations in human rights violations. The present draft
resolution gives IPTF the necessary authorization for that.
IPTF has so far made a significant contribution to efforts in
the field of human rights. However, we cannot ignore the
facts that IPTF monitors have on several occasions failed
to adequately respond to human rights abuses; that monitors
have frequently not been aware of their authority to conduct
human rights investigations independently of local police;
that many monitors have no professional background in
human rights investigations; and that monitors have not
received sufficient training. These and other anomalies were
reported recently by Human Rights Watch. The
recommendations made in the report by that organization
are useful.

We believe that the successful implementation of the
tasks of IPTF rests on the quality, experience and
professional skills of its personnel. Therefore, we support
the determination of the IPTF Commissioner to provide the
best personnel for such important tasks that the international
community assigned and Bosnian authorities entrusted to
IPTF.
The role of the United Nations remains very important
in a wide variety of areas of work: refugees, police, the
Tribunal, human rights monitoring, and assistance. The
Security Council should continue to maintain oversight of
all these activities and help with the appropriate decisions
within its competences.

In closing, I wish to express the appreciation of
Slovenia to NATO-SFOR and the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina's IPTF. Their role in the
realization of the essential tasks for durable peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is fundamental. We hope that, within the
extended mandates, decisive progress will be made in the
months to come.

