Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to begin
by saying that the commitment we must demonstrate
to children affected by wars and all other forms of
abuse should go well beyond that represented by
the international legal instruments and Security
Council resolutions that bind all States. It is a moral
duty - greater than the duty based on our representation
of our own countries or on our service in international
organizations- to fight, as hard as we can, the plague
of children being used as soldiers, targets or any other
form of abuse. I firmly believe, and state on behalf of
my country, Algeria, that children's place is in school,
and those schools should be immune and protected.

It is heartening that the international community
has started to size up this crucial issue. Today's
open debate - which I thank the United States for
convening - is of paramount importance and follows
similar meetings held in the past couple of years.
However, while some legal instruments do exist in
this field and the Security Council has adopted some
resolutions on the subject, we have to face the fact that,
according to credible accounts, 300,000 children are
still forcibly enlisted as soldiers and many others are
still abused in the maelstrom of conflict situations.
Children in the occupied Palestinian territories continue
to suffer from the prevailing military occupation. They
continue to be arrested, detained and prosecuted in
juvenile military courts, as has been highlighted in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2014/339). We all have in
mind the images ofthe children on the beaches of Gaza,
their schools destroyed.

At this juncture in the debate, Algeria believes
that the Security Council should make its message
and action as clear as possible. First, the whole world
should know that the Council will take specific action
wherever continued abuses against children are
committed and against whomever is committing them,
be they States, groups or individuals. Secondly, all
peacekeeping operations should encompass, beyond
the current advisers that exist, specific differentiated
provisions on children in conflict situations. Thirdly,
the Secretary-General's reports should include specific
recommendations. Fourthly, the Security Council
should be proactive and preventive on the issue of
justice and accountability, whether that involves States,
armed groups or individuals. Sanctions cannot be an
evasive or hypothetical option.

On a more positive note, I must thank the
Secretary-General for his report and commend the
tremendous work done by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Zerrougui, and her
Office, which deserve greater and broader support,
both politically and in terms of giving her Office the
appropriate means. We commend her for the United
Nations global Children, Not Soldiers campaign carried
out with UNICEF.

It is also important to encourage agreements
with regional organizations and States. Our duty is to
encourage those States that have voluntarily entered
such agreements and shown effectiveness. In that
respect, we deem it important to congratulate Chad
for setting an example for Africa and beyond. All
Member States should continue to work to stabilize and
help those countries with appropriate measures. The
international community should embark on rebuilding
homes and souls. We owe it to children to ensure they
hold pencils and computers in safe schools, and not
machine guns or targets in killing fields.

