Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Allow me
to welcome you to the Council, Mr. President, and to
congratulate Chile on its accession to the presidency
of the Council. I thank you for having organized
this meeting on post-conflict peacebuilding. I
also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
and Ambassador Antonio Patriota, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.

The success ofpeacebuilding in post-conflict States
requires, inter alia, three elements that we believe are
essential. These are the identification of priorities, the
strengthening of institutions, and the broad support of
the international community.

In terms of peacebuilding priorities, the countries
involved must set their own priorities in accordance
with the principles of national ownership. Furthermore,
the establishment of open political mechanisms should
be part of any peacebuilding strategy. We welcome the
example of Tunisia, where the broad participation of
political parties and civil society has led the political
process to the adoption ofa new Constitution and to the
holding of free, transparent elections. Furthermore, the
participation of women and young people in political
and development processes is critical to post-conflict
recovery. In that regard, we firmly recommend the
strengthening of investments in activities that support
the economic empowerment of women and young
people.

With respect to institution-building, we note that
this is a long-term effort involving robust interaction
at various levels. In that regard, we believe that the
emphasis should be on restoring State authority and
the essential functions of the Government and on
providing basic public services to the people. From
this perspective, we welcome the capacity-building
efforts in South Sudan, Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia and
elsewhere, as well as the support of partners. In South
Sudan, the initiative to build the capacities of the
public civil service, launched by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, has been possible due to the
involvement of civil service training personnel from
neighbouring States.

In Cote d'Ivoire, the simplification of birth records
and the issuance of identification documents has
improved access to services and electoral participation,
and strengthened social cohesion. We believe that this
example deserves to be replicated in other countries,
particularly in the Central African Republic. Indeed,
public trust needs to be restored in law enforcement
in those countries, and social cohesion must be
strengthened in order to speed up the return of refugees
and displaced persons.

In Liberia, the justice and security centres are a
crucial element in the Government's strategy to extend
justice and security services beyond the capital. We
welcome the support of the United Nations and the
major financing provided by the Peacebuilding Fund
for these initiatives. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the restoration of State authority through the
redeployment of State functions in areas previously
controlled by armed groups remains essential to the
stability of the country. It should be emphasized
that the sound management of natural resources and
transparency are major factors in terms of minimizing
the conflict and restoring trust.

With respect to the support of the international
community, we recall that peacebuilding depends to
a great extent on multifaceted support, particularly
political, financial and technical. In this respect,
Chad welcomes the role of the Peacebuilding Fund
in supporting peace processes, promoting the prompt
implementation of peace agreements, and investing in
the rapid strengthening of institutions. We therefore
call on the international financial institutions and
multilateral and bilateral partners to continue to
support the recovery of countries in post-conflict
situations. We hope that the necessary resources will
be mobilized in order to create conditions conducive
to lasting peace in post-conflict countries. At the same
time, we remain concerned about the many pending
challenges, including transnational organized crime,
drug and arms trafficking, and epidemics, such as the
Ebola virus, which continue to have a very negative
impact on the capacities of the institutions ofa number
of countries, particularly in West Africa.

In conclusion, we hope that the adoption of the
new peacebuilding architecture this year will help
us establish better adapted mechanisms in this area
in order to better contribute to the recovery of post-
conflict countries and to preventing their disastrous
relapse into violence.

