The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand,
the Philippines, Portugal, South Africa and Timor-
Leste, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the consideration
of the item, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Tilman
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
2

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/95, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Australia, Austria, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, China, France, Gabon, Japan,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Nigeria, the
Philippines, Portugal, the Russian Federation, South
Africa, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/85, containing the report of the
Secretary- General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in French): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1912 (2010).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
10-25245

