Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): It was just three
months ago, in February, that the Council was convened
to discuss the same issue we are now addressing, namely,
that of settlements in the territories occupied by Israel
since 1967. It was precisely because of the lack of
progress in this regard that my delegation strongly
supported the request for this meeting of the Security
Council, as called for by the League of Arab States, the
Islamic Group and the Arab Group in response to the

 

latest decision by the Israeli Government to confiscate 53
hectares of Palestinian land situated in the area of East
Jerusalem and its announcement that the land is to be
allocated for the purpose of continuing to build Israeli
settlements.

It is against this backdrop that my delegation wishes
to stress the need for the Security Council to undertake a
thorough consideration of the matter and to take urgent
actions on it. In our view, the decision of the Government
of Israel to confiscate Palestinian land in the city of
Jerusalem and the establishment of settlements on those
lands pose great dangers and may well jeopardize the whole
Middle East peace process. Such untenable policies and
practices by the Israeli Government could very well induce
the utilization of drastic measures by certain groups, which
would further exacerbate the already tense situation.

My delegation therefore strongly condemns this
decision by Israel, which is clearly in flagrant violation of
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, United Nations
resolutions declaring the settlements illegal and other
relevant Security Council resolutions, as well as of the
Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements signed on 13 September 1993 by the
Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization. Moreover, it is also in contradiction to the
norms of international conduct, the United Nations Charter
and the precepts and principles of international law.

Contrary to what the Government of Israel promised
in 1993 - that the future of Jerusalem would be negotiated
with the Palestinian leaders - we are witnessing actions on
the part of Israel which are far from this. We are deeply
concerned by the present activities, which represent the first
substantial land seizure since that promise was made. In
this regard, while we note some encouraging developments
which have taken place in the search for a peaceful
settlement to the question of Palestine in the context of a
comprehensive Middle East peace process, my delegation
cannot refrain from emphasizing once again that the issue
of settlements in the occupied territories has a profound
bearing on the peace process.

In this context, we would like to reiterate that it is the
responsibility of the international community, and
specifically of the Security Council, to take the necessary
steps to put an end to these violations and to repudiate the
Israeli confiscation orders, thus preventing any action which
could jeopardize the negotiations on a final settlement of
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

My delegation therefore calls upon the Government
of Israel immediately to revoke its confiscation orders and
arrangements affecting Palestinian land in the city of
Jerusalem and to commence the effective dismantling of
the Israeli settlements in all the occupied Palestinian
territories, including Jerusalem. This is indispensable to
sustain the positive achievements of the past. Therefore,
we urge all parties to continue their efforts to consolidate
the peace process and to refrain from any action
incompatible with the requirements of the agreed upon
accords.

