Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to express on
behalf of the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela our gratitude for the opportunity to
participate in this debate. My delegation aligns itself
with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

No one can dispute the need to protect all
vulnerable civilians from the effects of armed conflict,
pursuant to the relevant instruments of international
law, international humanitarian law and, in particular,
the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols. Those instruments should be applied equally
to all cases involving threatened civilian populations,
ensuring full transparency in the application of the law
and eliminating the ongoing impunity of those States
whose aggressions against unprotected civilian
populations have been condoned for too long.

The protection of civilians in the context of
peacekeeping operations is one of many tasks
established in Security Council mandates. It is related
to other equally important tasks and its implementation
is viable only within the regulatory framework that sets
out the guiding principles for such operations: the
consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of
force. The protection of civilians cannot be conducted
outside the political and legal bases accepted by States.
A successful strategy for the protection of civilians
demands that the root causes of conflict be
systematically addressed through actions that have a
positive impact on development and using appropriate
channels for the peaceful resolution of disputes.

As established in international law, States or
parties to a conflict have the primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians under the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Peacekeeping operations are in certain
limited cases assigned the task of protecting physical

well-being in situations of imminent danger to life,
always within the ground deployment of a mission and
when required to facilitate humanitarian aid.

We note the significant risks inherent in any
initiative that seeks to operationalize the protection of
civilians, especially in the light of the coexistence of
divergent, mutually exclusive conceptual approaches to
the problem and of the individual nature of each armed
conflict. In this context, the issue of civilian protection
forces us to reiterate the questions formulated in 2005
by President Hugo Chavez during the discussions on
the responsibility to protect, which have yet to be
answered. Who defines - and how - what is
necessary to protect civilians? What is the body
responsible for identifying the potential players -
"spoilers" - threatening the fulfilment of the
mandate? Finally, what risks do these issues present for
the impartiality of a peacekeeping mission? It is
necessary for the Member States to deliberate these
issues in the General Assembly as a basic prerequisite
for progress in the formulation of policies that bring
about genuine and broad consensus.

