Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to express my delegation's deep appreciation to the presidency for organizing this debate and, above all, for choosing the fight against terrorism and extremism in Africa as its theme, which demonstrates the importance that China attaches to Africa, its development and the prosperity ofits peoples. Moreover, the choice is timely. As emphasized by the Secretary-General in his latest report on the activities of the United Nations system in implementing the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (A/74/677), terrorism has become one of the most serious threats to international peace and security, to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and to the realization of universal human rights. That is particularly true for our continent, Africa. In particular in the Sahel, terrorists increasingly attack critical infrastructure and vulnerable targets, such as schools, hospitals and economic facilities, with disastrous consequences, both for the political stability and the socioeconomic development of those countries. Moreover, separatists and non-State armed groups, in particular those with proven links to terrorist groups, pose a genuine threat to peace and security in Africa. Even more worrisome is the recent rapprochement between Al-Qaida and Da'esh in the Sahel. Sworn enemies in the past, they now work together and conduct joint operations. By spreading fear, hatred and divisions within communities, today's terrorists aim to incite violence and create a vacuum they hope to then exploit. That is why it is imperative to address the root causes that drive people to join terrorists. Aware of the impact of the proliferation of transnational threats linked to terrorism on security and stability, Morocco is resolutely committed to promoting a comprehensive and coherent approach to the scourge that covers, in a complementary and integrated manner, security and military dimensions, the achievement of economic and human development, the safeguarding of cultural and religious identity and international and regional cooperation. Morocco's approach is in line with the guidelines of the African policy, as set out by His Majesty King Mohammed VI, which advocates the emergence of a new model of South-South cooperation that is both effective and supportive. That approach seeks to strengthen resilience in the light of the complex and multidimensional nature of the challenges faced by the continent. Lastly, it is based on principles and values, thereby making continental and interregional integration and solidarity key factors in responding to the changes occurring on our African continent. To that end, Morocco has always strongly advocated for economic and human development on the African continent. That dimension is crucial to ensuring that stability on the continent is irreversible and that peace is sustainable. It is in that context that Morocco has made the prudent choice to promote and invest, with strength and conviction, in tangible and concrete projects for the benefit of several brotherly African countries. Those projects, which are structural in nature, aim to target the most disadvantaged populations with an inclusive and participatory approach. They include the launch of several public-private partnerships and considerable investments in areas as diverse as financing, banking, insurance, telecommunications, infrastructure, mining, city planning, low-income housing and so on. In addition to socioeconomic development, Morocco has always advocated the preservation of the cultural and religious identity of African citizens. That lever is essential for countering the shameless and reprehensible use of the authentic spiritual frame of reference that fuels and unduly justifies the violent manifestations of extremism and the spread of obscurantism. Under the leadership of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, Commander of the Faithful, Morocco has invested in protecting and promoting moderate, tolerant and open Islam, which has been historically prevalent in the region. In that regard, the Mohammed VI Institute for the Training of Imams, Morchidines and Morchidates has trained 1,754 Imams from several African countries. In addition, the Kingdom of Morocco established the Mohammed VI Foundation for African Ulema, whose main objective is to unify and coordinate the efforts of Muslim ulemas in African States to promote, spread and consolidate the values of tolerance, which are enshrined in and promoted by Islam. The threat of terrorism is multifaceted, evolving and enduring. To address it, we must focus on building peaceful, inclusive and prosperous societies based on the rule of law, human rights, good governance and sustainable development. Resolute and proportionate responses to terrorist threats are also essential, but they must be complemented by medium- and long-term investments in prevention and resilience-building. In line with that approach, States need strong institutions, effective governance and respect for human rights to deny terrorists and their criminal supporters the scope they need to carry out their activities and to bring them to justice. Lastly, special attention must be paid to regional and international cooperation in the fight againstterrorism, as well as to information-sharing and the exchange of good practices.
