Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to again address the Security Council and
to contribute to the Council's deliberations on
Timor-Leste. We appreciate the Visit by the Security
Council that took place and thank those who
contributed to it. We also thank them for their report.
We appreciate the fact that, while in Timor-Leste, they
did liaise with the International Stabilisation Force
(ISF).

I note that the Secretary-General and both
Australia's Prime Minister, the Honourable Kevin
Rudd, and Foreign Minister, the Honourable Stephen
Smith, will be visiting Timor-Leste tomorrow for
further discussions on these issues.

Australia has been at the forefront of
international efforts to assist Timor-Leste in laying the
foundations for a stable and prosperous nation. We
have a vital interest in ensuring Timor-Leste's future
success and have demonstrated our continued
commitment through our substantial development and
security support. We are a leading donor to Timor-
Leste and make a significant contribution to the
country's security, including through our leadership of
the International Stabilisation Force.

Australia welcomes recent positive developments
in Timor-Leste such as the successful holding of
elections this year. United Nations efforts in Timor-
Leste have been integral in creating an environment
conducive to the return of stability. Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Atul
Khare, has made a particularly important contribution
in promoting the constructive and peaceful engagement
of Timor-Leste's political leadership, which has
principal responsibility for achieving good governance
and consolidating democracy.

But, while Timor-Leste has come a long way
since the unrest in April and May 2006, the security
situation remains fragile pending the resolution of
long-term social, political, security and governance
challenges. Timor-Leste's security institutions remain
weak. The presence of significant numbers of
internally displaced persons in camps around Dili and
the districts remains a concern. Unemployment,
including among Timor-Leste's young population, is
also unacceptably high, creating hardship for
Timor-Leste's citizens and fuelling political instability.

These issues must be addressed as the basis for
Timor-Leste's long-term stability and prosperity.

The Government and the people of Timor-Leste
recognize the challenges ahead and are working hard to
begin to address them. But they face significant
capacity constraints and will need international support
for some time to come.

Last year's unrest underscores the importance of
sustained international engagement in Timor-Leste to
lay a solid foundation for peace and prosperity. The
United Nations has invested much in Timor-Leste and
must remain at the forefront of international efforts to
support the new nation. This involvement should be
reflected in an extension of a strong mandate for the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
focused strategically on areas of key concern.

In particular, it will be important for the United
Nations to continue to play the primary security role in
Timor-Leste, until local security forces are able to
manage independently, especially through a strong and
effective police presence. Security sector reform will
be crucial if the people of Timor-Leste are to take full
responsibility for their own future.

With the support of the Timor-Leste Government,
Australia intends to continue to provide military
support to the United Nations Police for as long as the
security situation warrants. In passing, I want to record
our appreciation also for the ongoing New Zealand
military support to the ISF. Australia is also looking to
provide enhanced bilateral assistance in support of
police and defense force development.

Finally, I would like to reiterate Australia's strong
commitment to supporting Timor-Leste and emphasize
that we look forward to continuing to work closely
with the United Nations to this end.

