Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate. We also wish to thank, as
other delegations have done, the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry,
for presenting his report, and the representatives of
Israel and Palestine for their statements.

The Security Council's consideration of the
situation in the Middle East in 2008 culminated in the
adoption of resolution 1850 (2008). We hope 2009 will
bring the results that many of us had hoped for in 2008,
and that the Council will be preparing to become an
effective part of the solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.

Costa Rica believes that it is the parties'
responsibility to implement the provisions of the
resolution. Full compliance with Security Council
resolutions and international law, in particular
international humanitarian and human rights law, as
well as with the outcome of the Madrid Conference,
the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative is the right way to consolidate an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State
living side by side with Israel in peace and security.

In this time of political transition, we can only
continue to support the bilateral negotiation process
between senior authorities of Israel and Palestine so
that they can agree on the core issues in the context of
genuine and constructive negotiations. We must
therefore isolate and weaken extremists wherever they
may be.

I reiterate Costa Rica's conviction that there is a
strong link between political prospects for peace and
the socio-economic and humanitarian situation on the
ground. Only yesterday, we were told that crossings
between Gaza and Israel remain closed. Costa Rica
understands Israel's concern for its own security, and
in that respect has appealed emphatically for an end to
the rocket and mortar attacks on southern Israel. We
also vigorously condemn any statement undermining
Israel's existence as a State or threatening its right to
exist. It is nevertheless unacceptable that Israel should
cite its valid security concerns to justify measures that
indiscriminately effect an entire people, in
contravention of international humanitarian law.

My delegation takes this opportunity to urge the
parties to extend the fragile calm achieved in Gaza and
southern Israel thanks to the good office of Egypt,
which has played a very constructive role in this
matter. Costa Rica welcomes Israel's recent release of
227 Palestinian prisoners, which we believe represents
a gesture of support for President Abbas and for those
who, like him, distance themselves from all
unproductive extremism and are working hard to
achieve a stable and sustainable peace in the Middle
East. The international community must support and
strengthen the voices of moderation in Israel, Palestine
and the wider region calling for the building of peace,
and not those that clamour for war and violence.
We remain optimistic that we shall see the
renewal of indirect peace talks between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic in 2009, under the auspices of
Turkey and in a climate of positive and constructive
discussion. We therefore hope that senior officials of
those countries will begin direct conversations that will
help to build a bridge leading to a comprehensive
solution encompassing all aspects of the question of
the Middle East.

With respect to Lebanon, Costa Rica hopes that
the parties will continue to demonstrate political will
fully to implement resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006). We also hope that the Special Envoys of the
Secretary-General will pursue their ongoing
consultations with Governments that can persuade the
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias in Lebanon to
cooperate peacefully in the disarmament process.

In conclusion, Costa Rica expresses the hope that
2009 will be the year that reveals the truth of the adage
that the night is always darkest before the dawn.

