Ms. Davison (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing. I welcome the fact that we are againjoined by
Deputy Prime Ministers Dacie and Thaci, and I thank
them for their interventions.

It has been three months since we last met to discuss
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. In that time we have seen continued welcome
progress. The new government has launched its
programme of work and the European Union high-level
dialogue has resumed. Action is being taken on tackling
Foreign Fighters and on the Special Investigative Task
Force.

But challenges remain. It is disappointing that the
Kosovo Assembly presidency has postponed voting
on the specialist court. That delay risks calling into
question Kosovo's commitment to the rule of law and to
dealing with war crimes. If the vote is delayed further,
that would affect Kosovo's reputation, so it is vital
that the vote happens at the earliest opportunity. The
establishment of the court will be an important step
for Kosovo's efforts to tackle impunity. Despite that
setback, the direction of travel remains positive. I want
to focus on three areas where progress has been most
important this quarter.

First, Ijoin others in welcoming the consolidation
of the new Government ofKosovo. In its first 100 days,
the Government has set out an ambitious programme
to improve reconciliation, tackle economic reform
and strengthen the rule of law. It now needs to press
on with that programme in order to improve people's
daily lives in Kosovo. The Government has set clear
direction despite the challenges. The protests in
January and the boycott by the Srpska list ministers
and parliamentarians that followed were early tests
for the new administration. We welcome the return of
Srpska list to the Government and parliament following
the end of the boycott last month, and we commend the
response of the Kosovo police to the protests. We are
pleased that the security situation has remained stable,
as the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/303) notes,
although we were shocked by the recent violence in
Kumanovo. We welcome the positive role played by
the Kosovo Government in calming tensions after that
tragic incident.

Secondly, we welcome the important steps that
the Government has taken to address economic
development in Kosovo. In a country where far too
many young people are struggling to find employment,
such steps are desperately needed. That means
developing the economy, attracting inward investment
and creating jobs, to give people a new sense of hope.
For that to happen, the Government needs sustained and
energetic focus on the rule of law, tackling corruption,
promoting judicial reform and creating the conditions
for investment and enterprise to flourish.

The consequences of not addressing economic
development can be seen in the worrying increase in
illegal migration. That issue not only deprives Kosovo
of talented workers, but leaves migrants open to abuse,
trafficking and exploitation. We welcome the urgent
steps that the Kosovo Government has taken to combat
criminal networks and to increase public awareness of
the issue. And we commend the coordinated efforts of
the region, including European Union (EU) member
States, to help arrest that exodus.

My third and final point concerns the EU high-
level dialogue with Serbia. Last month marked the
second anniversary of the historic Brussels Agreement
signed by Deputy Prime Ministers Dacie and Thaci.
Although the pace of progress has been measured, we
should not underestimate how far Serbia and Kosovo
have travelled towards the normalization of relations.
In the past two years, agreement has been reached on a
wide number of issues, including border management,
regional cooperation, the judiciary, civil protection and
policing. And at the local level, we are seeing good
cooperation, including on housing in Mitrovica and
policing in Kline.

We congratulate both countries on the commitment
they have shown to the dialogue. The United
Kingdom is a strong supporter of both Serbia's and
Kosovo's EU perspectives. We look forward to further
implementation of the outstanding elements of the
Brussels agreement, including the establishment of an
association of Serb-majority municipalities.

Let me close with a familiarpoint. Kosovo's progress
is now undeniable. Relations with the region, and with
Serbia, are at their strongest. Over half of the United
Nations membership now recognises Kosovo as an
independent, sovereign State, as do many international
institutions. It is because of that progress that we say
again that it is long past time to reduce the frequency of
these meetings. The realities on the ground, as reflected
in the Secretary-General's report, do not merit this
level of Council attention, particularly when there are
so many more pressing calls on our time. As we move
into the third year of EU-facilitated dialogue between
Serbia and Kosovo, we must acknowledge that it is the
EU, rather than this Council, that will bring momentum
for further progress. Our efforts must therefore focus
on supporting dialogue in Brussels rather than in this
forum in New York.

