The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I understand that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Adeniji
(Nigeria) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Said Djinnit,
Commissioner of the African Union Commission.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Djinnit to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Pierre Schori, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Cote d'Ivoire, and to
Mr. Antonio Monteiro, High Representative of the
Secretary-General for the elections in C6te d'Ivoire.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Schori to take a seat at the Council
table.

I invite Mr. Monteiro to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-
Bi (cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council
table.


The President: I should like to acknowledge the
presence at this meeting of His Excellency Mr. Omar
Bashir Manis, the current Chairman of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union, and of
Mr. Mojanku Gumbi and Mr. Silumko Sokupa,
representing the African Union Mediator.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2005/639, containing the text of a letter
dated 6 October 2005 from the representative of
Nigeria addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Nigeria, His Excellency Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji; the
Commissioner of the African Union Commission, His
Excellency Mr. Said Djinnit; the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Cote
d'Ivoire, Mr. Pierre Schori; and the High
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
elections in C6te d'Ivoire, Mr. Antonio Monteiro.

I now give the floor to Mr. Adeniji.


