I thank all those who briefed us this morning. I would also like to thank Estonia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for arranging this meeting and for preparing the concept note (S/2020/374, annex) to inform our discussion. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has presented an unprecedented challenge to the Security Council over the past two months. Most importantly, the spread of this disease has significant implications for international peace and security that the Council needs to address. But it has also presented major challenges for the Council's working methods. In my intervention today, I will consider how the Council has adapted to these challenges before moving to some more general points. First, I would like to pay tribute to the efforts of China, the Dominican Republic and Estonia. Under their respective presidencies in March, April and May, the Council has been able to move to a position where open Council video- teleconferences can now be broadcast live on United Nations Television and we are able to adopt resolutions and presidential statements through a written procedure. We should not understate the work that was required to achieve this outcome, including from the Secretariat. The move to broadcasting Council video-teleconferences in full was a particularly important step for the transparency of the Council's work. However, the United Kingdom regrets that Council working methods have not been able to respond in a more agile and effective way to this crisis. I recall in this context Article 28 of the Charter of the United Nations, which requires the Council to be organized in a way that enables it to function continuously. Due to a lack of consensus in the Council, neither the Council nor its subsidiary bodies have held a formal meeting since 12 March. There are therefore no verbatim transcripts of our meetings. Our technical platform has not been able to accommodate simultaneous interpretation or open debates and continues to suffer from technical glitches. Meetings are conducted without the benefit of the established framework of the provisional rules of procedure and the mechanisms for resolution of disagreements that they provide. We all hope that we will be able to return to the Chamber soon. But as long as we are confronted with these extraordinary circumstances, we need to continue to pursue opportunities for improving our working methods. When we do return to normal, we will need to consider how we can put contingency plans in place to ensure that we are able to respond more quickly and effectively to any future crises. Last week's Arria Formula meeting on the anniversary of Victory in Europe Day showed us what can be done. I would like to turn to the potential tension between transparency and effectiveness highlighted in the concept note. One significant challenge in this regard is maintaining an appropriate balance between open and closed meetings. Achieving the right balance requires Council members to approach the monthly programme of work with an open mind. It is easy to fall into the trap of following the same format each time an issue appears on our agenda. One option that I would like to highlight is the private meeting. The opportunity for Member States to participate provides an element of transparency, but the closed nature of the meeting removes the temptation to address the media rather than Council colleagues. But the assumption that closed meetings are more effective does not always hold true. To be effective, Council members need to enter these meetings with a willingness to engage in a discussion and consider action. Regrettably, we still see too many examples of Council members reading out prepared statements or refusing to engage in a serious discussion of outcomes or next steps. My final point on transparency relates to civil society. The United Kingdom believes that engaging with a diverse set of briefers is an important element of transparency, and we will continue to promote civil society participation in Council activity. But as highlighted in the Arria Formula meeting organized by the United Kingdom and the Dominican Republic in February, the Council needs to do better at handling the risk of reprisals. We look forward to continuing discussions with Council colleagues on this important issue. Turning to efficiency, there has been some progress in bearing down on speaking times in the Council. But the Council still spends too much time in lengthy meetings that address the conflicts of yesterday rather than shouldering its responsibilities to address today's conflicts and prevent future conflict. We support informal horizon- scanning briefings by the Secretariat and the development of sofa talks to address this challenge. It is important that we use these opportunities effectively. But informal discussions are no substitute for Council meetings - not least for reasons of transparency. We must therefore continue to subject the Council's programme of work to critical analysis and be prepared to bring new issues to the Council. The current crisis means that the Council's work on prevention is more important than ever. The United Kingdom has also prioritized reducing the length and opacity of Council products over recent years. We have had some success, especially with reducing the length of peacekeeping mandates. But there is more work to be done. The United Kingdom will maintain our focus on this issue. In conclusion, the Council's working methods have perhaps never been under greater scrutiny. While we have made significant progress since March, our ambition should be for the Council to be a leader in innovation and agility. I look forward to continuing discussions on how we can rise to the challenge.
