Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea, and
thank also Under-Secretary-General Miyet for his
useful briefing this morning. Your initiative, Mr.
President, in convening this open meeting is also very
welcome.

My statement today can be relatively short. We
fully share the views that will be expressed later in the
debate by the delegation of France, which currently
holds the Presidency of the European Union.

The fighting between Ethiopia and Eritrea must
rank high on any list of totally avoidable conflicts. The
cost in human suffering has been enormous, as the
Security Council mission to both countries earlier this
year saw for itself.

We are particularly grateful for the major
contribution, reflected in the Secretary-General's
report, of Major-General Timothy Ford and his
reconnaissance team. Their findings will form the basis
for the essential work, which we hope will begin soon,
on expanding the mandate and structure of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE).

The Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities,
signed in June after much painstaking work by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), is the key to the
deployment of UNMEE. The United Kingdom is
grateful for the skilful efforts of President Bouteflika
of Algeria and the good offices of the special envoy of
the United States in bringing this Agreement to
fruition. We commend their persistence and welcome
their continued involvement. It is clearly essential that
the negotiations continue if we are to achieve lasting
peace between Ethiopia and Eritrea and the beginnings
of economic revival.

The Secretary-General's account of the
humanitarian situation in both countries makes chilling
reading. Over 1 million Eritreans have been adversely
affected by the war. Over 90,000 of them have sought
refuge in the Sudan since May of this year alone. In
Ethiopia, the war has exacerbated an already desperate
food shortage. Over 10 million people currently require
emergency aid. That is why, for the sake of the peoples
of both countries, every effort must continue to be
made to achieve a lasting peace settlement. In the
meantime, it is clearly essential that both parties to the
conflict maintain the ceasefire and adhere precisely and
completely to the terms of the Cessation Agreement.
That will allow early deployment of an expanded
UNMEE.

We hope the 100 military observers foreseen in
Security Council resolution 1312 (2000) will deploy
soon. It is obviously important that the two sides begin
to develop confidence in the sustainability and
permanence of the ceasefire. The early arrival of the
military observers will greatly assist this process.

But the timely deployment of the full UNMEE
peacekeeping force remains the key to a permanent
ceasefire and the creation of conditions necessary for
work on a lasting settlement. Particular care will be
needed to define the time scale of UNMEE's
deployment. As Ambassador Soderberg has said this
morning, the deployment of United Nations
peacekeepers cannot be an excuse for inaction on the
political front.

We agree fully with the Secretary-General's
concern that UNMEE's peacekeepers should not be
expected to deploy indefinitely. It is also important that
clear and effective coordinating mechanisms should
exist between UNMEE and the OAU as the OAU
works to resolve the political differences between the
two parties.

The threat posed by landmines and unexploded
ordnance to the United Nations Mission and to the
return of civilians to those areas affected by the
conflict is of grave concern. We welcome the
involvement of the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS) and urge both sides to cooperate
fully with the UNMAS programme.

The United Kingdom will continue to follow the
situation in Ethiopia and Eritrea closely. We urge both
sides to maintain the ceasefire and to continue to work
for a negotiated, lasting peace agreement. We believe
that the swift demarcation and delimitation of the
border is a first and vital step towards that goal. It is
also imperative that all Governments comply with the
mandatory arms embargo and ban on related technical
assistance and training imposed by Security Council
resolution 1298 (2000). We look forward to beginning
work soon on the draft resolution which will expand
UNMEE's mandate.

