Ms. Bertini: I thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Security Council for this invitation to
address the Council, on behalf of the United Nations
agencies, on what is the most important issue facing us
today.

In more and more crises, the United Nations flag has
become a target rather than a shield, and all too often aid
workers must risk their lives to save the lives of others. It
is hard for us sometimes to appreciate what a humanitarian
worker goes through on a daily basis. For instance, in
Somalia, the Sudan and Afghanistan, United Nations relief
convoys have been hijacked and our drivers have been
beaten or killed. In Angola and Afghanistan, our planes
have been fired on. Members of our staff have been held
hostage in Sierra Leone, the Balkans, the Great Lakes, the
Caucasus and elsewhere.

Since 1992, as the Deputy Secretary-General noted,
United Nations agencies have lost 184 civilian staff to
violence, including air crashes. Since 1994, there have been
59 incidents of kidnapping and hostage-taking that have
affected 228 of our colleagues. In 1999, there were 292
violent robberies, assaults, rapes and vehicle hijackings.

One recent victim, Saskia van Meijenfeldt, a
dedicated young Dutch woman who worked for the World
Food Programme (WFP), will always stand out in my mind.
I think of her often. She and her colleague Luis Zfifiiga
were shot in the head at point blank range after an
ambush in Burundi. Mr. Zfifiiga was the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) chief of staff in Burundi.
Their deaths were all the more horrible because they were
execution-style, premeditated and cold - deliberate acts
of violence aimed at the United Nations itself.

Those providing food, shelter and medicine - the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), UNICEF, WFP, the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and our many non-
governmental organization partners often become victims
in humanitarian crises. According to the Office of the
United Nations Security Coordinator (UNSECOORD),
UNHCR and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) have each lost 25 staff members since 1992;
UNICEF and WFP have lost 27 each; and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations has lost 30 civilian staff.
When you add deaths in vehicle accidents caused by work
in difficult terrain and the deaths of short-term contract
employees, the figures climb even higher.

The mechanical business of delivering aid in war
zones is especially hazardous. The World Food
Programme, for instance, often handles the logistics of
moving both people and supplies for all of the United
Nations agencies and many non-governmental
organizations in spots such as East Timor, Kosovo and
Angola. One of the saddest moments for all of us last
year was when a WFP-chartered shuttle from Rome to
Pristina crashed, killing all 24 people on board.

A growing factor in the security picture has been
the resurgence of the use of hunger as a weapon of war.
People are wilfully starved because of their politics, their
religion, their ethnicity or just because of where they live.
Food stocks are stolen or destroyed, fields are burned.
Hunger is an integral part of the tactics of Violence in
Somalia, the southern Sudan, Angola and Afghanistan. It
was also used in Kosovo in a systematic way not seen in
Europe for half a century. The tactic does not vary that
much whether it is used in northern Afghanistan or
northern Uganda. Delivering the food aid crucial to
responding to humanitarian needs has put workers in
harm's way. Sometimes warring factions see the delivery
of food aid itself as a political act, and therefore those
who deliver it are targets.

Of course this is unacceptable. The international
community must take concrete steps to ensure that the
safety of our aid workers it totally protected and that we

 

put a stop to this alarming trend. If humanitarian agencies
are to carry out our primary task of assisting civilians,
humanitarian workers have to be given better tools to
ensure their protection.

I am honoured to follow the Deputy Secretary-
General in making these remarks. She has wisely made the
issue of staff security one of the top priorities for her and
for all of us. Staff security has also become my highest
personal concern at WFP. In 1998 - a year in which WFP
lost 12 of its staff members, seven of them murdered - we
created a security task force to examine ways to better
protect our people. Our greatest achievement so far has
been an agency-wide security training programme for every
employee. In 11 months we have trained more than 5,400
people, and, over the last two-year period, we have
quadrupled our expenditures for staff security.

I know that this is a high-priority issue for all of my
colleagues who are agency heads, particularly those who
are managing humanitarian agencies where staff are at risk
on a daily basis.

We believe we must equip all humanitarian staff for
dangerous work through security training, to include how
to read the warning signs in volatile settings, how to deal
with armed marauders, how to spot hidden landmines, how
to extricate themselves from trouble and how to deal with
forced confinement.

But in-house training by the United Nations agencies,
although extremely important, is not enough. We have to
improve our communications systems, our field structures,
our equipment, our security consciousness. And we must
have the cooperation of Governments in the countries where
we work in providing better protection, in allowing the
United Nations staff to use communications systems and in
pursuing and prosecuting those responsible for violence
against United Nations staff.

There needs to be a shared recognition that the job
of humanitarian worker is now, more than ever, a
dangerous job. Soldiers - who may spend only a small
part of their time in dangerous, life-threatening
situations - are instilled with an awareness of security and
are given security training. Humanitarian workers, on the
other hand, who may spend most of their time in equally
high-risk environments, are not taught to be aware of risks;
and it is time we were. So we have to increase the
awareness of security issues in the United Nations culture
and embrace security management as an integral part of
every operation.

I commend you, Mr. President, and the Security
Council for your willingness to address the issue of
security for humanitarian workers. Humanitarian agencies
are facing some very difficult questions these days. The
most difficult of all is, when is the security risk for our
staff so great that we cannot reach the victims of war -
who then die for lack of food, shelter, water and
medicine? Where do we draw the line?

I also commend the Council for its increased
interest, attention and action regarding humanitarian issues
in the last several months, which were highlighted last
month by the focus on Africa. I believe I speak for all of
my colleagues when I urge the Security Council to always
take the safety of humanitarian aid workers into
consideration when it takes political decisions.

Humanitarian operations frequently contribute to
the fulfilment of the Council's mandate for peace and
security. Its efforts to focus attention on the security of
United Nations staff will strengthen the clear role of the
United Nations as a leader in humanitarian action
worldwide. We need to confront the simple fact that the
United Nations sends unarmed aid workers into
environments where Member Governments will not send
armed troops.

A number of recommendations have been made to
strengthen the consciousness and the competence of the
United Nations approach to security, and I would like to
highlight just a few for your consideration.

First, the humanitarian principles of impartiality
must be maintained in all crises. They should be taken
into account even when the Security Council takes
decisions on conflict situations. The humanitarian
principles of impartiality must be accepted, and the terms
of engagement must allow aid workers to reach innocent
civilians, wherever they are, on either side of a conflict.
This has been a problem in many cases, but we must
reaffirm, for instance, that no innocent child or adult
should starve because he or she is caught in a war or a
conflict.

Secondly, I would respectfully request that the
Security Council consider examining its authorization of
peacekeepers in crisis situations. The Council regularly
spells out the peacekeepers' role in protecting civilians,
but it does not necessarily clarify their role in protecting
aid workers. I would recommend that the Council
explicitly include consideration of and define how future

 

peacekeeping operations would protect humanitarian
workers as well.

Thirdly, we must also mobilize the international
community to punish those responsible for crimes against
humanitarian workers - a message that I underlined
following the Deputy Secretary-General's comments. Strong
messages must be sent to those Governments and groups
under whose jurisdiction murders, kidnappings and
harassment take place that they will be held accountable
and punished if they fail to respect aid workers' lives. In the
case of countries that do not take serious action to prevent
or to investigate and prosecute crimes against humanitarian
workers, I suggest that the Council consider calling for a
system to monitor such violations, leading to penalties.

I must tell you, Mr. President and members, that this
is one of the most frustrating parts of our jobs, because so
often when staff members are murdered, we have no way
to follow up to ensure that people are held accountable. All
too often, we hear things like "It wasn't our troops who
were responsible; it was the rebels", or the other way
around. Therefore, no one takes responsibility for the
investigation. Sound investigative reports are rare. And, as
the Deputy Secretary-General mentioned, in two - only
two - of the murders have people been prosecuted and
brought to justice.

Fourthly, security training must be conducted for all
United Nations staff members who work in insecure
environments. This should be a pre-condition for staff to
participate in high-risk operations.

Fifthly, again to underline the Deputy Secretary-
General's words, we should enhance UNSECOORD'S role
as coordinator and clearing house for security information
by increasing its staff and its funding. We all welcome the
decision to appoint a full-time security coordinator. The
United Nations budget should be revised, of course, to
accommodate this. I would like to draw your attention to
the fact that UNSECOORD currently has 12 staff members
for its worldwide operations. Eight of them are paid for
from budgets of other agencies, so that the United Nations
is funding four people to manage the security operations for
tens of thousands of United Nations staff members all
around the world. In fact, when you look at the budget, it
calls for about a half a million dollars a year, not counting
the malicious acts insurance, to pay for all of what the
United Nations provides for staff security, in addition, of
course, to their agency contributions and agency budgets.
And, of course, the suggestions that the Deputy Secretary-
General mentioned are very important in strengthening
this operation.

Finally, as humanitarian aid workers, we all want
to work under a United Nations flag that is a symbol of
hope and of safety. We do not want to abandon the poor
people we are helping when insecurity makes the job
dangerous. We want to be there to provide food, shelter,
medicine and hope.

Every day, this is what United Nations staff
members do throughout the world. They give everything
they have to save people living in the worst circumstances
on earth. They shouldn't have to give their lives.

