I congratulate the Dominican Republic on its assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of April and commend the conduct of work during these challenging circumstances. We thank the Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing. As with the rest of the world, the Middle East region is experiencing the dire impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. That new threat is compounding the already existing crises in many parts of the region. Furthermore, it could have long-lasting socioeconomic and political implications, particularly for the most vulnerable, including women, young people, children, persons with disabilities and the elderly. The pandemic is also having a huge impact on various socioeconomic and political transition processes in several parts of the Middle East, including ongoing peace negotiations between warring parties, humanitarian access and the flow of food and medical supplies, not to mention the living situations in refugee and internally displaced persons camps. This human crisis could also potentially create an environment where conflict and violent extremism can continue to thrive. We are in agreement that the current situation calls for a recognition of interdependence and an opportunity for cooperation. The multiplicity of challenges during this pandemic is indeed a test of international crisis management. We need to act fast and act together. In that regard, my delegation stands firmly behind the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire in order to collectively focus our actions on fighting COVID-19. At the same time, the international community should ensure the continuation of processes mandated by the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the Security Council resolutions pertaining to the Middle East. My delegation welcomes the ongoing Government and grass-roots efforts to combat the pandemic across political and conflict lines. The Palestinian Authority's timely issuance of a state of emergency socioeconomic response plan and its announcement of an emergency budget, on the one hand; and the Israeli Government's emergency fund transfer, including medical equipment and training facilities to the Palestinian Authority, on the other, is a demonstration that a people- focused approach is a critical element of effective leadership. Although urgent challenges remain, Kenya commends the critical steps taken so far, including the movement of critical supplies and health workers and other personnel in and out of the West Bank and Gaza since the beginning of the crisis. The initiative of the Israeli Government and the private sector to manufacture critical health and testing equipment domestically will further ensure a sufficient supply of much-needed resources. We call for regular engagement and cooperation between the Israeli and Palestinian authorities in order to build the resilience of health and service-delivery institutions for the entire population, and especially for the Palestinian people in the West Bank, East Jerusalem and Gaza. Gaza needs more focused and immediate attention due to the heightened risk of spread of the coronavirus posed by Gaza's population density. My delegation further supports the 11 April joint call by Special Coordinator Mladenov and other United Nations Envoys to the Middle East - including the Secretary-General's representatives in Iraq, Lebanon, Syria and Yemen - urging watring parties in the region to end hostilities and maintain existing ceasefires in the 65/99 66/99 face of this global human crisis, which is unprecedented in recent history. It is our hope that, beyond the ceasefire, those steps will contribute to the establishment of durable peace and the realization of lasting solutions to conflicts across the region. My delegation stands in solidarity with the Middle East community, including religious leaders, refugee host countries, peacekeepers, health and aid workers, civil society organizations, the United Nations country team, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and all those who are working tirelessly to defeat this common enemy in this challenging situation. In conclusion, the current call for a global ceasefire should go hand in hand with the lifting of measures, including sanctions and blockades, that might act as bottlenecks to socioeconomic recovery during the pandemic. This is one instance where such measures may compound suffering for the most vulnerable segments of the population. Cooperation and coordination at the national, regional and global levels will prove crucial in addressing both the short- and long-term implications of COVID-19 in the Middle East region.
