Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Presidents Santos
Calderon, Preval and Clinton, and to thank them and
the Secretary-General for their excellent introductory
remarks. I, in turn, would like to make the following
comments.

Painful tragedies have long dwelled in the
collective memory of the Haitian people. These include
the natural disasters and political and economic crises
of 2010, starting with the earthquake, which claimed
the lives of 230,000 people and displaced more than
2 million, and the cholera epidemic, which took more
than 4,500 lives and has infected more than 240,000 to
date, as well as insecurity and political instability
arising from problems related to the electoral process.
However, our meeting today once again demonstrates
the international community's commitment to moving
forward in the reconstruction of Haiti. It shows the
resolve of the United Nations to establish a lasting and
strategic partnership with that country to ensure that it
enjoys a better future.
In that regard, we commend the international
community for its solidarity with and support to the
people of Haiti and its Government, which continues to
provide relief and support in various areas. We call on
donors to honour their commitments in that respect.
For its part, Lebanon has joined the efforts of the
international community in relief activities, thereby
showing its solidarity with the Haitian people.

We welcome the positive developments this year,
including improved political stability and security, the
notable 50 per cent decline in the number of displaced
persons, the noticeable progress in the reconstruction
and rehabilitation of State institutions, and the holding
of parliamentary and presidential elections.

The presidential statement that the Security
Council will adopt today shows the link between
development and security. By highlighting that issue in
preparing for this meeting, Colombia has underscored
its importance and implications for Haiti's future and
prosperity. There is no doubt that economic and social
crises fuel conflict and threaten international peace and
security. That is a challenge for the Security Council,
which is entrusted with addressing those crises. It is
the role of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, whose duties, in addition to maintaining security
and stability, include tasks related to development,
such as reconstruction and building State institutions.

The link between development and security leads
us to another issue - the link between democracy and
security. Haiti has had experience of that phenomenon
throughout its contemporary political history. It
experienced tragedy and suffering under protracted
dictatorships. On the other hand, the recent elections
were held in an acceptable, calm and stable
atmosphere. We congratulate the people of Haiti on
that democratic achievement and call on all parties to
support the formation of a new Government, which
will face the same significant challenges facing the
entire country.

We once again commend President Preval for his
wise leadership in the various crises that have beset the
country. The cholera epidemic remains a source of
great concern, and we call on the international
community to provide immediate assistance in bringing
it to an end. As the Secretary-General noted, without an
immediate and broad international response, we will be
unable to end that threat to the lives of hundreds of
thousands of Haitians. In that respect, we welcome the
establishment of a panel of experts to investigate the
sources of the epidemic.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for efforts
to strengthen national capacity-building, security,
development, the rule of law, good governance and
respect for human rights. We also reaffirm the need for
the people and Government of Haiti to assume
leadership together, above all in the reconstruction of
the country. As one Haitian proverb has it, a borrowed
drum never makes for good dancing.

