Ms. Loj (Denmark): I should like to join others
in thanking High Representative, Lord Ashdown, for
his interesting briefing. He has given us impressive and
detailed accounts of the notable advances being
achieved on the ground in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Next week marks the tenth anniversary of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. In those 10 years, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has achieved remarkable progress.
Although a number of challenges still remain, we are
committed to ensuring that the days of war, destruction
and massacres are gone for good in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in the Western Balkans as a whole.

I would like to associate myself with the
statement by the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom on behalf of the European Union
(EU). I limit myself to three points. First, we are
particularly encouraged by the recent adoption of the
police restructuring bill and, earlier this year, the
defence sector reform. Those reforms represent key
benchmarks in Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress
towards Euro-Atlantic integration. We expect,
therefore, that the European Union will formally agree
to open negotiations on a stabilization and association
agreement - the first step towards eventual EU
membership.

Progress has also been significant on the path
towards membership in the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) Partnership for Peace
Programme. Cooperation towards that end between the
authorities in Sarajevo and the NATO mission is
commendable.

Secondly, moving towards association with the
EU and NATO will also require further reform by our
partners in Sarajevo. Full implementation of the bill
restructuring the police force will be important.
Furthermore, adoption and implementation of
legislation on public broadcasting and full cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) will also be key factors in
determining further progress in relations with the EU
and NATO. Bosnia and Herzegovina - as indeed all
countries of the Western Balkans - needs to take
decisive action and bring remaining persons indicted
for war crimes to justice, most notably Ratko Mladic
and Radovan Karadzic. Only then will the remaining
legacy of war in the Western Balkans be buried - a
precondition for lasting reconciliation in the region.

Thirdly and finally, we commend the High
Representative, Lord Ashdown, for all his efforts over
the past three and a half years. Lord Ashdown has
played a key role in the progress in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. He has been a catalyst for visible
progress, while maintaining the delicate balance
between - on the one hand, using proactively his
Bonn Powers - and, on the other hand, ensuring a
gradual transfer of responsibility and political
ownership to the political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We support the gradual downsizing of the Office
of the High Representative. But the job is not yet
finished. While we may be contemplating adjustments
to the Bonn Powers, we should do so in a measured
way and with due attention to the risks of new crises in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Denmark remains committed to assist as best we
can, as Bosnia and Herzegovina and indeed the whole
Western Balkan region continues its journey towards
stability and democracy. I think we all sense the strong
commitment of the Government and people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to take charge in forming a better,
more prosperous and democratic future together. We
strongly welcome and support that.

