Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
his briefing. We also wish to congratulate His
Excellency Mr. Jose Luis Guterres on his new
appointment as Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Timor-Leste, and we welcome him to
the Council.

The United Republic of Tanzania witnessed the
agony of the people of Timor-Leste following the
events of the past three months. Those regrettable
events have also focused international attention on the
urgent needs of Timor-Leste. What has become clearer
through the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2006/628) and the briefing that we received this
morning is that, even without those sad events, Timor-
Leste's needs would be immense and challenging. The
magnitude of the challenge is such that Timor-Leste
cannot confront it alone.

It is true that the people of Timor-Leste need
committed friends and partners; but they also need the
United Nations. This Organization, and especially the
Security Council, can be proud of the way they have
assisted the people of Timor-Leste on their march to
self-determination and independence. It was a
worthwhile investment.

But if that invaluable investment is to make a
lasting contribution to the growth and stability of
Timor-Leste, the work aimed at supporting effective
and credible security, administration and judicial
institutions will have to be carried to its conclusion.
We believe the United Nations has an important role in
this regard.

It was therefore with great relief that we took
note of the letter (S/2006/620, annex) from the Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, His Excellency Jose Ramos-
Horta, informing us that the emergency facing his
country is at an end. His appeal that it is now important
to focus attention on the establishment of a new United
Nations peacekeeping mission in Timor-Leste is, in our
View, the most desirable way of providing Timor-Leste
with the support of the international community and of
preserving its sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Peacebuilding and the building of effective
national institutions of governance and administration
can be a daunting task. Nonetheless, it is one in which
the United Nations has significant expertise, based on
country-led and country-owned initiatives. In this
regard, the future of Timor-Leste and its well-being
very much depend on the support the international
community can extend to it through the United
Nations.

The assessment mission has established that this
future will require the reconciliation of communities
deeply divided by violence; the building of a truly
national army and police force; the establishment of
the rule of law, with a competent and impartial system
ofjustice; the addressing of human rights abuses; and a
focus on what could be the core of the problem:
poverty.

Obviously, this is a daunting job - a complex
responsibility that will require contributions of
resources and expertise from the international
community. However, the United Nations must play a
central role in the support of Timor-Leste while urging
individual Governments and regional and international
organizations to do likewise. The Council can show the
way. Moreover, the United Republic of Tanzania will
support such a course of action.

