Mr. O'Brien: We witnessed devastation
and suffering in Syria in 2016 at levels that defy
comprehension. We witnessed people dying of
starvation, with the pictures of emaciated, starving
children from the besieged town of Madaya staining
our conscience. There were the constant, harrowing
images of bombs and mortars raining down on schools,
medical facilities, internally displaced settlements,
public markets and critical water networks. We saw
a shocked, blank stare from five-year-old Omran
Daqneesh, his silent face covered in blood and dust after
being pulled from the rubble caused by an air strike
in eastern Aleppo. We are still horrified by reports
of rescue and medical workers teams, Syrian Arab
Red Crescent volunteers and humanitarian personnel
attacked while on duty. We witnessed the destruction
in Darayya, dubbed "Syria's capital of barrel bombs",
and the relentless demolition of eastern Aleppo. We
saw towns besieged, bombed and then emptied. We saw
buses, intended to evacuate civilians, burning outside
of Fo'ah.

We have seen the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) recapture the ancient city ofPalmyra. And
we have watched as these actions brought with them
an atrocious, incalculable human toll. The Secretary-
General, myself and my colleagues have called the
situation a slaughterhouse, a complete meltdown of
humanity, the apex of horror. There is no pretending;
that is what daily life was like for millions of civilians
across Syria throughout 2016 - so much suffering in
just 12 months, and all of it under our collective watch.

And yet, as we start 2017, and as hard as it is to
imagine, there are some emerging reasons to hope.
Since 30 December, a nationwide ceasefire continues
to hold, despite some breaches. That has provided a
rare moment of respite for many, and we must all do
everything in our power to see that it is consolidated
and extended. I have also just returned from Helsinki,
where the world came together to support Syrians and
the region. Even with continuing dire humanitarian
needs, I took away a sense of hope from my meetings in
Finland, none more so than in the steady determination
of Syrian non-governmental organizations, with whom
I had the honour to sit alongside as we discussed the
humanitarian priorities for the coming year. Together
with the European Union, the United Nations will host
a conference on Syria in the beginning of April. That
will be an opportunity for the international community
to reiterate and pledge their commitment to support the
Syrian people.

I also take hope in recent developments on the
political track. This week we saw those who, despite
years of fighting, were willing to set the past aside to
sit alongside one another in Astana. The agreement by
Russia, Turkey and Iran in Astana to establish a trilateral
mechanism to observe and ensure full compliance
with the ceasefire is a welcome development. Saving
Syrian lives is the shared priority of all of us, and
the United Nations stands ready to assist in the
establishment of this mechanism. It is also our hope
that further consolidation of the ceasefire will help to
create a supportive environment for the resumption of
intra-Syrian negotiations in Geneva, under the auspices
and lead of the United Nations, as per relevant Security
Council resolutions. Special Envoy de Mistura has
just attended the Astana meeting and he will brief the
Council, as the President mentioned, more fully on the
political track, on 31 January.

As we move towards United Nations talks,
the collective hopes of the world are for a political
solution based on resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). There is
no other solution, neither humanitarian nor, indeed,
military - however emboldened some parties may feel
following the full evacuation of eastern Aleppo. We
all owe it to the people of Syria, who have suffered so
much, to do everything in our power to see the political
process succeed and to see their hope restored.

Sadly, in recent months, we have too often been
unable to translate hope into humanitarian action.
From the formation of the Task Force on Humanitarian
Access, as part of the International Syria Support
Group in early 2016, up until September last year,
we saw unprecedented access to those most in need
in Syria. By September of last year, over one and a
quarter million people were reached via inter-agency
convoys to besieged and hard-to-reach areas, compared
to just 487,000 in all of2015. Such access was not easily
achieved, but took the hard work of the United Nations
team in Damascus and in Geneva, with the support of
influential Member States - especially the Russian
Federation and the United States. Frustratingly, and with
dire humanitarian consequences, significant challenges
with cross-line access have re-emerged. Sadly, access
has currently returned to the levels we saw before the
humanitarian task force came into effect.

That diminution in access is, in part, because
the two-step approval process agreed by the Syrian
authorities has become, in practice, a ten-step process.
Despite high rates of in-principle approvals, only one or
two approved convoys have reached their destinations
in each of the last three months. In December, one -
just one - inter-agency convoy delivered assistance to
6,000 people out of a total of 930,250 people requested
under the December inter-agency convoy plan. This is
less than 1 per cent of what we aimed to achieve, and
even in this one instance when we could deliver, over
23,000 medical items were removed from the United
Nations inter-agency convoy. So far, in January the
situation is not much better, with only one inter-agency
convoy deployed to Moadamiya, on 7 January, reaching
40,000 people; however, this was a location that we had
requested under last November's plan.

In both December and January, the Syrian
Government did respond within the agreed seven
working days to our monthly inter-agency convoy
plans, but subsequent administrative delays on the
part of the Government - including in the approval
of facilitation letters, approval by local governors and
security committees, as well as broader restrictions on
the part of all parties - continue to hamper our efforts
and deprive the most vulnerable civilians of much-
needed assistance.

Let me be perfectly clear. We have a humanitarian
task force whose sole purpose is to ensure access, and
since 30 December we have had a ceasefire that has
improved security in many areas. And yet, despite
these two positive factors, we continue to be blocked
at every turn by lack of approvals at the central and
local levels, disagreements on access routes, and the
violation of agreed procedures at checkpoints by parties
to the conflict. Are these important? Yes. We cannot
"just plough on" or "just get on with it", as I have heard
one member sitting around this say table to me, because
if one brave aid worker drives through the check point
without these facilitation letters and the command is
then transmitted down the line, the checkpoint guard or
their sniper takes the shot.

On 11 January, the United Nations Resident
Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator in Damascus
sent a note verbale to the Syrian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs with a list of practical suggestions to speed up
access, simplify procedures and get convoys moving.
No response has yet been received. We have the
capacity to deliver to hundreds of thousands of people
in besieged and hard-to-reach areas every month,
and we are ready to move should access be allowed
by the parties to the conflict. We call on all Council
members with influence over the Syrian authorities
and on members of the humanitarian task force to do
more to ensure the support of the Syrian Government
to deliver life-saving assistance through the existing
structures and mechanisms. I say without, I hope, being
seen as defensive, that the fault is not at the door of the
United Nations or the non-governmental organizations
(NGOs); it is the Syrian Government and the local
governors who are responsible. I would ask Council
members to direct their irritation and influence at
them. We need to be allowed to pass - not as a favour
but as a right - and safely.

On the ground, despite enormous challenges,
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners in
Syria continue to deliver life-saving assistance and
support to millions of people across the country every
month. For example, the World Food Programme
(WFP) - which the Council will hear more from in
a few minutes - reached over 4 million people with
food commodities in December alone. The World
Health Organization, which the Council will also hear
from this morning, along with UNICEF, implemented
their accelerated routine immunization campaign in
northern Syria, vaccinating some 104,000 children in
Jarablus and other parts of Aleppo governorate. Over
the course of 2016, over 4 million non-food items were
distributed across Syria, nutrition items were provided
to some 3 million, and shelter was provided to nearly
300,000 people.

Moreover, the vital humanitarian cross-border
activities continued to represent a crucial element of the
United Nations response. Since cross-border operations
began in July 2014, following the adoption of resolution
2165 (2014), the United Nations has conducted more
than 467 cross-border convoys, or nearly four a week
on average. This has allowed United Nations partners
to deliver medical supplies sufficient for 9 million
treatments, including for 2 million people to be
vaccinated. Some 3 million have been fed, many on a
monthly basis. Assistance has been delivered to various
parts of Aleppo, Idlib, Lattakia and Hama governorates
in Turkey, and Dar'a and Quneitra governorates in
Jordan. These operations complement the critical
role played by international and Syrian NGOs, which
provide assistance and services to millions more from
neighbouring countries.

In addition, the United Nations has completed 294
airlifts to Qamishly, delivering 10,000 metric tons
of food; water, sanitation and hygiene products; and
nutrition, education, shelter and non-food assistance on
behalf of humanitarian actors, including 120,000 full
food rations. I will leave the WFP Deputy Executive
Director to provide more context and reports on our
United Nations airlift and air drops capacity, and
activity, particularly at Hasaka and Deir ez-Zor.

I pay a complete tribute to all the extraordinary
steadfast and unflinchingly courageous aid
workers - those from NGOs, Syrian, regional and
international; those working cross-border from both
Jordan and Turkey, as well as those within Syria;
those across the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, and my colleagues in the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA); those
with the International Committee of the Red Cross, the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent, the International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies; and the local
communities and families that have set aside so much
to help others. They can rest assured that their actions
have saved many lives of their fellow Syrian and global
citizens, protecting them wherever possible and never
desisting, despite relentless setbacks, threats and
danger. And, ifI may, let me pause to take a moment
to honour all those humanitarian aid workers who have
been killed in their duties.

As was noted last month, with the evacuation of
eastern Aleppo the number of those besieged in Syria
was reduced. Following a comprehensive review by the
United Nations, it is now estimated that as of January
some 643,780 people are living in 13 areas under siege.
Three locations were removed from the previous list of
16 locations, where some 974,080 people were unable
to move freely. The eastern neighbourhoods of Aleppo
were removed following their full take-over by the
Government of Syria in December. Madimayet Elsham
in rural Damascus was delisted due to the significant
improvement in humanitarian access and freedom
of movement over the past three months following
the signing and subsequent implementation of a local
agreement. Hajar al-Aswad, in rural Damascus, was
also removed due to the access that has been available
through Yarmouk, Yelda and Al-Qadam.

Further, population figures have been adjusted for
other locations based on the latest and most accurate
information received from the ground. This includes
a reduction of 1,200 people for Fo'ah and Kafraya, in
Idlib, following their evacuation from the two towns
in December. Adjustments were also made for areas in
the eastern Ghoutah enclave due to movements within
the enclave, as well as for Zabadani and Khan al-Shih.

The reduction in numbers, however, should not
be mistaken for progress in addressing the scourge of
besiegement. Parties continue to use siege as a weapon
of war, and in each of these cases we saw protracted
periods of restricted aid, as well heavy fighting and
bombing, as a precursor to the agreements that brought
the areas back under Government of Syria control. I
continue to call for an immediate end to all besiegement
by all parties in this conflict. The act of besiegement
does nothing other than to punish civilians, who already
bear the brunt of this terrible conflict.
Let me provide the Council with an update on four
locations in Syria where humanitarian action remains
greatly needed and, sadly, often contested: Aleppo,
Deir ez-Zor, rural Damascus and Raqqa. I shall address
each of these in turn.

First, in Aleppo, humanitarian needs continue to be
staggering. Since 24 November, nearly 160,000 people
have been at least temporarily displaced from formerly
besieged neighbourhoods of eastern Aleppo. This
includes over 120,000 people displaced to Government-
controlled areas in and around Aleppo city or having
stayed in eastern Aleppo, and over 36,000 people
evacuated to non-State armed group-controlled Idlib
and rural western Aleppo. The humanitarian situation
for many of those who have been displaced or have
stayed has been difficult, and the cold winter has
exacerbated the situation further. Following the cut-off
of running water to the some 1.8 million in Aleppo due
to a technical problem - as we understand it - whose
solution lies in ISIL-controlled territory outside of
the city, the humanitarian situation has become even
more difficult.

Last month, OCHA provided Council members
with a detailed overview of our response to those
36,000 people who evacuated into rural western
Aleppo and Idlib. Those 36,000 people were provided
with immediate life-saving assistance that is now part
of the regular cross-border humanitarian programming
that assists some 900,000 internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in Idlib, as well as elsewhere in the north.

I will now brief the Council on the United Nations
response in each of the main areas in which those
affected by the Aleppo crisis have been displaced or
returned to across the city itself. The United Nations
has had an ongoing presence in Aleppo since 2014 and
responded immediately to the additional humanitarian
needs caused by the displacement of so many. The level
of assistance was immediately increased and the United
Nations has since continued to address the needs of
those people displaced from or returning to eastern
Aleppo, alongside the brave humanitarians working
for the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and International
Committee of the Red Cross, as well as other national
and international non-governmental organizations.

Nearly 90 per cent of the supplies distributed
by all partners are provided by the United Nations,
and just last week $19 million was released from the
OCHA-managed Syria Humanitarian Fund to support
immediate life-saving and early recovery assistance for
thousands ofpeople. Those funds will provide responses
to immediate needs, assist with the rehabilitation of
basic services and removal rubble and undertake other
necessary steps to create the conditions where people
can safely return to their homes.

In eastern Aleppo, a total of over 65,000 people
have been officially registered as having returned to
or having stayed in the eastern districts of the city.
Most now live in damaged houses or are scattered
across various neighbourhoods, with Hanano hosting
the largest number of returnees to date. Other
neighbourhoods that registered high levels of returnees
include Tariq Al-Bab, Al-Kalaseh and Bustan Al-Qaser.
In those areas, the United Nations has been active
in providing immediate relief. Food items, medical
services, protection and education support have all
been provided to those in need.

I am deeply concerned about reports relating to the
stockpiles of humanitarian supplies found in eastern
Aleppo since the evacuation. I take that extremely
seriously. We need to establish the facts and, as I
speak, we are following up on those reports urgently.
I emphasize to the Council that such matters draw into
stark relief the need for unimpeded access of the United
Nations and humanitarian partners to all areas in Syria,
not only to allow us to deliver, but to monitor the needs
and the appropriate distribution of assistance, even
after materials have been pre-positioned.

On the outskirts of eastern Aleppo city, there
are 5,077 people who have been displaced to the
Jibreen collective shelter. Parts of the shelter remain
in need of rehabilitation, particularly winterization.
The United Nations and its partners have provided
hundreds of stoves and other essential winterization
items. Furthermore, the United Nations is supporting
communal kitchens that provide hot meals for
thousands, and a static clinic and, in coordination
with the relevant authorities, commenced with the
distribution of personal identity documents.

In western Aleppo, over 50,000 are being supported
as part of increased regular programming activities
already being delivered on a daily basis to support the
over 400,000 IDPs inside western parts of the city.
That includes regular distribution of food and non-food
items. The United Nations has recently provided 250
metric tons of medical supplies - enough for 300,000
treatment courses - to Aleppo city, and in December
provided enough medicine for 430,000 treatments.
UNICEF continues emergency water trucking and
the provision of fuel for operating wells, which
together benefit nearly 1 million people - 400,000
people from water trucking and 600,000 people
from public wells - across the city. And together
with the Aleppo Department of Education, UNICEF
and non-governmental organizations have provided
education support to thousands of children and youth.

We must make sure that the record and the
positive balance are put in the public domain. The
United Nations and others will remain committed
and actively engaged in assisting all those in need in
Aleppo who we can access, working tirelessly with our
humanitarian partners to ease suffering and provide a
basis for recovery.

Secondly, I promised to provide an update on
Deir ez-Zor. I am deeply concerned for the safety
and protection of an estimated 93,500 people in the
besieged western side of Deir ez-Zor in Syria following
reports ofISIL attacks, resulting in the death and injury
of scores of civilians. Since 15 January, ISIL reportedly
took control of several areas including the main road
and the Deir ez-Zor airport and is gaining ground in
several more areas, splitting the besieged enclave in
two. Beyond the temporary suspension of air drops by
the World Food Programme, the Al-Assad National
Hospital was temporarily closed. Water has reportedly
also been cut for thousands of people living in ISIL-
controlled areas around Deir ez-Zor due to fighting
damaging power generators in the area. Mobile
communication has reportedly stopped throughout
the area.

Thirdly, I turn now to rural Damascus, where
the situation remains deeply troubling. Fighting in
the Wadi Barada area, just outside of Damascus city,
continues and has already displaced an estimated
17,500 people. Water remains cut off from the
main source since the fighting began, affecting the
primary water supply for some 5.5 million people in
Damascus and surrounding areas, who now only have
minimal access to water. In response, technical teams
comprising the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and water
authorities, entered the Wadi Barada area on 13 and
14 January for a preliminary assessment of damages.
However, following the assassination of a member of
the reconciliation committee, fighting was rekindled
and the assessment mission suspended before the repair
works could commence. Should such deprivation of
water to civilians be determined to have been deliberate,
those responsible may have committed a war crime.
Accountability must be ensured for the perpetrators of
such acts.
Fourthly, I would draw the Council's attention
to the military operation in Raqqa district, where I
have serious concerns for the safety and security of
over 400,000 people in need, including over 150,000
internally displaced people. So far, some 35,000 people
have been displaced as a result ofthe fighting, although
many have returned to their homes since the fighting
has subsided.

Humanitarian partners are providing a response to
those displaced to the north towards Tell Abyad. The
majority of the population of Raqqa district is reportedly
facing critical problems in meeting immediate needs.
Fighting has had an adverse impact on infrastructure
such as water and power stations, affecting people's
ability to access basic services. Food insecurity is also
considered a major problem. Access to Raqqa by the
United Nations has been highly constrained due to
insecurity and ISIL's restrictions on the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, with the last United Nations
inter-agency convoy to Raqqa taking place in October
2013. Access and security permitting, which they
currently do not, the United Nations and humanitarian
partners do stand ready nonetheless to respond to
further large-scale temporary displacement as military
efforts to push ISIL out of Raqqa continue.

After nearly six years of senseless and brutal
conflict, we have all been longing for a glimmer of hope
that the suffering of the Syrian people might finally be
coming to an end. The past few weeks have seen far
fewer civilians killed and injured since the ceasefire
came into effect on 30 December 2016. In some parts
of the country at least, it has given a respite for people
who have told us loud and clear that all they want is
to be safe and for their families to be protected from
violence. But the ceasefire alone is not enough. We
must maintain our outrage at what is occurring in Syria
and what is being perpetrated against the Syrian people.
Now is the time for advocacy and now is the time for
renewed determination. I call on the States members
of the Council to do all in their power, collectively and
individually, to see the following implemented.

First, they must ensure the current ceasefire is
sustained, and that it results in increased access after
months of stagnation. We need full implementation
of the monthly access plan to reach all those in need.
Secondly, they must ensure that all parties protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure and abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, they must recommit to ensure that the barbaric
act of besiegement is immediately lifted across the
entire country. Fourthly, I ask that we all rally behind
Staffan de Mistura's tireless efforts on behalf of the
Secretary-General to find a political solution that
brings an end to the conflict and meets the aspirations
of the Syrian people. After a chronicle of missed
opportunities, this is the time for the various parties
to come together and bring an end to this horrendous
chapter in Syria's history.

