Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Mr. President, I would
like to thank you for having convened this open debate.
The issue of national reconciliation following a conflict
has not been discussed much in the United Nations. I
must confess that Japan is still in the process of
studying this issue and has not yet arrived at a firm
position on it. However, I am sure that everyone will
agree that reconciliation is indispensable for the
consolidation of peace in unstable post-conflict
societies.

The consolidation of peace is one of the key
elements of human security which my Government has
been advocating forcefully. It is our hope that today's
discussions will yield better ideas on such important
issues as how to promote reconciliation successfully in
a post-conflict society and the role of the international
community and the United Nations in such an
undertaking.

Reconciliation has a psychological aspect and for
that reason is not so easy to achieve. Unless the truth is
fully disclosed, it is difficult to create a basis for
reconciliation. On the other hand, hatred and bitterness
do not always fade away so easily, even when the truth
has been exposed. There are cases in which the only
effective remedy for rancour is the passage of a
considerable amount of time. Especially as regards
hatred and bitterness at the individual level, which
results from so many varied situations, I believe it is
not practical to discuss solutions in the United Nations.

In that connection, the presidency made a very
wise suggestion in specifying national reconciliation as
today's topic, because, as far as national reconciliation
is concerned, we believe that there are several things
that the international community and the United
Nations can and must do in order to promote
reconciliation in precarious post-conflict societies.
The first task is the restoration of justice.
Punishing, in accordance with the law, those who have
perpetrated serious crimes against humanity during
conflicts will certainly contribute to national
reconciliation. It is also important in deterring others
from committing similar crimes in the future. At the
same time, however, it is necessary to recognize as a
problem the fact that reconciliation does not progress
significantly while a trial is under way. This is
particularly true when a trial takes a long time to be
completed. It should be noted that there are a number
of cases in which early national reconciliation is
required for the prompt consolidation of peace and
that, in order to enable people to come to terms with
the past and to establish relationships of trust within
the community, there exist a variety of policy options
ranging from strict punishment to total forgiveness. It
is vital for a post-conflict society to choose the policy
measures which it considers best suited to its unstable
transitional situation. We should bear in mind that the
strict application of "justice" as defined by a third
party in post-conflict societies does not always
contribute to national reconciliation.

It may be useful to consider this matter on the
basis of actual examples. In South Africa - as we
heard a few minutes ago from the representative of that
country - confessions of the truth about past criminal
deeds, the granting of amnesty and the proportion of
compensation for victims were pursued in combination
and led to successful national reconciliation. In the
case of the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation in Timor-Leste, the combination of
public apologies by the offenders and their engagement
in activities contributing to the general welfare was
suggested and eventually accepted as appropriate by
the victims of the crimes. This solution is considered to
have promoted the restoration of justice and
reconciliation at the community level. Both cases show
the wisdom of the people in the community in judging
that the restoration ofjustice and promotion of national
reconciliation could be effectively achieved by finding
the hard truth.

Secondly, it is important to end discrimination
and social injustice. In any society, if a portion of the
population feels that it has been subjected to social
inequity, that situation has the potential to develop into
a conflict. So long as such conditions continue, it will
be difficult to achieve and consolidate reconciliation. It
is therefore critically important, through promoting
fundamental human rights as universal values, to
eliminate unfair discriminatory systems and practices
between people of different ethnic and cultural
backgrounds so as to establish a society where they can
live together in peace. The international community
can contribute here - but again, it is not easy to define
what will be accepted as "equitable" by two parties that
have been involved in a conflict. Japan believes it is
essential that the parties to the conflict themselves take
time to talk to each other calmly and patiently and to
apply themselves to accumulating successful outcomes
one by one. The international community, for its part,
should support the creation of a framework to facilitate
such discussion. For instance, we should take action to
help initiate dialogue between the parties to a conflict.
Much consideration has been given to the budget for
the minority group in Kosovo by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo.
We welcome this as an effort that could reduce the
social injustice as perceived by the minority group. We
also welcome the effort to promote direct dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina: it is a necessary and
appropriate step towards coexistence.

Thirdly, we wish to underscore the importance of
economic and social development. Areas in which
conflicts arise are often areas that are plagued by
poverty, and the economic and social difficulties that
people continue to experience in their daily lives make
it more likely that they will be conscious of social
injustice or feel rancour towards those that they
perceive to be the source of social injustice. Japan
believes that a most effective means of achieving
reconciliation is to create conditions in which people
are able to entertain the hope that their lives will be
better in the future. The more confident people are that
reconstruction will succeed, the more easily
reconciliation will proceed.

The relationship among national reconciliation,
justice, truth and reconstruction in the transitional post-
conflict phase is extremely complex, and the most
effective and appropriate mix of policy measures is
different for each specific case. Both the issue of
justice and that of reconstruction have been taken up
and discussed extensively in the United Nations, but if
we are to address effectively all the important aspects
relating to the consolidation of peace in the precarious
phase of a post-conflict society, it is necessary, in our
View, to include the issue of national reconciliation in
our deliberation as well.

Before concluding, I would like to propose that
the United Nations study past success stories in the
area of national reconciliation and identify the
problems encountered along the way and the lessons
learned. I believe this would certainly enhance the
effectiveness of our deliberations on this important
issue.

