The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first formal meeting of the Security Council this year, I
should like to extend my best wishes on the occasion of
the New Year to all members of the Security Council,
the United Nations and the Secretariat.

In presiding over this first formal meeting of
the Council in 2015, I am happy to welcome the new
members, namely, Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Spain and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. We
look forward to their contributions to the work of
the Council. Their experience and wisdom will be of
invaluable assistance in the discharge of the Council's
responsibilities.

I also take this opportunity to express the Council's
gratitude to the outgoing members i Argentina,
Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and
Rwanda - for their important contributions to the work
of the Council during their terms in 2013 and 2014.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President

The President (spoke in Spanish): 1 should also like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Mahamat Zene Cherif,
Permanent Representative of Chad, for his service as
President of the Council for the month of December
2014. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Cherif
and his team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Mali

Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2014/943)

Letter dated 23 December 2014 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2014/944)


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.

On behalf ofthe Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
African Integration and International Cooperation of
the Republic of Mali.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Herve'
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document 8/2014/943, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali, as well as to
document S/2014/944, a letter dated 23 December 2014
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.


