Mr. Kay: Thank you, Mr. President, for giving me
this opportunity to introduce the Secretary-General's
report on Somalia (8/2013/709) . At the outset, I would
very much like to thank the Council for its continued
support for peace and State-building in Somalia.

The past three months have been eventful. When I
briefed the Council on 12 September (see S/PV.7030),
I warned that the impact of Somalia remaining a
stronghold for terrorists would be felt well beyond
Somalia's borders - "from Bamako to Bangui", I think
was the phrase. Tragically, later in September, we saw
a shocking demonstration of that truth at the Westgate
Mall in Nairobi.

As the Council knows, tackling the scourge
of terrorism in Somalia requires a comprehensive
approach. Political, military and development efforts
are all needed. Somalia will be a stable partner in
the region and the world when it has strong State
institutions, including accountable and professional
security forces, and when there is firm consensus among
Somalis about how they wish to manage their affairs
and resources. Reaching that agreement is primarily a
political challenge. After 22 years of conflict, I believe
Somalis are not just ready, they are desperate to rise to
that challenge.

In today's briefing, I would like to update the
Council on progress and highlight some of the problems
that still remain.

In the past three months, we have witnessed
crises of a political, governance and security nature. I
have worked hard with international partners and the
Federal Government to turn those crises into genuine
opportunities to make progress on long-standing
problems. We cannot afford to be blithe. Progress is
checkered on human rights, transparency, including the
rule of law, good public financial management and the
efficient delivery of public services. But the fact that
Somalia's institutions have weathered several storms in
the past months gives me confidence that our hopes are
not misplaced.

On the military and security front, I am grateful
to the Council for its wise decision in resolution
2124 (2013) to reinforce the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and, in particular, to allow
the Somali National Army to benefit from a targeted
logistics package when engaged injoint operations with
AMISOM. Hard work is under way to implement the
resolution, and I appreciate the open and consultative
way in which the African Union is setting about both
generating the additional forces, revising the AMISOM
strategy and drawing up a new concept of operations
for military and police forces.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) is contributing to that effort, particularly to
ensure that support to AMISOM. and the Somali security
forces is in line with the Secretary-General's human
rights due diligence policy. I welcome the inclusion
of the European Union Special Representative for the
Horn of Africa as a permanent member of the Military
Operations Coordination Committee (MOCC) at its
latest meeting, held on 26 November in Addis Ababa.
After the United Nations, the European Union makes
the second largest financial contribution to AMISOM
costs. Theirs is a vital role.

As the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
I stand ready to assist the work of the MOCC as
required. I urge in particular that military and political
strategies and plans be fully synchronized. To that end,
I am pleased that on the ground AMISOM. and UNSOM
have formalized a senior leadership coordination
forum. I look forward to a strategic planning retreat
for the two missions early in 2014, following which I
hope Ambassador Annadif, the Head of AMISOM, and
I will again brief the Council jointly at the next 90-day
review.

Meanwhile, I wish, ifI may, to use this opportunity
to strongly appeal to donors and partners to contribute
to the soon to be established United Nations trust fund
for the supply of non-lethal support to the Somali
National Army, in line with resolution 2124 (2013).

Preparations are well under way to restart major
offensive operations against Al-Shabaab-controlled
areas. I note and welcome the intention of Ethiopia to
provide some of the additional forces for AMISOM.
A lack of any military helicopters, however, remains
a major concern. Once again I urge the African Union
and its member States to come forward with utility
and attack helicopters. The United Nations, through
the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM,
stands ready to receive and fund related costs for up to
12 helicopters.

Before I provide the Council with an update on
efforts to strengthen Somali security institutions, I
would like us all to focus a bit more on the political
challenges of today. Somalia's long-term success
depends first and foremost on Somalis agreeing on
a new political dispensation. Recognizing that, the
Council has established the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia as a special political mission.

Let me recall the immensity of the peaks to be
climbed. The political landscape is dominated by
several mountains stretching to the ever-closer horizon
of 2016: first, the need for wide-ranging national and
local reconciliation; secondly, a redrawing of Somalia's
political map of 18 regions into a lesser number of
federal member states; thirdly, the finalizing of a new
and permanent constitution; and fourthly, democratic
elections in all of Somalia in 2016 - the first in nearly
50 years. On each of those tasks, the United Nations
is actively and increasingly engaged in support of the
Federal Government and in close collaboration with
Member States.

The New Deal Compact endorsed at the Brussels
conference on 16 September provides a vital framework
for all our joint efforts on peacebuilding and
State-building, and in particular on the political track.
For that reason, I have engaged personally and will
continue to do so in support of the first Peacebuilding
and State-building Goal, known as PSGl, which is about
inclusive and legitimate politics. UNSOM. will continue
to work under the leadership of the Federal Government
to provide technical assistance and strategic advice
across all the peacebuilding and security goals of the
New Deal, and with a special focus on PSGl. In January,
I am very pleased to say, we shall also be working from
our new secure offices within Villa Somalia, the seat
of the Government in Mogadishu, which will reinforce
that cooperation.

The process of federalism is under way, but needs
to be accelerated. Different regions have had different
starting points, and several have begun discussions
on the formation of the units that will make up the
federal State. The overall package of power and
resource-sharing is still, however, to be decided. We
are politically and practically supporting that process,
including the efforts of the Juba Interim Administration
and the Federal Government to move ahead with the
28 August Addis Ababa agreement. We must not lose
momentum in the Juba process. Success there will
set the stage for reconciliation and state formation
processes elsewhere in Somalia. Broad-based meetings
in Baidoa and Beledweyne mark the beginning of the
process of state formation in other regions, too.

On democratization and elections, at the Federal
Government's request a United Nations elections needs
assessment mission visited Somalia in November.
Conceptual and technical planning is under way. There
is no time to lose in preparing for the 2016 elections,
but we need to get to them step by step. There are real
risks of slips and possibly fatal accidents at each step.

In Mogadishu, two crises have posed significant
challenges in the past months. First, the voting out of
the Prime Minister has been a political crisis, which
has led to a slowing of progress on vital State-building
tasks. The other - the resignation of the Central Bank
Governor - has been a body blow to international
donor confidence. Both pose serious questions that
have not yet been fully resolved, but both also give
some cause for optimism.

The removal by Parliament of Prime Minister Abdi
Farah Shirdon was handled in the end in accordance
with the Provisional Constitution and Parliament's own
rules of procedure. In years gone by, such political
disagreement would often be resolved by fighting and
the spilling of blood. In today's Somalia, debating
and voting settled the matter - a sign that Somalia's
institutions are coming of age. The priority now is to
quickly establish a new Government that will bring
Somalis together and that has the skills and integrity
to deliver what people need: peace, jobs and public
services. It will then be important that Parliament, the
Government and the presidency continue to work in
harmony, respecting fully the Provisional Constitution.

With regard to the other crisis, the resignation
on 30 October of Ms. Yussur Abrar, Governor of the
Central Bank, drew stark attention to the need for more
robust public financial management and transparency.
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud has responded
rapidly and consultatively to that challenge. He
appointed Bashir Isse Ali, on 27 November, as the new
interim Governor following careful consultation.

I have brought the international community and
donors together on several occasions to address the
crisis, including through a series of meetings with the
President. I welcome the active role being played by
the World Bank and more recently by the International
Monetary Fund in assisting the Government to put in
place the necessary measures to restore both Somali
and international confidence in public financial
management. With the right political leadership by the
President and the Federal Government of Somalia, I am
confident that words will be turned into actions.

Respect for human rights lies at the heart of any
sustainable political progress. The Prime Minister
of Somalia briefed the Human Rights Council on
24 September, which I also attended. We heard there
two things: powerful testimony to the severe human
rights problems faced by many Somalis and strong
commitments from the Federal Government to
addressing them by building stronger institutions and
human rights mechanisms.

Some progress has been made since September.
The Federal Government announced on 26 November
the creation of a Directorate General for Human and
Minority Rights and the Rule of Law. The Directorate
will take the lead in the finalization and implementation
of the Government's Post-Transition Human Rights
Road Map. Meanwhile, Parliament has yet to deliberate
on the bill on the establishment of the human rights
commission, a national institution required by the
Constitution, and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child still awaits ratification.

This today is not the place for a detailed account of
the human rights situation, but the handling of cases of
alleged rape and sexual Violence has continued to cause
concern despite the clear commitment of the President
and Government to ensuring due process. Part of the
long-term answer to many of the challenges faced
by women is to ensure women's full representation
and participation in local, regional and national
decision-making processes.

On 4 December, we celebrated in Mogadishu
the Open Day on Women, Peace and Security. Forty
women's representatives from across Somalia presented
a statement to the President of Somalia on their concerns
and engaged in an open debate with him. As the
United Nations, we shall actively support women's full
participation in Somalia's complex political processes
in the coming years.

Somalia's political map consists not only ofsouthern
and central Somalia. Formal relations between the
Puntland State of Somalia and the Federal Government
remain suspended. Puntland, however, continued
with preparations for upcoming indirect presidential
elections, in January. I have visited Puntland twice in
the last three months to try to help ensure that January's
elections are peaceful and credible and yield a result
that everyone respects. UNSOM. is working closely
with international partners, who will continue to stay
engaged.

In Somaliland, differences have developed between
the Government and the opposition. Opposition figures
have, on occasion, been arrested or prevented from
travelling. We shall keep watch on the situation, which
is heading towards general elections in Somaliland
in 2015. But since Somaliland continues to reject
UNSOM's mandate, our operations there remain on
hold.

While Somalia's problems are increasingly being
addressed through political processes, building
capable security institutions and forces remains
equally important. UNSOM. is playing an ever more
important role in assisting the Federal Government
to coordinate international support to the security
sector. We provide advice and technical assistance for
the Government's defence sector working group, the
Somali police force's strategic planning team, and the
justice and corrections steering committee, which met
for the first time on 24 November in Mogadishu. We
are making this progress, unfortunately, against the
backdrop of the assassination of four judges between
6 and 30 November, which highlights the importance
of putting in place, without delay, enhanced judicial
security structures and systems.

UNSOM. has prioritized making progress on
supporting the Government's efforts to receive
disengaged combatants from armed groups, especially
Al-Shabaab. The second Government-endorsed
disengaged combatants transitional centre opened in
Beledweyne, central Somalia in November. On-site
preparations for a third disengaged combatants
transitional centre, in Baydhabo, are also being launched
this month under the management of the International
Organization for Migration.

Somalia has not faced only political crisis.
Humanitarian agencies have focused on responding
to two new emergencies in November and December.
That followed a tropical storm that made landfall on
the Somali coast on 10 November, prompting the
Puntland State authorities to declare a natural disaster
emergency. The humanitarian community conducted
rapid assessments and initiated a response. According
to humanitarian partners, a large majority of the 4,000
to 5,000 affected households had been reached with
most urgent humanitarian assistance 10 days after the
storm struck. Mid- to long-term needs are currently
being assessed.

Seasonal rains, which started at the end of
September, have contributed to flooding, especially in
and around Jowhar, in the region of middle Shabelle.
Eleven thousand households are estimated to have been
affected. The situation was compounded by the outbreak
of clan fighting in early November, which displaced
an estimated 3,000 households. United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator Philippe Lazzarini visited
the still-flooded area on 5 December, and subsequently
the common humanitarian fund has allocated nearly
$1.2 million for emergency health support and safe
water.

Humanitarian partners are also looking at
contingency plans to ensure preparedness and response
for the possibility of increased food insecurity in
Somalia. In late November, the Famine Early Warning
System Network warned of a likely deterioration in
food security in parts of Somalia in the coming months,
due in part to the climactic shocks mentioned just now.

Following the signing on 10 November of the
tripartite agreement among Kenya, Somalia and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) to support the voluntary return
of Somali refugees, UNHCR will offer assistance to
an initial estimated 10,000 Somali refugees who are
opting to repatriate, during a six-month pilot phase
from December to May 2014.

On 1 January, UNSOM. becomes an integrated
mission, and the Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian
Coordinator post will take on the role of a Deputy
Special Representative. That will be an important
milestone, but integrated work is already under way. We
have launched the preparation of an integrated strategic
framework to guide our work. Meanwhile, UNSOM
and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
are working in joint teams on rule of law and security
institutions through the global focal point initiative
and on constitutional review, elections, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, human rights and
planning.

After 1 January, one thing will not
change - humanitarian work will continue to be done
in strict accordance with humanitarian principles and
based on needs. The integration of our activities will
be helped greatly when the United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes begin to return to their
compounds in Mogadishu in the coming weeks. After
the attack on the United Nations common compound on
19 June, there have been extensive security reviews and
additional measures have been put in place to allow that
progressive return. Mogadishu remains a risky place to
work, and Al-Shabaab has shown a consistent intent
to target international partners, including the United
Nations. That intent still exists.

I welcome the request by the Council in resolution
2124 (2013) to be presented with detailed proposals for
deployment of an additional United Nations guard unit
to protect UNSOM. in Mogadishu. I believe that without
such a guard unit we will lack sufficiently robust
security measures to allow us to operate consistently
in Mogadishu at full strength and without interruption.
A recent reconnaissance mission to Mogadishu
determined that the guard unit would need to comprise
410 personnel, and I believe that the Secretary-General
will shortly request the Council's concurrence for that
deployment.

"What does not kill you makes you stronger", I am
told. None of the crunches and crises that Somalia has
faced in the last three months has turned out to be as
bad as the prophets of doom had predicted. The Central
Bank crisis should lead to tighter financial oversight.
The no-confidence motion against the Prime Minister
has tested parliamentary institutions and found them
strong. Even the horrific Westgate attack has galvanized
international support, both to AMISOM. and to the
Somali national forces. My heartfelt condolences go
to the victims of that terrorist attack and of many in
Somalia, in Beledweyne, Mogadishu and most recently
in Bosaso, as well as of many smaller incidents. Such
cruel violence only strengthens our resolve.

I thank the Council for its unswerving support for
our work in Somalia. It would be fair, I think, to say
that all in the United Nations are in the business of
silver linings. The new, emerging Somalia deserves the
Council's support. The United Nations will continue to
back the voices of hope, not despair, and of opportunity,
not crisis.

