Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2010/401) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We would also like to thank
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, for his briefing and the
staff of UNMIK for their efforts. We welcome the
participation in today's meeting of Mr. Vuk Jeremie,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
and Mr. Skender Hyseni.

We are pleased to note that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, operating
within the framework of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999), is successfully continuing its role of
maintaining peace, security, stability and respect for
human rights in Kosovo. Furthermore, we appreciate
and commend UNMIK's efforts to encourage the
process of reconciliation and to facilitate constructive
dialogue and regional cooperation, as well as its focus
on mediation between the communities and its support
to minority communities.

The report of the Secretary-General indicates that
the security situation in Kosovo has remained
relatively calm, despite some incidents mainly in
northern Kosovo, where the situation has continued to
be sensitive and politically delicate. In particular, the
end of the reporting period was marked by two
incidents that increased tensions. In that regard, Bosnia
and Herzegovina condemns the tragic incident that
occurred on 2 July, in which one person was killed and
several others were injured.

We also regret the tragic death of a member of the
Assembly of Kosovo representing the Serb community -
Petar Miletic' - who was shot by unknown
perpetrators in front of his house in northern Mitrovica.
Once again, we reiterate our call for an investigation
into these incidents and for those responsible to be
brought to justice.

We are of the view that efforts to improve inter-
community dialogue and confidence-building among
the parties are of particular importance for returns.
Although the number of voluntary minority returns
remains low, we are encouraged by the fact that there
has been an increase in comparison to previous years.
Furthermore, in stressing the importance of providing
conditions conducive to sustainable returns, we
welcome UNMIK's efforts to defuse tensions and draw
attention to common needs. We encourage the
continuation of the practice of "go-and-see" visits,
which give displaced persons the opportunity to visit
their properties and make first-hand assessments of the
conditions in the receiving community.

With regard to the rule of law, we welcome the
activities of UNMIK and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), operating within
the status-neutral framework of the United Nations. We
also support the existing practice of cooperation and
coordination among UNMIK, EULEX, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and NATO - the latter present through the troops of
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) - and we hope that this
practice will continue.

The Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
not considered the question of whether to recognize
Kosovo's independence. While Bosnia and
Herzegovina has taken no position on this question, we
take note of the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice rendered on 22 July, in which the
Court concluded that the declaration of independence
of Kosovo, adopted on 17 February 2008, did not
violate international law.

Finally, we would like to stress the importance of
the European Union-sponsored High-Level Meeting on
the Western Balkans held in Sarajevo on 2 June, which
reaffirmed the European Union's commitment to the
European perspective of the Western Balkan countries
within the new framework of the Lisbon Treaty.
European Union membership for all of the Western
Balkans remains our shared objective.

