Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
valuable and comprehensive briefing today, and for
reminding the Security Council and the international
community of the dangerous situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. We underline once again the State
of Kuwait's full support for his concerted efforts to
achieve lasting, fair and comprehensive peace for the
Palestinian people. This repercussions of this long-
standing problem have been aggravated on a daily basis
and affected the people who have suffered the hardship
of occupation for over five decades.

"If new funds are not received immediately, we
will be facing a potentially catastrophic breakdown
in essential service delivery... Services provided at
hospitals, clinics, as well as sewage treatment, water
and sanitation facilities will cease... Hospitals in
the Gaza Strip only have enough fuel to support
service provision just over two weeks, in total, with
some facilities at greater risk... putting the lives
of over 500 vulnerable patients at risk each day.
These include patients being treated in intensive
care; new-born babies in neonatal units; patients
requiring emergency surgery."

Those are the words of Mr. Jamie MCGoldrick,
Humanitarian Coordinator for the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, who appealed to the world and the donor
community to prevent a new catastrophe; this time,
a health catastrophe for the people of Gaza. It is no
exaggeration to warn that just a few weeks separate
Gaza from a catastrophic collapse in basic humanitarian
services, according to Mr. Mladenov. That must cause
us to redouble our efforts to protect civilians and avoid
this dark scenario by compelling Israel to respect and
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
while stopping all its illegal and illegitimate practices.

Yesterday, our appeals were aimed at averting the
emergence of a humanitarian crisis due to the closure
of the vital Karam Abu Salem crossing by Israel,
the occupying Power. Today, the Palestinian people
continue to face multiple challenges. Numbers and
statistics do not lie. More than 4,800 patients in the
Gaza Strip are dire daily need of basic health care.

Mr. Mladenov's briefing tells us once again
that the situation in Gaza is still on the brink of the
abyss, especially after the fall of a number of martyrs
and wounded. Three Palestinian citizens, including a
12-year-old boy, were recently killed in addition to 248
citizens injured, 80 of them were hit by live bullets.
That raises the number to 180 people who have been
killed since the beginning of the peaceful Great March
of Return on 30 March. We strongly condemn these
systematic Israeli crimes against unarmedPalestinian
civilians, which amount to war crimes and crimes
against humanity under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law.

In addition, the occupying authorities have given
orders for bulldozers and demolition machines to begin
moving towards the Al-Khan Al-Ahmar area after the
Israeli Supreme Court rejected the petition filed by the
Bedouin community of that area. This act threatens to
displace 80 Palestinian families, which means about 190

persons, of whom 53 per cent are children. The reason
for that is to implement the so-called Greater Jerusalem
Project, including the settlement project called E-l, to
vacate the area of all Palestinian presence, separate the
southern West Bank from the centre and isolate the
occupied city of Jerusalem from the West Bank. That
constitutes a serious violation of human rights and
international humanitarian law, while undermining the
efforts towards a two-State solution.

In that regard, we reiterate our demand that the
Israeli occupation Power be obliged to respect and
implement resolution 2334 (2016), which underscored
that Israeli settlements constitute a flagrant violation
of international law and an obstacle to peace. We
welcome the first written report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/614), which was issued in June, on the
implementation of that resolution. We regret that no
such report was issued this month, and we look forward
to the issuance of periodic written reports regarding the
implementation of that resolution starting in December
in response to a request by 10 States members of the
Council, and in line with the established practice and
the note by the President S/2017/507.

Unfortunately, the basic services provided by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to more than
5 million registered Palestinian refugees are facing
great pressure as a result of the severe financial crisis
of the Agency. We had believed that its previous
financial crisis could not get any worse, but today we
find that these challenges have doubled and now pose a
direct threat to those refugees as a result of UNRWA's
fiscal deficit. We urge donor countries to continue to
provide the necessary and sustainable financial support
for the Agency's programmes and activities. Funding
the Agency is the responsibility of the international
community and its burden cannot be borne by specific
States. However, the total amount provided by the State
of Kuwait has exceeded $70 million in the past four
years alone. We will maintain this support alongside
many other countries.

The special session of the Council of the League
of Arab States, which was held at the ministerial level
on 12 September to discuss the UNRWA crisis, fully
supported the mandate given to the Agency under
General Assembly resolution 302 (IV). It rejected
attempts to end or reduce the role and mandate of the
Agency through systematic campaigns against it. It
called on the international community to commit itself
to the Agency mandate and to ensure resources and
financial contributions to its budget and activities in a
sustainable manner so that it can continue to play its role
in providing basic services to the victims of the Nakba.
That is a right which the international community has
a responsibility to fulfil, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948.

Unfortunately, there is once again overriding
tension in Jerusalem due to the provocative incursions
launched by extremist settler groups in the courtyard
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, covered by Israeli occupying
forces, which have released tear gas on civilians and
detained dozens of worshippers and Mosque guards, as
well as removing officials from the Islamic Endowments
Department. We renew our rejection and condemnation
of any Israeli violation of holy sites, especially attempts
to change the historical and legal status of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque or to partition it, and to undermine the freedom
of Muslim prayers therein. In that regard, we commend
the decision of the Government of Paraguay to refrain
from moving its Embassy to Jerusalem, in respect
of international law and the relevant internationally
legitimate resolutions.

In conclusion, what I have outlined is only a glimpse
of the suffering of the unarmed Palestinian people; it is
only a small part of the scourges facing our Palestinian
brothers in the occupied territories. Most importantly,
what I have outlined must stir our consciences and
compel us to put an end to the injustices that the
Palestinian people have suffered for decades. Everyone
in the Council is all too aware that the Palestinian
question is a top priority of every Muslim and Arab.
There can be no lasting peace and security as long as the
occupation continues. The resolutions of international
legitimatcy, the Quartet road map, the principle of
land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative are the
cornerstones ofa comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
Those would provide the Palestinian people with their
legitimate political rights and the establishment of their
independent State with East Jerusalem as its capital.

