Ms. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would like to
express our sincere thanks to the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her fifteenth report and comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Libya.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands has long been
a firm supporter of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). The ICC is a key institution when it comes to
accountability for the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes of international concern, and we have found the
Prosecutor to be a key ally in this endeavour. I would
like to echo the words that she just spoke - thatjustice,
peace and stability form a trinity - and to thank her
and her Office for their unwavering commitment to
bringing justice to the victims of atrocities in Libya,
and also, as a part of this trinity, to working towards
the achievement of peace and stability in the country.

Allow me to focus on three important aspects:
the security and human rights situation in Libya;
cooperation with the Court; and combating impunity.

First, we are deeply worried by the volatile security
and human rights situation in Libya. Civilians continue
to be the main victims of the ongoing conflict. The
situation of internally displaced persons and migrants,
especially those held in detention centres, gives
particular cause for concern.

We welcome the work of the Prosecutor in relation
to alleged crimes against migrants. We welcome in
particular her collaborative efforts with States and
organizations, in conformity with strategic goal 9, as
well as her efforts to determine whether these crimes
fall within the jurisdiction of the Court.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains ready to
employ all means available to combat abuses against
migrants and stabilize Libya, including through targeted
sanctions, which can complement and strengthen
criminal prosecution.

Secondly, on cooperation with the Court, for the
Office of the Prosecutor to fulfil its mandate, the full
cooperation and assistance of the Libyan authorities is
essential. In this respect, we would like to commend
the successful cooperation between the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan Prosecutor-General's Office,
which has resulted in the Office's first mission to Libya
in more than five years. However, greater cooperation
is needed from all States and the Council, especially in
relation to the surrender of suspects to the Court.

In particular, like others, we regret that
Mr. Al-Werfalli, commander of the Libyan National
Army's Al-Saiqa Brigade, and other suspects have not
been arrested and brought to The Hague, especially
considering that Mr. Al-Werfalli has allegedly
committed more murders since the last report on the
situation in Libya (see S/PV.8091). This shows that lack
of accountability encourages the repetition of crimes,
as perpetrators feel free to commit further offences
without fear of punishment. We find it alarming that
Mr. Al-Werfalli was reportedly released after just one
day in custody. That he remains at large shows disregard
for the Council and for the international community as
a whole.

We urge all relevant entities to fully cooperate
with the Court to ensure the immediate arrest and swift
surrender of all those against whom an arrest warrant
has been issued. Moreover, it is essential that the
Council abide by its financial obligations and facilitate
adequate United Nations financial funding for the
Office's work in Libya.

Thirdly, on combating impunity, this year marks
the twentieth anniversary of the Rome Statute. Twenty
years ago, we were full of hope and confidence that we
had turned a new page, that impunity would be targeted
successfully and that this international approach of
accountability would set a universal norm. Today,
however, the picture is more grim. There are still many
situations outside the Court's jurisdiction, with Syria
being the most visible, and the Council is all too often
paralysed and does not take adequate action.

We appreciate the efforts of the Prosecutor to
make full use of the options she has at her disposal,
including requests to the ICC for the exercise of
jurisdiction over the alleged deportation of people to
neighbouring countries.

If the Court has the ability to scrutinize situations
all around the world, justice can be brought to those who
are in need of it. We therefore urge all States to become
State parties to the Rome Statute. Until that is the case,
the Security Council needs to take responsibility for
referring situations to the Court.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands stands firmly

by the Prosecutor's side in her fight against impunity.
Together, if all ofus are fully committed to this common
goal, we can make accountability happen for Libya and
all around the world.

