Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me begin by
joining previous speakers in welcoming and expressing
appreciation to the Special Envoy, Mr. Jan Eliasson, for
his briefing on the political process in Darfur and to
the Under-S ecretary-General, Mr. J can-Marie

Gue'henno, for his update on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

My delegation would like to reiterate once again
its continued support for Mr. Eliasson's untiring
efforts, together with those of his counterpart from the
African Union, Mr. Salim Salim, in the political
process to find a durable negotiated political settlement
to the Darfur issue. We believe it is essential that the
Security Council reaffirm its continued support for that
process as an irreversible one and to strongly signal to
all parties our full backing for the Special Envoy's
efforts.

We note in the report that the rebels have
coalesced into five main factions. That has offered
them the potential to come up with a common platform
for negotiations. We underline the importance of their
full participation in the negotiation process being
facilitated by the Special Envoys of the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations. Special Envoy Eliasson
used the term "critical mass" in his briefing. It is
absolutely essential that all sides support and
contribute to the peace process, so that the suffering of
the people in Darfur and in the Sudan as a whole can
be alleviated without further delay.

It is also essential that all sides cease hostilities
and desist from resorting to force, in order to permit
progress on the political front. In addition to the
political and peacekeeping phases, the cessation of
hostilities and the ceasefire are one phase of the Addis
Ababa conclusions of 2006 that has not yet been
implemented. We need to more closely examine and
explore ways to establish a sustainable cessation of
hostilities, and we need to revitalize and go beyond
previous ceasefire mechanisms. Creating conditions
conducive to the political process is key.

The political process is the cornerstone of the
international community's efforts to assist the Sudan in
dealing with the Darfur issue. The deployment of
UNAMID and the political process should be mutually
reinforcing. We share the Secretary-General's View that
the deployment of UNAMID will be only as effective
as the political process that it is mandated to support.
At the same time, it is our hope that UNAMID will be
able to provide greater security on the ground for the
civilian population and to provide greater impetus and
confidence for the political process.
We therefore draw some encouragement from the
important development with regard to the status-of-
forces agreement and troop composition. Those are
pertinent steps in UNAMID's deployment and should
be recognized as such. We continue to believe in the
efficacy of the Tripartite Mechanism - Secretariat/
African Union/Government of the Sudan - in
addressing issues relating to UNAMID's deployment.

We would like to echo the Secretary-General's
statement earlier this week that UNAMID troop
contributors must speed up their preparations so that
they can be in theatre as soon as possible. Moreover,
we recognize that it is important that those in the
international community who are in a position to
contribute critical aviation and ground transportation
units do so.

The recent rebel incursions in Chad and the
potential ramifications for our efforts in Darfur are
reminders of the risks of delays in the Darfur political
process. Indeed, the relations between the Sudan and
Chad are essential for the stability of both countries. In
that regard, we call on them to respect and secure their
common border in accordance with their bilateral
agreements, in particular the Tripoli and Riyadh
agreements.

More than 4.2 million people in Darfur depend on
humanitarian assistance. We commend the efforts of
international humanitarian organizations to deliver
assistance to those in need. It is deeply troubling that
humanitarian workers have continued to be targets of
Violence and armed robberies. The Joint Communique
on the facilitation of humanitarian activities should be
supported and fully implemented. The Security Council
should be ready to look at further measures against
those attacking humanitarian workers operating in the
service of those in need.

My delegation is convinced that progress on all
fronts in Darfur - including the political,
peacekeeping, ceasefire and humanitarian tracks - is
essential in order to achieve a comprehensive peace.
That requires a constructive approach and
contributions by all parties, including the international
community, the Government of the Sudan and the
rebels. The centre of all these efforts, however, is
obviously the political process. We wish Mr. Eliasson
and Mr. Salim all the best in that endeavour.

Finally, I should like to wish our colleague the
Permanent Representative of Croatia every success in
her future endeavours.

