Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome Mr. Zahir Tanin, the new Special
Representative and Head of the United Nations Mission
in Kosovo. We would like to thank him for his briefing
on the situation in Kosovo. Our country wishes him
every success in his efforts to promote peace and
stability in Kosovo and the region. We would also like
to thank Mr. Ivica Daeic', First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citak for their briefings.

In the political arena, we value the progress
achieved in recent months with the establishment
of the association/community of Serb-majority
municipalities, a substantive element of the First
Agreement on Principles Governing the Normalization
ofRelationsof 19 April 2013. We recognize the role ofthe
European Union in facilitating the high-level technical
negotiations between Pristina and Belgrade, which
are contributing to the promotion of trust between the
parties. Nonetheless, we note with concern the recent
attacks against political leaders in Kosovo. All acts that
could damage or undermine the normal functioning of
democratic institutions must be repudiated. We call on
the political leaders to refrain from using inflammatory
language and anti-democratic methods to express
their positions. In that regard, we are also extremely
concerned by the violent attacks against minority
communities and against the cultural and religious
heritage of Kosovo. It is critical to preserve and deepen
the conditions for coexistence and to avoid all acts
that could endanger relations among the different
communities. Promoting respect for minorities is a task
that everyone should respect and one with which all
should comply.

We recognize the progress made in Kosovo since
our last meeting with respect to preventing extremism
and radicalization. The adoption of the strategy of
16 September constitutes an important step in tackling
that phenomenon. However, an effective strategy
requires both recognizing and addressing the diverse
factors that contribute to extremism. We stress the
importance of continuing to work on addressing the
socioeconomic factors that exacerbate the recruitment
activities of extremist groups. Similarly, we highlight
the importance of coordination between the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime with the goal of addressing
the financing of terrorism. Finally, we recognize those
initiatives that highlight the important role of women in
the fight against violent extremism in Kosovo.

Identifying the whereabouts of the more than
1,600 people who disappeared during the conflict is
sine qua non for advancing toward truth and justice
and it is a right of family members that must be met
by the relevant authorities. In that regard, we commend
the recent agreement on the exchange of information
signed by the Commissions on Missing Persons of
Kosovo and Montenegro, and we urge the authorities in
Pristina to strengthen the efforts of the Working Group
on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances. Progress
on that matter is fundamental for closing the wounds
left by the war. The restoration of the social fabric in
Kosovo requires the return and effective inclusion of
those who were displaced by the conflict. We recognize
the regional efforts to address that issue and commend
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for the crucial role it has been playing in
facilitating the voluntary return of refugees. We would
also highlight the central role of the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo in strengthening the rule of law and
promoting the security, stability and respect for human

rights in Kosovo.

To conclude, I would like to stress that resolution
1244 (1991) retains its full force as the internationally
recognized basis for resolving the situation in Kosovo,
including strict respect for the principle of territorial
integrity.

