Mr. Feltman: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to brief it on this important topic, as well my
United Nations colleagues Ms. Irina Bokova, Mr. Yury
Fedotov and Brigadier General Fabrizio Parrulli,

I would like to start by expressing my sincere
condolences to the loved ones of the victims of
Wednesday's terrorist attack in London, as well as my
deep sympathy to the people and the Government of the
United Kingdom. We needed no reminder of the horror
of terrorism. But the London attack - like those in
Kabul, Baghdad, Maiduguri and so many other places
recently - must move us to strengthen international
counter-terrorism cooperation in line with international
human rights and humanitarian law standards.

In particular in armed conflict situations, today
terrorists are not only destroying lives but are also
visiting their horrific violence on historical sites
and objects. The deliberate destruction of cultural
heritage and the trafficking in items of great artistic,
religious or cultural significance target individuals
and communities on cultural and religious grounds.
The protection of heritage, then, is not only a cultural
issue, it is also a security and humanitarian imperative.
Terrorist groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant exploit cultural sites to finance their activities
while strengthening their linkages with transnational
organized crime. They also destroy and traffic cultural
heritage to undermine the power of culture as a
bridge between generations and people of different
backgrounds and religions. Resolution 2347 (2017), just
adopted, aims to strengthen international cooperation
to deprive terrorists of funding, but also to protect
cultural heritage as a symbol of understanding and
respect for all religions, beliefs and civilizations.

Awareness of the essential importance of the
protection of cultural heritage is not new, but it has grown
considerably over the past several years. In establishing
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali through
resolution 2100 (2013), the Security Council established
the link between the illicit trafficking of cultural
objects and the financing of terrorism. Resolution 2322
(2016) urged States to bolster cooperation to prevent
and combat trafficking in cultural property and related
offences that benefit or may benefit terrorist groups.
Meanwhile, during the fifth review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the General
Assembly expressed concern, in resolution 70/291, that
terrorists may benefit from transnational organized
crime in some regions, including from the trafficking
of cultural property, and condemned the destruction of
cultural heritage by terrorist groups. In paragraph 3 of
resolution 68/127, the General Assembly deplored

"attacks on religious places and shrines and cultural
sites in violation of international law, in particular
human rights and humanitarian law".

Moreover, there is already a strong international
legal and normative framework to address these crimes.
This is based on the United Nations Conventions against
Transnational Organized Crime and Corruption, the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism and the International Guidelines
for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses
with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and
other Related Offences.

Protecting cultural heritage requires us to make
every effort to implement this international legal and
normative framework and strengthen international
cooperation. It also demands a global criminal-justice
response that can prevent trafficking in cultural property
by disrupting organized criminal and terrorist networks,
including through anti-corruption and anti-money-
laundering action, and bringing perpetrators to justice.
We need to put a stronger focus on investigation, cross-
border cooperation and exchange of information, and
on bringing in private and public sector partners,
including dealers and the tourism sector, to promote
supply-chain integrity and stop the illicit trade and sale
of cultural property.

The United Nations system, particularly through
the entities of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF), is increasingly supporting
Member States' efforts to address these threats through
advocacy and capacity-building assistance. For
example, the UNESCO and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime are already working together, along
with INTERPOL, the World Customs Organization and
other partners, to assist Member States in protecting
cultural heritage and countering the trafficking in
cultural property. As CTITF Chair, and in the light of
this debate and the resolution that was adopted today,
I will encourage the CTITF Inter-Agency Working
Group on Countering the Financing of Terrorism to
develop new projects to help Member States protect
their cultural heritage.

The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, have demonstrated their determination to
further integrate the protection of cultural heritage in
their counter-terrorism work. With the support of United
Nations entities, Member States are strengthening their
legal frameworks and criminal justice systems and
enhancing their collaboration to prevent and respond
to terrorist attacks against their cultural heritage. I
believe we can, and must, do even more. Resolution
2347 (2017) provides a good basis to do just that. The
United Nations stands ready to do its part.

