Mr. Sucharipa (Austria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the European
Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia - and the associated country Cyprus, as well as
the European Free Trade Association countries members
of the European Economic Area - Iceland and
Norway - align themselves with this statement.

The European Union has consistently supported the
United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia as an important part of the international peace
effort in the region. The deployment of United Nations
troops to prevent an overspill of conflicts from
neighbouring countries was a first in the history of United
Nations peacekeeping activities and has proved to be a
successful undertaking so far. The operation was initially
intended to prevent a spillover from conflicts in the
former Yugoslavia; last year its focus shifted towards the
civil unrest in Albania. Today the focus has shifted again:
the conflict in Kosovo poses a new, grave threat to peace
and stability in the region.

Today the Security Council, at the request of the
Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, will extend the current mandate of
UNPREDEP for a further six months and authorize the
increase of its strength to 1,050 troops. The European
Union welcomes these decisions and looks forward to
further considerations by the Council on the full
implementation of the Secretary-General's
recommendations contained in his report of 14 July 1998.

The European Union is deeply concerned about the
escalation of the conflict in Kosovo, which poses a
serious threat to regional peace and security. The Union
fully subscribes to the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1160 (1998), which, inter alia, imposed an
arms embargo on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In
this context, UNPREDEP will play an important role in
the monitoring of and reporting on illicit arms flows and
other activities that are prohibited under Security Council
resolution 1160 (1998).

The Secretary-General' s proposal to also increase the
number of military observers and civilian police within
UNPREDEP will, in the opinion of the European Union,
be a crucial aspect for the discharge of the tasks
UNPREDEP is mandated with in view of the volatile and
destabilizing situation created by the conflict in Kosovo.

 

For these reasons, the European Union supports the
draft resolution before the Council today and encourages
the Council to continue its consideration of the Secretary-
General's recommendations on the further strengthening of
UNPREDEP.

