Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela is grateful to you, Sir, for convening this
informative meeting to address an issue of particular
importance to the international community and our
country. We also appreciate the briefing of Mr. Fang
Liu, Secretary General of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO).

My delegation voted in favour of resolution 2309
(2016), based on our firm commitment to fight terrorism
and our categorical rejection of the commission of
terrorist acts, whatever their motivation, whenever or
by whomsover they are committed, because such acts
deliberately undermine international peace and security
and constitute flagrant violations of international law.

The most recent terrorist attacks, particularly
those committed by Da'esh, are evidence of how
vulnerability in the face of that terrible scourge and the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters have become
a global one. More than 30,000 persons, including
youths and women, from more than 100 countries
have joined terrorist groups, as noted in the most
recent reports of the Monitoring Group of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999,) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities.

Civil aviation has always been a target of terrorist
acts. One only need to consider the attacks against the
Cubana de Aviacion plane in 1976, which cost the lives
of 73 Cuban athletes, among other incidents. However,
since the terrible attack in New York on 11 September
2001, we have seen greater awareness of the phenomenon
and the need to improve and strengthen civil aviation
security regulations. However, the recent attack against
Flight 9268 of the Russian airline Metrojet, almost a
year ago, reminds us that there is still much to do in
this area.

We would like to pay tribute to all the victims of
such violent acts..We note with regret that, on some
occasions, those events have been used to exacerbate
the political rhetoric against specific countries. The
fight against terrorism in civil aviation requires
cooperation and trust among all of us, because terrorist
groups continue to come up wiht new ways and means
to strike.

The security of international civil aviation plays a
key role in the complex web of preventing and combating
terrorism. While this is ultimately a question in the
ambit of the Security Council as the organ responsible
for maintaining international peace and security, my
country believes that ICAO is the sole specialized agency
with the competence to build consensus in developing
and monitoring the standards and recommended
practices required for international civil aviation. In that
regard, Venezuela considers it necessary to continue to
strengthen national civil aviation systems, including
their evaluation mechanisms, without undermining
each State's authority and sovereignty so that we can
effectively and on a sustainable basis tackle the terrorist
threat. In that respect, capacity-building, technical
assistance, transferring technology on favourable terms
and mobilizing resources are of critical importance.
Similarly, strengthening international and regional
cooperation will prove to be greatly important in that
battle.

Venezuela considers that, in the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism, the preventive
approach is always the best way to tackle this scourge.
It is important that we adopt and implement coordinated
initiatives tailored to each national case and reality,
geared towards undermining the clear strategy of
groups with extremist ideologies that have decided to
promote violence and intolerance. It is also important
to address the root causes fuelling this reprehensible
practice and to devise effective and innovative strategies
to counter extremist and terrorist narratives and to help
our societies to think critically. The aim is to prevent
radicalization, recruitment and the mobilization of
resources, including through the inappropriate use of
communications and information technologies.

It is very important that no country protect or give
haven to the perpetrators of terrorist crimes against
civil aviation. There can be no justification for any
terrorist act. We must all be committed in the fight
against this phenomenon.
Venezuela believes that the fight against terrorism
must take place within the framework of stepped up
international cooperation, in accordance with existing
international and regional instruments, including the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the norms of international law, with full
respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms and
the rule of law. If we depart from those premises to
prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism, we will be
contributing to its radicalization.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the need
that, more than ever, we must be frank and resolute in
fighting terrorism and that we do not selectively draw
on the provisions set out in the relevant international
instruments and resolutions of this multilateral forum
that prohibit the transfer of small arms and lights
weapons, including the man-portable air defence
systems, as well as the financing, training and
provision of havens to terrorist groups, as well as
the implementation in a comprehensive and balanced
manner of the four pillars of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

