Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
I, too, should like to begin by thanking Mr. Guehenno
and Mr. Ramcharan for their briefings. I pay tribute to
the extremely difficult work being carried out by the
human rights staff of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). I believe that they deserve such a tribute.

Without making a statement, as you requested,
Madam, I shall first briefly address Mr. Guehenno's
comments on political developments and then I shall
address the issue of human rights.

A few days ago, the Council rightly welcomed
the settlement relating to the problem of armed forces,
which opened the way for the establishment of the
transitional Government at Kinshasa. This is an
important step to which Mr. Guehenno rightly referred.
He spoke of his concern over the situation in Kivu and
condemned what was happening there. He noted some
interesting developments, for example, the completion
of the first implementation phase of the agreed
ceasefire and withdrawal following the meetings
organized by the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) on
19 and 26 June 2003.

I shall offer a few comments on Bunia to
highlight a point made by Mr. Guehenno that I believe
is important. First, the Interim Emergency
Multinational Force (IEMF) has had the expected
beneficial effect there. Despite logistical problems
related to the airstrip being in poor condition, the force
was deployed there more quickly than had been
expected. The result has been a stabilization of the
security situation and the start of the return of the
civilian population.

Mr. Guehenno said this has begun to change the
balance between those with guns and the legitimate
parties, namely the Ituri interim administration, which
was acquiring a political space within which to operate.
As Mr. Guehenno said, the people who have benefited
from this are the civilians. I am interested that a
strategy has been developed to guide the activities of
United Nations agencies and of other donors. I am also
interested in the Secretariat's efforts to ensure that the
IEMF can be replaced by a robust task force that will
be deployed by 15 August 2003.

Turning now to human rights matters, the
briefings by Mr. Ramcharan and Mr. Guehenno were
indeed devastating. We all remember what Ms.
McAskie said before the Security Council mission
visited the region. At the time, of course, establishing
the truth about violations was the first essential step in
order to provide assistance to the victims, and also in
order to combat impunity. Mr. Ramcharan was correct
to stress the importance of the fight against impunity.
This is what the Council and the Commission on
Human Rights have often emphasized.

Before asking a few questions, I would like to
comment on the recommendations. We agree it is
essential that the transitional Government establish an
appropriate judicial mechanism to ensure the
prosecution of those responsible for serious human
rights violations.

We also believe it is essential that those involved
in violations not be given refuge anywhere. We further
agree that fighting impunity means that the United
Nations must also work on that basis. All United
Nations bodies must consider how we can ensure that
the fight against impunity will succeed. We agree that
we should support the establishment of national
mechanisms to promote and protect human rights in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as a
National Truth and Reconciliation Commission, and
the strengthening of the operational capacity of the
judiciary.

As I read the reports I had three questions. First,
in paragraph 29 of the report on the events at Drodro, it
is recommended that we consider the possibility of
sending an international investigation team at an
appropriate time to Ituri and the eastern part of the
country. What would be an appropriate time, in the
view of the author of the report? Can Mr. Ramcharan
be more specific?

Secondly, paragraph 30 refers to the possibility of
human rights rapporteurs from the Commission on
Human Rights carrying out a joint investigative
mission. I wonder how such a joint mission by the
special rapporteurs would be combined with the
international investigation team.

Thirdly, would it be possible for military
observers to report on human rights violations? And
should not human rights observers enjoy some
protection?

