Mr. Qazi: I am honoured to brief the Council for
the first time since my appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. My
predecessor, the late Sergio Vieira de Mello, did so just
over a year ago. In paying tribute to his memory, I
intend for him and his colleagues who paid the ultimate
sacrifice in the service of the people of Iraq to be an
inspiration and a standard for my team and myself. I
am indeed profoundly gratified and privileged to have
been given this opportunity and responsibility to
implement the mandate of the United Nations, as
circumstances permit, in Iraq.

I am here today to introduce the first report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 30 of Security
Council resolution 1546 (2004) (S/2004/710). This
report is intended to provide Council members with an
update on United Nations activities in Iraq since the
Secretary-General's last report of 5 August 2004
(S/2004/625). It focuses on our priority tasks set forth
in resolution 1546 (2004), particularly with regard to
the National Conference and preparations for the
elections scheduled for January 2005. It also provides
an update on security arrangements for the United
Nations presence in Iraq. The report is in large part
self-explanatory, and I will therefore limit myself to a
few brief observations.

The tragic human dimension of the current
situation in Iraq was brought home to all of us today,
with almost 50 people losing their lives to yet another
bombing. I condemn such acts of violence, whose
primary victims are innocent civilians. It is a sign of
the resurgence of the vicious circle of violence that is
halting the process of rebuilding the country.
Improving the security situation is a collective
responsibility that we all share.

I arrived along with members of my team in
Baghdad on 13 August 2004, on the eve of the National
Conference. During the 13 days that I spent in
Baghdad, I had meetings with the Iraqi Government
and political leadership, prominent members of civil
society and representatives of the diplomatic
community. The return to Iraq of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
international staff of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has been warmly
welcomed. I would, in particular, like to take this
opportunity to thank the Iraqi Interim Government for
its hospitality and support. I would also like to thank
the multinational force for its support.

The National Conference, which took place from
15 to 18 August 2004 against the backdrop of the Najaf
crisis, provided me with a unique introduction to the
diversity and complexity of the Iraqi political
landscape. I was made aware of both the extraordinary
potential of Iraqi society and the serious challenges
that the country must overcome in order to realize its
potential.

Along with the President, the Prime Minister and
the Vice-President of Iraq, I had the honour of
addressing the inaugural session of the National
Conference on behalf of the Secretary-General. I urged
the delegates to the Conference to avail themselves of
the opportunity to elect a representative Interim
National Council that would help broaden and
strengthen the political process and would enable their
country to successfully make the transition to a
constitutional democracy in accordance with the
schedule indicated by resolution 1546 (2004).

Prior to my arrival, the United Nations, in
consultation with the Preparatory Committee for the
National Conference, had encouraged broad
participation in the Conference and advised on a
number of important issues, including procedures for
preparation, the conduct of proceedings, the agenda
and the public information campaign. It was
emphasized that the Interim National Council to be
elected by the Conference needed to be as inclusive,
diverse and representative as possible for it to be
credible and effective in preparing for the national
elections scheduled to take place by 31 January 2005 at
the latest.

Despite the undoubted shortcomings of the
National Conference, the distractions of the Najaf
crisis and the very adverse security environment in
which the Conference took place, the convening of the
National Conference and the election of the Interim
National Council must be adjudged a qualified success
and a first step towards a more participatory, pluralistic
and inclusive polity than Iraq has previously
experienced. While the Conference was attended by
more than a thousand delegates - including 70 parties
that collectively added up to a significant portion of the
Iraqi political spectrum - the fact is that a number of
civic groups, small parties and independents felt
excluded. Some significant political groups chose not
to attend. Inducing them to participate in the political
and electoral process should become a matter of high
priority for the Iraqi Government.

This will not be an easy undertaking, as the
recent violence in Najaf and Kufa and the current
violence in Baghdad, Falluja, Ramadi, Samarra,
Mosul, etc., amply demonstrate. The transition process
is fragile. Serious differences within Iraqi society have
yet to be politically and effectively addressed. The
transfer of sovereignty to the Interim Government has
not been accompanied by an improvement in the
security situation. That is the central challenge facing
Iraq today. The main victims of the violence in Iraq are
Iraqi civilians. The climate of fear remains entrenched.

Ultimately, this situation can only be politically
resolved. That fact places a great burden of
responsibility on all parties. Neither national
reconciliation nor specific political programmes can be
successfully pursued through an excessive reliance on
the threat or use of force. All the parties and
movements in Iraq must take care not to lose sight of
their shared interest in a united, independent,
prosperous, stable, secure and peaceful Iraq. Only then
will they appreciate their respective stakes in
politically addressing their differences in a spirit of
compromise, however intractable those differences
may appear today. The Interim Government and the
Interim Council have a primary responsibility in that
regard. They are working in that direction, but they
will need all the assistance and encouragement they
can get.

In the brief period before the planned elections,
the political process will have to be further broadened
to include those parties and movements that have so
far, for one reason or another, tended to stay away or
have allowed themselves to be tempted by the path of
violence instead of pursuing dialogue and
accommodation. Only then can the political process
begin to embrace the full range of aspirations that
define the politics of Iraq and deliver the peace and
security dividend so dearly yearned for by the people
of Iraq. As Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, I shall be ready to contribute to any
facilitating role that the United Nations is able to play
in the political and electoral process in Iraq, as well as
to the humanitarian, reconstruction and development
aspects of UNAMI's mandate.

The transitional process will require all parties to
share a transcending national vision, including
agreement on benchmarks and the end objectives of the
process. The next benchmark in the Iraqi transition
process will be the elections. As should be clear, the
electoral process will be an Iraqi process, conducted by
Iraqis for Iraqis. It cannot be anything else. The Iraqi
people have the right to expect - and do expect - the
Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq, the Interim
Government and National Council to fulfil their shared
responsibility to enable them to fully and securely
participate in credible and fair elections as currently
scheduled. In that regard, the Iraqi Government will
have the responsibility to ensure the independence and
financial autonomy of the Iraqi Electoral Commission.
This is crucial to enabling the Commission to discharge
its electoral responsibilities to the Iraqi people.

UNAMI is committed to actively assist and
support the Iraqi Electoral Commission in
administering, conducting and monitoring a fair and
credible Iraqi electoral process. The extent and scale of
UNAMI activity in that regard will necessarily be
determined by prevailing circumstances, including the
security environment. UNAMI will not run or
administer the Iraqi elections. Iraq is a sovereign
country with a sovereign Government and an
independent Electoral Commission. But UNAMI has a
mandate from the Security Council and, accordingly, a
responsibility to the Iraqi people to render a leading
role in giving advice and providing technical support,
training and funding to the Iraqi Electoral Commission,
which has the exclusive authority to organize and
conduct the elections. The electoral component of
UNAMI is already assisting the Iraqi Electoral
Commission in preparing for national and other
elections that are scheduled to take place
simultaneously by 31 January 2005. Within the
prevailing circumstances, UNAMI will extend its
assistance and support to the Commission to the best of
its ability and with the utmost responsibility.

Similarly, UNAMI continues to facilitate a
sustained effort, from both inside and outside Iraq, to
support the coordination efforts of the Iraqi authorities
in capacity- -building, humanitarian assistance,
reconstruction and development. UNAMI is also
liaising with Iraqi authorities, civil society and others
to promote human rights and the rule of law, as well as
developing its efforts for informing the Iraqi public on
the transitional process. Here I wish to pay tribute to
the dedication of the UNAMI staff in Iraq and in the
region, particularly our national staff, who continue to
work under very difficult conditions.

All these activities reflect the need for a
comprehensive long-term approach to rebuilding
Iraq - including politically and in terms of security,
law and order, socio-economic development and rights
empowerment. To succeed, Iraq will need the
continued support of the international community, and
I look forward to a constructive outcome of the next
donors meeting, to be held in Tokyo in October. The
ongoing regional dialogue and cooperation between
Iraq and its neighbours is also encouraging. The
development of Iraq is as much in the interest of the
region as the development of the region is in the
interest of Iraq.

With the deployment of UNAMI to Baghdad, the
Blue Flag is once more flying in Iraq, albeit,
necessarily, in the Green, or International, Zone. Iraqi
expectations of UNAMI are high. For many Iraqis,
UNAMI involvement with the political and electoral
processes is a sine qua non for their credibility and
effectiveness.

There is much work to be done. However, the
current security environment is far from conducive to
the deployment of UNAMI international staff to Iraq,
except in minimal numbers. It also largely confines
UNAMI's movements to the International, or Green,
Zone, which limits UNAMI's ability to interact with a
sufficiently wide range of the Iraqi political spectrum.
A light footprint is, however, unavoidable. At all times
security must be the overriding guiding principle for
determining the number of international staff that can
be deployed in Iraq. That is why it will be essential for
the Iraqis to own their political process.

As I am Head of UNAMI and Designated Official
for the security of mission personnel, both national and
international, security has to be my paramount, if not
exclusive, concern and obligation. It has to be the key
operating principle. Here I wish to thank the Iraqi
authorities and the multinational force for the
protection currently provided to us on an interim basis.
It is crucial that the necessary logistical and security
arrangements for our operations be finalized as soon as
possible. The United Nations is making every effort to
support the efforts of the multinational force in this
regard, as well as to generate UNAMI's own internal
security capacity.

It is important, however, that the distinct entity of
the multinational force mandated by the Council to
provide security for our presence in Iraq should be
identified or deployed immediately prior to the
deployment of UNAMI guard units. The need for a
clear and unambiguous legal basis for obtaining and
deploying guards units for the protection of United
Nations facilities in Iraq is emphasized in paragraph 30
of the Secretary-General's report (S/2004/710). The

Secretary-General intends to write to the Security
Council on this matter shortly, and I would like to urge
the Council to consider that letter at its earliest
convenience.

Let me conclude, Mr. President, by noting that
Iraq's transitional process is compressed within a
rather short period of time. A number of timelines have
to be met between now and national elections under an
approved constitution by the end of next year. The
international community must do everything possible
to assist the Iraqis. Every effort must be made to
improve the security environment, as an acceptable
security environment is necessary for political
progress. But equally, an inclusive, sustained and
proactive political process, involving dialogue, mutual
accommodation and a willingness to compromise, will
improve the chances for a significant reduction in
violence and improvement in the security environment.

My brief introductory stay in Baghdad has
convinced me that the people of Iraq desperately want
peace and to be masters in their own country. They
have the talent and the will to peaceably persevere on
the path towards those objectives. They see an
effective role for the United Nations in that process as
critical to the realization of their hopes. They
appreciate that despite an adverse security situation the
United Nations returned to Baghdad. Accordingly,
while necessarily constrained by the overriding
consideration of security, it will be my effort as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General not to
disappoint Iraqi expectations. UNAMI will do
everything possible to support the Iraqi Government
and people in their efforts for the political and
economic reconstruction of their country.

In discharging my tasks in Iraq, I am very
conscious that I am advancing on the path established
by Lakhdar Brahimi, with the able assistance of Jamal
Benomar. Mr. Brahimi's sagacity has been critical in
promoting the necessary political process for restoring
normalcy in Iraq.

In the months ahead, the continued support of the
Security Council will be of vital importance to
maintain Iraq's transition by building on the work done
so far. I look forward to a continuous process of
consultation and interaction with the Council as we
move forward with the implementation of resolution
1546 (2004). I also look forward to working closely
with the Iraqi Interim Government and National
Council, Iraqi political parties and movements, Iraqi
business leaders, non-governmental organizations,
professional associations and civil society and human
rights advocacy groups, as well as with the
neighbouring, regional and donor countries, to help
provide an enabling environment for Iraq's political
and development process.

