Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and to express my appreciation for your
efforts. I would also like to pay tribute to your
predecessor, the Ambassador of Kenya, for his role in
presiding over the Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting for the third time in
a little over a year to consider the situation in the
occupied Arab territories, particularly in the Holy City of
Jerusalem, where on 21 June the Israeli Cabinet adopted
a decision that would expand the boundaries of the
municipality of Jerusalem to include some of the adjacent
settlements and large areas of the West Bank. This new
Israeli decision is one of the most dangerous Israel has
adopted with regard to the Holy City. It represents a step
in a programme that is perfectly clear to all and that aims
to achieve several objectives. Among these objectives are
the annexation of more Palestinian territory to the
municipality of Jerusalem, whose authority was previously
expanded illegally, the alteration of the demographic
composition of the city, the obliteration of its character,
and the change of its status as the Holy City for all
revealed religions, as well as the eradication of its Arab
identity.

The new Israeli decision and the plan that it implies
represent not only a provocation of the Palestinian people,
its will and its leadership, but also a challenge to the will
of the international community and a clear violation of
international law and legitimacy. As we all know, this is
in complete contradiction of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War. It also repudiates the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, particularly the more
than 16 relevant resolutions of the Security Council
regarding the city of Jerusalem, including in particular
resolution 252 (1968). That resolution provides that all
measures and actions adopted by Israel with regard to
Jerusalem are null and void.

This is not the first measure on Jerusalem adopted
by Israel. Rather, it is but a step in a long series of
measures and illegal actions that aim to change the facts
on the ground in favour of Israel. These include the
building of settlements such as the one at Jebel Abu
Ghneim - an issue on which this Council could not

 

come to a decision but which is still being considered by
the emergency special session of the General Assembly.
This is in addition to other measures that aim to tighten the
grip, economically and socially, on the Palestinian people.

In spite of repeated calls from the international
community, Israel persists in challenging the will of the
international community by refusing to implement the
commitments and pledges that it assumed in the framework
of the peace process and of other concluded agreements.
Among these is the agreement to consider the status of
Jerusalem in the final stage of the peace process and the
agreement not to adopt, in the interim, any measures that
would change the existing situation.

What is needed today is for the Council to adopt firm
measures to prevail upon Israel to rescind its decision. That
would represent a positive step in the efforts to give
impetus to the peace process. This is what Tunisia has been
working for: the establishment of a permanent and just
peace in the Middle East, in order to give substance to the
principle of land for peace and in a manner that would
guarantee the Palestinian people's right to establish their
own independent State, with Jerusalem as its capital, and
the right of the other Arab peoples concerned to have their
lands restored to them.

The whole world is looking to the Council today to
see what urgent measures can be adopted in this direction
to affirm its credibility, maintain its prestige and safeguard
the aspirations for peace and security in the Middle East.

