The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Sierra Leone and Togo, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dahor (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Kpotsra
(Togo) took the seat reserved for him at the side of
the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the third
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone, document
S/l998/ll76, and the special report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Observer Mission
in Sierra Leone, document S/l999/20.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/l999/26, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like also to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the following documents:
S/ 1999/ 17, letter dated 6 January 1999 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Liberia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; and S/l999/18, letter dated 7 January
1999 from the Permanent Representative of Togo to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution (S/1999/26)
before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America


The President (interpretation from Spanish): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1220 (1999).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 12.55 pm.

