Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by thanking the French presidency for
organizing this open debate. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for presenting his annual report
(S/2017/821) on children and armed conflict, as well as
the briefers for their valuable input.

The scale of Violations committed against children
reached an alarming level in 2016. International efforts
to hold perpetrators accountable for crimes against
children in situations of armed conflict must be
strengthened and impunity must end in order to prevent
new cycles of violence against children. Ensuring
the full compliance of all parties with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law
must be the cornerstone of our prevention efforts.

The defeat of Da'esh, Al-Qaida and their affiliates
in Syria and Iraq has been a positive development in that
regard. However, we must remember that the terrorist
groups, such as Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab, are still
fully active, ravaging other parts of the world and
terrorizing children. Likewise, the targeting of children
on religious and ethnic grounds, such as what we are
witnessing in Myanmar, is a matter of grave concern.

The Secretary-General's 2017 report reveals
that the number of Palestinian children in military
detention has reached the highest level recorded since
2010, with 444 children, including 15 girls. The use of
live ammunition is frequently used by Israeli forces
and has led to the killing of 30 Palestinian children
this year. On 20 September, the world witnessed how
Israeli forces continued to shoot at a 16-year-old boy in
Bani Na'im after he had fallen to the ground, following
initial gunshots to his legs. That is just one example of
the atrocities that the Israeli regime commits on a daily
basis against Palestinian civilians, including children,
who resist the illegal occupation and apartheid policies
of the Israeli regime. It is absurd, however, that in
Palestine resistance against foreign occupation is
labelled as terrorism by the occupying regime.

Yemen has entered the third year of its war, which
inflicts a devastating cost on civilians. Around 15 million
people lack adequate access to clean drinking water and

health services. About 7 million people are faced with
the threat of famine. Worse yet is that all of those have
been exacerbated by the largest single-year outbreak
of cholera ever recorded. That epidemic now includes
over 800,000 suspected cases of cholera across 90 per
cent of communities in Yemen - a country in which
only 45 per cent ofhealth facilities are functioning. The
responsibility for that devastating situation falls upon
the Saudi-led coalition, which seeks a military solution
in place of a political settlement to the crisis.

Israel has never been blacklisted in the Secretary-
General's reports, despite flagrantly targeting
Palestinian children. Last year, the Saudi-led coalition
was blacklisted for the first time, but surprisingly its
name was removed from the list. This year, we note
that the name of the Saudi-led coalition is on the list,
though as an improving child-killer. We would like to
take this opportunity to call for the accountability for
the war crimes against children committed by anybody,
everywhere. Being political and selective in such a case
is tantamount to betraying the most vulnerable people
on the planet, children, whom this process is designed
to protect. It also discredits reports of the United
Nations and seriously damages the universality of the
application of international humanitarian law.

