Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea appreciates the United States' initiative
in convening this open debate and in adopting the
resolution on the Ebola crisis (resolution 2117 (2014)).
We also thank the briefers, who provided us with a
comprehensive picture of how grave the situation
is. We would like to commend the leadership of the
Secretary-General and welcome his timely proposal
on the establishment of the United Nations mission
for Ebola emergency response. We also pay tribute to
the WHO and all those who are on the front lines of
the fight against Ebola, especially the noble work of
aid personnel operating in an extremely challenging
environment.

The spread of a disease may not normally fall
within the domain of our traditional understanding
of peace and security. However, this Ebola crisis is
unravelling the very fabric of the affected societies and
threatening the gains made through our international
peacebuilding activities in those countries. As such,
peace and security are under serious threat nationally,
regionally and globally. In that light, allow me to share
with the Council some observations on this matter.

First, a substantial and coordinated international
response is required to tackle the Ebola epidemic. We
believe the disease, while a formidable threat, is both
preventable and controllable. Before the situation gets
out of control, with devastating results, we must heed
the risks and respond at the international level. The
United Nations, which is the best platform to coordinate
international efforts, should help strengthen response
systems and direct the many different streams of aid
flowing in to curb this epidemic.

Secondly, the current Ebola epidemic, which is
regional at this stage, requires proactive regional
cooperation. We urge all countries, including those in
the region, to refrain from closing their borders and
thus isolating the affected countries, which only causes
further harm and delays efforts to stop the spread of
Ebola. In that regard, we welcome the fact that Ghana
was made an Ebola logistics hub for West Africa. It will

serve as a vital corridor to get urgently needed supplies
and health personnel into the affected countries.

Thirdly, we also need to take a serious look at how
United Nations peacekeeping missions can further
support country efforts in facing the Ebola threat. The
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has shown
great resilience and has proved to be instrumental in
assisting the ongoing efforts to cope with the crisis.
While we have ensured a technical rollover of the
Mission's mandate, we need to enhance UNMIL's
supporting role in its mandate. The continued and
strengthened operation of the peacekeeping Mission
in itself is a reassuring reminder of the United Nations
commitment to standing by those affected.

Indeed, fighting the unprecedented epidemic
disease is one of the most urgent challenges facing us
all today. We should be united in rising to the challenge.
The Republic ofKorea reaffirms its commitment to this
international coalition. We are providing humanitarian
assistance to the affected countries and also considering
additional contributions to support the work of the
United Nations and the WHO at this critical stage.

