Mr. Bessho (Japan): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, for guiding the Security Council through
the month of August, which turned out to be quite a full
month of developments, good and bad - but mostly
bad, unfortunately. Today, I would like to focus on just
a few points, as suggested in the concept note. I would
like to concentrate on North Korea and South Sudan.
In doing so, I would like to stress the importance of the
unity, action and effectiveness of the Security Council.

On North Korea, my delegation stresses the
importance of the united message sent by the Council
in the press statement (SC/ 12494) to strongly condemn
the submarine-launched ballistic missile launched
on 23 August and the series of preceding launches
by North Korea, which were in flagrant violation of
obligations under Security Council resolutions. Those
launches contribute to North Korea's development of
nuclear-weapon-delivery systems and increase tensions
in the region and beyond. The launches, including one
impacting in Japans air defence identification zone,
pose an increasing threat to Japan's national security.

We welcome the fact that the Council demonstrated
unity in condemning acts of provocation by North
Korea through its press statement on 26 August, but that
is not enough. We must not let those violent acts pass
without consequence. In the light of the seriousness
of the situation, the Council should consider taking
further measures in response to North Korea's clear
and continuing threats to international peace and
security, bearing in mind the determination that we
expressed in resolution 2270 (2016) to take further
significant measures in the event of a further nuclear
test or launch. I would also like to repeat the call of
my Government to urge all Member States to redouble
their efforts to fully implement and enforce the relevant
Council resolutions, including by submitting national
implementation reports.

On South Sudan, Japan has contributed to
nation-building in that country through various
forms of assistance and by contributing troops to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Japan supports the strengthening of UNMISS
through resolution 2304 (2016). In addition to the
full implementation by the parties of the agreement
on a resolution to the conflict, the establishment of
a regional protection force under the basic principles
of peacekeeping, including the consent of the parties,
represents the most effective response to address the
situation on the ground. The upcoming Council visit to
South Sudan will be an important opportunity for the
Council to convey a clear message to the Transitional
Government of National Unity.

Before concluding, I would like to stress the
importance that Japan attaches to improving the
working methods of the Council. In that context, allow
me to briefly touch upon the new and inclusive process
for selecting the chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the
Council for 2017. We are in the implementation phase of
the new note S/2016/619 by the President ofthe Security
Council, of 15 July. From the beginning of August, as
co-facilitators of the process, the United Kingdom and
Japan have been consulting informally with the newly
elected and the incumbent members of the Council.
We will undertake further consultations in accordance
with the text and spirit of the presidential note.

I would again like to thank the Malaysian
representative and his delegation for all of the good
work they have done during the month of August. I
wish the representative of New Zealand a successful
presidency in the month of September. We would like
to assure him that we will provide all of the support he
will need.

