Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The situation for
civilians in northwest Syria is devastating. More than
1,000 civilians have been killed, including over 500
women and children, and almost 630,000 people have
been forced to leave their homes since the beginning
of May. I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Mueller for her briefing and for the work that
her officials and colleagues are doing. We commend
their work and that of the humanitarian agencies to
address the humanitarian suffering of the people in
Idlib. The United Kingdom has contributed more
than $150 million to humanitarian assistance in Idlib
over the past 18 months. I took careful note of what
Assistant-Secretary-General Mueller had to say about
the importance of resolution 2165 (2014) regarding
cross-border operations in that context. We of course
support that resolution.

The Security Council must act to protect civilians
in Idlib. That is why we fully support the humanitarian
penholders - Belgium, Kuwait and Germany - with
regard to their proposed draft resolution S/2019/756. We
will vote in favour ofthe draft resolution and in favour of
protecting civilians and ending indiscriminate attacks.
The Council has a duty to protect those suffering on the
ground. We need to send a message to the regime that
the international community is resolute in condemning
its actions and will not allow them to continue unabated.
Only a vote in favour of the co-penholders' draft
resolution will send the message that countries around
this table, representing the international community,
will not accept the wanton targeting of civilians and
civilian infrastructure regardless of the stated objective.
Now is not a time to sit on the fence.

We know that the Syrian regime does not care
how many of its civilians it kills but Russia says
that it does care. If so, Russia should vote in favour
of the co-penholders' draft text and it and China
should withdraw their draft text, which would permit
continued attacks on civilians. We note Russian claims
to the press recently that the information of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
is apparently not up to date given its lack of presence on
the ground. That only reinforces the need for Russia to
press the Syrian authorities to approve OCHA's request
for greater humanitarian access on the ground.

On Monday, the Astana guarantors noted their
commitment to sustainable peace in Syria and that that
can be achieved only through political and diplomatic
methods. We have been waiting a very long time for
political progress. We ask again for Russia to maintain
pressure on the regime, to fully engage with the
political process and, of course, to end the violence in
Idlib, which threatens that political process.

Finally, we welcome the Secretary-General's board
of inquiry, which will soon begin to investigate some
of the recent appalling attacks in Idlib. We call for the
findings ofthe inquiry to be released to the public. Some
of the information underlying those findings may need
to remain confidential but it is crucial that the board be
transparent in its mandate and output. The international
community, but, more importantly, the Syrian people,
deserve to be privy to its findings on events in Idlib.

Assistant Secretary-General Mueller said that
the world was watching the Council but the Syrian
people - men, women and children - are dying while
they watch.

