Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having responded so swiftly to our request for the
convening of this meeting, which demonstrates your
awareness of the seriousness of the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. I should also like to
express my great appreciation to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of France, for the efforts he
made during his presidency and for the skill with which
he guided our work.

The Council has met twice in less than a month to
consider a new act of aggression perpetrated by Israel
against the Palestinian people and its leaders. That
clearly shows the gravity of the policy of aggression
conducted by Israel. The leaders of the Likud Party are
now heavily involved in undermining the opportunity
for peace and in attempting to impose the occupier's
will on the Palestinian people at a time when the
world's gaze is fixed on Iraq.

Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi was therefore
assassinated within the framework of the extrajudicial
executions being carried out by Israel at a time when
appeals were being made to Palestinian resistance
factions to show restraint and not to play into the hands
of Israeli politicians by responding to the death of
Sheikh Yassin. We had wanted to breathe new life into
the road map.

We are not saying anything new here by
reiterating and emphasizing that the Israeli practices
perpetrated in the occupied Palestinian territories -
inter alia, those perpetrated in East Jerusalem - are
illegal. A number of Member States of the
Organization have ceaselessly condemned those
practices, and the Secretary-General himself made an
eloquent statement in that regard. Therefore, there is no
need to reiterate here what has already been said.

In fact, the policy of assassination, bloody
executions and extrajudicial killings carried out in a
frenzied manner by the Government of Tel Aviv
dovetails with its organized campaign designed to
promote its withdrawal from Gaza. Furthermore, it
dovetails with a strengthening of its presence in the
occupied West Bank on the basis of a unilateral
decision that is part of a strategic plan aimed at
exerting its power over yet more Palestinian territory,
at shattering the Palestinian entity and at ensuring
Israel's unbroken, real control over Palestinian
territories and their inhabitants.

Israel must be compelled to respect and
implement its obligations under the Fourth Geneva
Convention. We also wish to emphasize the importance
of commitment by all parties to comply with the road
map without adopting unilateral positions that could
endanger the peace process and lead to further
instability in the region.

It is clear that the Security Council, in order to
put an end to the series of extrajudicial executions and
killings conducted by Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories, must seriously consider the possibility of
allowing the International Criminal Court to play a role
here. The Council must therefore take a firm stand, as
it should have done, but was unable to do, on the
occasion of Sheikh Yassin's killing. That prompted the
Likud Party's leaders, who flout and ignore the will of
the international community to engage in further
arrogant acts and to flout laws and customs.

The Republic of Yemen stresses that it is in full
solidarity with the Palestinian people in their
continuing fight to exercise the rights of which they
have been deprived and to re-establish their right to
self-determination. The Republic of Yemen also hopes
that this time, the Security Council will adopt a
resolution designed to preserve the sacred nature of
international treaties and to enforce the relevant
resolutions of the Council, which will reaffirm its
credibility.

