Ms. Fountoulaki (Greece): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this timely and
important debate. We also wish to express appreciation
to China, Angola and Senegal for the useful concept
note (S/2016/321) on an issue of major concern,
not only to States in the Gulf of Guinea, but to the
international community.

Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union (EU) and wishes to
add the following in its national capacity:

For a traditional maritime country like Greece,
with a leading shipping industry, the longest coastline
in the European Union and maritime borders that are
to a large extent the borders of the European Union,
the safety of navigation and marine transportation is
of utmost importance. Greece has contributed to the
adoption of the International Maritime Organization
(IMO) resolution A.1069(28), regarding the Gulf of
Guinea, as well as to the European Union Maritime
Security Strategy, which addresses, in an integrated
way, all security challenges at sea, including piracy.

Greece recognizes the key role of all Gulf of
Guinea States in raising the international community's
awareness on the challenges they face in combating
piracy and developing a comprehensive regional
response. We fully support the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions as well as
the resolutions adopted by the International Maritime
Organization on the issue. We also endorse the
implementation of the European Union Gulf of Guinea
Action Plan 2015-2020.

The growing threat of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
and several recent violent incidents against crews are
particularly worrying. The situation poses an alarming
threat to local economies, potentially undermining
stability and threatening the oil revenues upon which
many countries in the region rely. Greece is gravely
concerned about that phenomenon, which endangers
the lives of seafarers who continue to pay a heavy
price. The strong commitment of the international
community and close cooperation with flag States and
regional organizations is necessary in order to ensure
the prosecution of pirates and armed robbers. As an
additional step towards prevention, it is important that
States apply the guidelines and recommendations of the
relevant specialized organizations, in particular, those
of the International Maritime Organization.

We firmly believe that the international
community must support the countries in the region
to build their own maritime strategy in order to fight
piracy. Local ownership renders a strategy legitimate
and sustainable. Agreements providing for technical
assistance and counter-piracy training will reinforce
the determination to develop their means to that end.
The NATO Maritime Interdiction Operational Training
Centre in Crete/Greece, in cooperation with the IMO,
the African Union and, in particular, the East Africa
Standby Force, provides expertise through standardized
or other training tailored to specific needs, either on
its premises or through mobile training teams. There
have been 364 officers and experts from 30 member
States trained so far, including 16 officers from nine
West African States.

The problem of piracy can only be resolved with
a holistic, coordinated approach on land and at sea.
Preventing and addressing the root causes of the
phenomenon, such as poverty and the lack of economic
opportunities, and capacity-building should be among
the priorities. The lessons learned from the successful
international involvement against piracy off the coast
of Somalia can provide useful guidelines to address
issues in the Gulf of Guinea.

In view of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/ 1), and
while addressing the multifaceted global challenges of
the future, we should not allow the revival of phenomena
such as piracy to reverse our efforts to enhance and
secure development for the benefit of all nations and
future generations.

