Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. We would also like to thank the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Catherine Ashton,
for her informative briefing on the activities of the
European Union in the various areas that bring us
together.

The delegation of Guatemala takes this opportunity
to express its gratitude to the European Union for
its constructive presence in the United Nations and
its important role in many activities, ranging from
cooperation and development to peacekeeping, and for
the contributions of its member countries to the United
Nations budget.

On this occasion, I would simply like to make six
brief comments, all on topics covered in the briefing of
High Representative Catherine Ashton.

First, in the case of non-proliferation talks between
the European Union and the Islamic Republic of Iran,
we are concerned over the deadlock in the process, and
we urge the European Union to persist in its efforts.
We note the additional sanctions that the European
Union has applied against Iran with the ultimate aim
of weakening the actions that would allow it to develop
a nuclear programme. We welcome the announcement
that the upcoming round of talks between the E3+3
Governments and the Islamic Republic of Iran will take
place in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on 26 February. We hope
that all parties will make their best efforts to find a
negotiated solution acceptable to all, bearing in mind
the three pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Power.

Secondly, with regard to the peace process in the
Middle East, Guatemala believes that the European
Union, as a member of the Quartet of core international
mediators, must step up its efforts to encourage Israel
and Palestine to seek a solution to the age-old conflict
between them. We should spare no effort towards
achieving the ultimate aim of identifying common
ground in order to resume negotiations.

Thirdly, as for the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, we note that the policies of the European
Union from the outset of the conflict have been based
on the following actions: supporting the efforts of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States to find
a political solution to the conflict and to encourage a
political transition; exerting pressure on the regime
through the application of unilateral sanctions; and
using debates within the Security Council and the
United Nations system to exert pressure on the Syrian
authorities.

However, those actions have not led to strategic
success, since the Government has yet to commit to a
serious political dialogue on the future of the country.
On the contrary, while the Syrian army and the armed
opposition continue to commit human rights abuses
and violate international humanitarian law against the
civilian population, the violence seems to escalate every
day. We welcome the role of the European Union in the
area of humanitarian assistance and acknowledge that
its member States are the largest bloc of donor countries
providing humanitarian assistance in the Syrian crisis.

Fourthly, with regard to its mediating role for the
normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo,
we congratulate the European Union, in particular
High Representative Ashton, on the leadership in the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. That new
phase of mediation, which led to the convening of
the first high-level meeting, took the process from a
primarily technical to a political level, offering new
prospects for resolving various long-standing issues.
We encourage the parties to continue those efforts
in line with the existing legal framework, namely,
resolution 1244 (1999).

Fifthly, with regard to Mali, we welcome the
logistical and financial support provided by the European
Union to the African-led International Support Mission
in Mali. We commend the establishment of a European
Union training mission in Mali in order to train the
Malian armed forces in supporting the restoration of
the country's territorial integrity. The mission is an
integral part of the European Union's comprehensive
approach to the situation in Mali and the Sahel region.
We look forward with great interest to its launch in
the coming weeks. We also congratulate the European
Union and the High Representative Ashton on having
hosted the ministerial meeting of the Support and
Follow-Up Group on the Situation in Mali in Brussels
on 6 February, at which the international community
underscored, among other issues, the importance of
respecting international humanitarian law and the
protection of civilians in Mali.

Finally, Guatemala has always supported a broader
development of and greater cooperation among the
United Nations, the Security Council and regional and
subregional mechanisms. Such cooperation should take
place on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular Chapter VIII. As a regional mechanism,
the European Union has established close and fruitful
cooperation with the United Nations on a wide range
of key areas. We will continue to support the further
strengthening of that cooperation.

