Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank the
United Nations Special Envoy for Yemen, Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen O'Brien, to
whom we express our support for all the efforts he
has made to fulfil his mandate, for their briefings. I
would also particularly like to thank Ms. Radhiya
Al-Mutawakel for her poignant statement that has
showed us the face of the grave situation in Yemen.

While the matter that we have come to discuss is an
update on the establishment ofthe peace negotiations as
a response to the conflict, we must acknowledge that the
situation ofthe Yemeni people is becoming increasingly
alarming and precarious owing to the many elements
that are coming together and exacerbating their living
conditions. The situation in Yemen is critical and the
figures are distressing.

As Mr. O'Brien has been pointing out and as he
underscored once again, the total population of Yemen
is 27.4 million, more than 18 million of whom require
humanitarian assistance and, among them, more than
10 million need extremely urgent assistance. There is
also a shortage of food for more than 17 million people
who are living in food insecurity, of which 6.8 million
are at risk of famine.

Unfortunately, the situation continues to deterioate
and the Yemeni people now has to deal with an outbreak
of cholera, which according to the 18 May report of the
World Health Organization, has led to 361 deaths in April
and May and has spread to 19 of the 22 provinces that
make up Yemen. According to the 24 May communique
of the Humanitarian Coordinator in Yemen, more than
35,000 cases ofpossible contagion have been recorded.
We are therefore very concerned that the humanitarian
assistance deployed in Yemen continues to be seriously
affected by the imposition of random restrictions by the
parties to the conflict, as well as by the constant threat

of air attacks on civilian infrastructure, which limits
the distribution of humanitarian supplies, which the
Yemeni people desperately need.

In the same vein, we regret and condemn the
22 May attack in Sana'a on a humanitarian convoy
in which the Special Envoy was also travelling. We
remind the parties to the conflict that they must provide
unconditional and unrestricted access to humanitarian
assistance and ensure that it is secure and not identify
humanitarian convoys as military targets for any
reason. We also reiterate to the regional actors involved
in the conflict that they have the obligation to respect
the provisions of resolution 2140 (2014) and that they
must do everything possible to commit themselves to
establishing a sustainable process for dialogue that
will lead to a peaceful, inclusive and orderly political
transition that is led by the Yemeni people and that will
meet their legitimate rights and aspirations, as well as
fully respect Yemen's sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.

We feel it is important to refer to the words of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad
Zeid Al Hussein, who last May in a press conference in
Geneva said,

"The United Nations is concerned about the
humanitarian repercussions of such an attack in
terms of inflaming the humanitarian crisis even
further, let alone our concerns about loss of civilian
life were there to be a large-scale attack on port".

We believe that the Council should maintain a
unanimous position in speaking out against these
belligerent acts and campaigns and against any action
that defends the use of violence or weapons as an
option to solve this or any other conflict, especially
when these war tactics run counter to the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, which the Security
Council stands for. We unequivocally reiterate that the
Security Council must send out a clear, quick message
with regard to humanitarian assistance and with regard
to the port of Hudaydah, which is the only entrance
possible for humanitarian assistance for civilian
victims who must now deal with not only a food crisis,
but also a health crisis which could get worse if these
attacks continue.

In conclusion, Bolivia would like to reiterate the
three requests made in this meeting by Mr. O'Brien.
We listened carefully to what he just said and I picked
up on the following. Yemen has been forgotten, as can
be seen in the famine, war, collapsed economy, deadly
diseases and attacks on civilians which plague the
country. Yemen today is one of the greatest failures of
the Council and of our Organization.

