Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Valentin lnzko and
Ms. Selma Korjenie for their briefings.

The Dominican Republic expresses its recognition
for the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also acknowledge
the efforts of the High Representative and his Office
in the implementation of the civilian aspects of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. At the same time, we regret that
no progress has been made in meeting the objectives
and conditions of the 5+2 agenda for the definitive
closure of the Office of the High Representative. This
slowdown in the process has become a matter for the
Council's consideration.

It should be remembered that where there is a unified
will for the benefit of the great majority, differences
take second place. The political representatives are
determined to make their positions more flexible so
that they can provide Bosnia and Herzegovina with the
tools to carry out reforms that will strengthen the rule
of law, pave the way for integration into the European
Union and expedite the path towards the consolidation
of unity, peace and development.

We support the mandate and management of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. In that regard, we understand that all
efforts should focus on consolidating the progress
made, redirecting efforts towards integration with the
European Union and, at the same time, overcoming
challenges such as the fight against organized crime
and corruption, among others.

We understand that the mere action of refraining
from any unilateral measure that could stall or jeopardize
the process of reconciliation and peacebuilding is a sign
of goodwill and cooperation to improve the situation in
the country and support the efforts of the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is appropriate
for the political leadership to act openly in favour
of unity, accepting that Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
single, sovereign State.

A year ahead of the elections, it is important
to complete the process of establishing the new
authorities. In that regard, we recommend taking the
necessary steps to strengthen the rule of law, support
multilingualism, ensure the participation of young
people and women in the political processes and protect
the rights of refugees and internally displaced persons
in order to create the conditions for their voluntary and
safe return to their homes.

It is necessary to acknowledge the important role of
the press in a free and democratic society. To that end,
it is vital that the relevant measures be taken to ensure
those freedoms in a safe environment.

In conclusion, we welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2496 (2019), which extends the
mandate of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force EUFOR-Operation ALTHEA. Furthermore, the
Dominican Republic takes this opportunity to call
on all political leaders and stakeholders to cooperate
in a genuine spirit of commitment with the Office
of the High Representative so that together we can
achieve a Bosnia and Herzegovina that will enable an
atmosphere of inclusion, the reconciliation of ethnic
and religious diversity, accountability, access to justice,
the empowerment of young people and women, the
security of civilians and effective policies to reduce
poverty to prevail.

