Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation thanks the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2016/532) and Special
Representative Nicholas Haysom for his briefing. We
wish him Godspeed in his future endeavours.

At the start, let me condemn the attacks in Kabul
and Badakshan.

Also, at the very outset, I reject the unjustified,
untrue and gratuitous comments made by the
representative of Afghanistan in casting uncalled-for
aspersions on my country and its State institutions.
The international community is well aware of, and
acknowledges, Pakistan's contribution to and sacrifices
in countering violent extremism and terrorism.

This is indeed a sombre moment for the people of
Afghanistan, for the region and for the international
community, which has invested so much blood and
treasure to restore peace and stability in Afghanistan.
The Secretary-General's report observes that there
has been no significant improvement in the political,
security and economic situation in Afghanistan. On the
contrary, attacks by insurgent groups have intensified,
economic opportunity is absent, the reconciliation
process is frozen, hopes for peace are waning, and the
confluence of those factors has magnified the suffering
of the people of Afghanistan and the threat to regional
peace and security. The Warsaw Summit and the
Brussels conference will be further opportunities for
the international community to provide the support that
Afghanistan obviously needs to overcome those multiple
challenges to peace and development. Yet, ultimately,
it is the responsibility of the Afghan Government to
deliver on the commitments to its own people.

In his report, the Secretary-General expresses and
reinforces the firm international consensus that only by
a negotiated political agreement will Afghans achieve
sustainable peace. That is precisely what my country
has long proposed as the only course to end the decades
of war and suffering in Afghanistan. Based on that
beliefin a negotiated peace, and in response to repeated
requests from President Ashraf Ghani, Pakistan agreed
to facilitate the first-ever direct peace talks between the
Afghan Government and the Afghan Taliban in Murree
in June 2015. That was a promising start to a process
aimed at ending Afghanistan's long night of conflict.
Unfortunately, days before the second round, in which
the two sides were to also consider a de-escalation of
violence, the talks were scuttled by developments that
are well known.

Another period of concerted efforts led to the
establishment of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group
in December 2015 in Islamabad, by which Afghanistan,
the United States, China and Pakistan undertook to join
together to provide decisive impetus to Afghanistan's
peace efforts. The international community welcomed
that development. The Group held five meetings
in which a road map for a peace process was drawn
up. In its meeting of 18 May, the Group agreed that
a negotiated settlement was the most viable option.
Efforts by Pakistan and others were under way for the
early resumption of the peace talks. Despite posturing
by both Afghan parties, a revived dialogue seemed to
be within reach.

That process was destroyed by the United States
drone attack of 21 May, which killed the Taliban leader,
Mullah Akhtar Mansoor. Is it an accident that, in less
than a year, the possibility for a negotiated peace in
Afghanistan has been scuttled? The United States
drone strike on our territory was a blatant violation
of Pakistan's sovereignty and territorial integrity
and a blatant breach of the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and of international law. That
unacceptable action also dealt a blow to the Afghan
peace process and added to the intensity and complexity
of the Afghan conflict. It has raised serious questions.
Does the international community desire a negotiated
or a military solution in Afghanistan? Is it ready to
invest in war rather than peace in Afghanistan? The
use of force for the past 15 years has failed to stabilize
Afghanistan. Continued resort to military means will
further destabilize the situation in our neighbour and
in our region. Pakistan would advise against such
a strategy.

Other than Afghanistan, over the past 35 years
Pakistan has suffered more than any other country as
a result of foreign intervention, conflict and terrorism
within Afghanistan. Several thousand Pakistani
civilians and security personnel have died at the hands
of terrorists.

Let me make it clear what Pakistan's policies and
priorities are. First and foremost, we will eliminate all
terrorist threats within Pakistan. Pakistan's Operation
Zarb-e-Azb is the largest and most effective anti-terrorist
campaign anywhere in the world, involving over
180,000 members of our security forces. In two years,
that Operation has made substantial gains in cleansing
our country of terrorism. Our Operation will continue
until our objectives have been accomplished; those
objectives will not be fully met until the sanctuaries and
safe havens of terrorists who have fled to Afghanistan
have been eliminated. We urge the Government in
Kabul and the international coalition there to take
action against the militant Tehrik-i-Taliban elements
that have sought refuge in Afghanistan.

Secondly, it is self-evident that effective border
control and management are vital to preventing the
move of militants across the 270-kilometre Pakistan-
Afghan border. Pakistan proposed a number of border
standard operating procedures to Afghanistan two years
ago; they still await finalization, as does Pakistan's
proposal to establish a joint border commission.
Effective border management is a sovereign right of my
country. Pakistan will take measures on its side of the
border accordingly. It is disingenuous to characterize
steps aimed at regulating the border and curbing the
flow of immigrants as illegal. There is nothing - I
repeat, nothing - illegal about any construction on our
side of the border.

Thirdly, we have the related problem posed by
the 3 million Afghani refugees who remain on my
country's soil after 35 years. Our hospitality and
challenges in hosting the most protracted presence of
refugees anywhere in the world needs to be, at the very
least, appreciated and supported by the international
community. But we also expect that tangible steps
will be taken for the early return of refugees to their
homeland with honour and dignity.

Finally, Pakistan remains ready to support a
genuine Afghan peace process, but we will not tolerate
violations of Pakistan's sovereignty and territorial
integrity from any source. Those who seek a renewed
recourse to military solution need to rethink the
consequences of their position. Further, we would urge
the Government of Afghanistan not to externalize its
internal problems and blame others for its own failures
and omissions.

The Quadrilateral Coordination Group remains a
viable mechanism to promote a genuine peace process,
but that process will have to be pursued with patience
and perseverance. Success will be assured only when the
Afghan parties themselves come to the conclusion that
there is no military solution to the Afghan war and that
peace can be achieved only through a non-conditional
dialogue that will require difficult compromises on
both sides.

