Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of November,
and to take this opportunity to greet the members of
the Council.

In my briefing, I intend, on the one hand, to
report on the activities that I have carried out since
the Council's previous consideration of the question of
Burundi (see S/PV.8013) and, on the other hand, to take
stock of recent developments in the matter. The mission
assigned to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi is very clear. It is to support the efforts of
the region - in other words, those of the mediator and
the facilitator - in order to advance the negotiations
whose purpose, I recall, is to implement the inclusive
inter-Burundian dialogue. That is what I have been
doing by meeting with the Burundian authorities and
political actors, meeting with the Burundian opposition
and representatives of civil society - including those
who are in exile - and meeting with African Heads of
State and partners of Burundi.

My first discussions with the mediator, President
Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, took place in August
in Entebbe. They focused on the urgent need to
convene a regional mini-summit in order to assess
the progress of the negotiations and, where possible,
to coordinate decisions. At the conclusion of our
discussions, the mediator informed me of his intention
to meet with President Pierre Nkurunziza. I know that
he recently sent a special envoy carrying a message
to his counterpart in Burundi. I also met a number of
African leaders, always with the aim of raising their
awareness and requesting their support, given their ties
to the Burundian authorities.

My meeting with the Burundian opposition
abroad took place in Brussels on 14 October, and
brought together the leaders of the National Council
for Respect for the Arusha Agreement and the Rule
of Law (CNARED) as well as civil-society leaders in
exile. At this first meeting, I primarily explained the
purpose of my mission, which is chiefly a good-offices
mission that seeks, in support of regional efforts, to
bring closer together the positions of the Government
and the opposition with a view to promoting inclusive
inter-Burundian dialogue. My Visit to Brussels also
gave me the opportunity to have discussions with the
Foreign Minister of Belgium and some representatives
of the European Union on the prevailing situation in
Burundi. My return to Bujumbura was an opportunity
to canvass the views of two very influential moral
authorities of the Catholic Church of Burundi, namely,
the bishops of Bujumbura and Gitega.

My meeting on 2 November with the Ombudsman
focused on the discussions he had had with the
opposition abroad in Helsinki and on the adoption
by the Government of Burundi of the new revised
Constitution. The Ombudsman assured me that, apart
from the decision not to take into account previous
terms served and the seven-year term of the presidential
term proposed in the Constitution, the Government
has respected all the other provisions of the Arusha
Agreement. All these activities that I was involved in
were contained in a report to the facilitator, with whom
I met on 3 November in Dar es Salaam.

Based on the overall summary, the facilitator,
in agreement with the mediator and the Burundian
Government, has decided to convene, on
27 November, in Arusha, a dialogue session between
the representatives of the Government and all the
other Burundian stakeholders, including, of course,
the opposition in exile. These meetings will take
place from 27 November to 8 December, as I said, in
Arusha. We have been informed that the CNARED is
not disposed participate. A summit of Heads of State of
the Community of East African States is envisaged for
January 2018, which, inter alia, will have to evaluate
the outcomes of these meetings.
With regard to the situation on the ground in
Burundi, I was in Bujumbura two weeks ago, and
everything appeared to be calm, apart from some
expressions of outrage against the International
Criminal Court's decision to open preliminary
investigations into crimes against humanity committed
since 2015 in the country. The protests also denounced
reports ofhuman rights violations, including allegations
of arrests, imprisonment, enforced disappearances,
inhuman and degrading treatment, restrictions on
freedom of association, intimidation and even hate
speech. The Burundian authorities have already turned
their attention to the upcoming elections, although
the issue of inclusive dialogue has not yet found a
proper resolution.

In conclusion, the United Nations remains
obligated, regardless of the difficulties ahead, to
continue its good-offices mission, standing shoulder
to shoulder with the subregion, in order to extricate
Burundi from the current crisis. We remain convinced
that the political process is the only way of untangling
the Burundian crisis.

Finally, with regard to relations between United
Nations and Burundi, the relationship seems to me to
be moving in the right direction. Indeed, the United
Nations Secretariat and the Government are continuing
negotiations on a draft headquarters agreement. It
should be noted, however, that the Government has not
yet taken the steps necessary to implement its decision
to fully cooperate with the Human Rights Council and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. Negotiations are also ongoing with the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The foregoing represents the main facts that I have
noted since the question of Burundi was discussed
during my last briefing to the Security Council on
the subject.

