Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine) (interpretation from Russian):
On behalf of the delegation of Ukraine, I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council at this extremely
important time in its work, when its decisions will
directly determine whether war will end in Europe. Over
the past few days, we have witnessed the way in which
your diplomatic skills, tact and patience promoted the
adoption of constructive decisions on very important
issues related to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

I should also like to express the gratitude of my
delegation to the Permanent Representative of the
Sultanate of Oman, Mr. Al-Khussaiby, for his successful
presidency of the Council in November.

(spoke in English)

Only five months ago nobody could have foreseen
or even imagined that the peoples of war-tom Bosnia and
Herzegovina would enter the Christmas holidays in peace.
Yesterday in Paris the parties to the conflicts on the
territory of the former Yugoslavia made this peace more
real by signing the Peace Agreement. Fear and mistrust in
the future have yielded to hopes and concrete plans.

 

We would like to stress that the ultimate responsibility
for the implementation of the Peace Agreement rests with
the conflicting parties. In this context, the delegation of
Ukraine fully supports paragraph 10 of resolution
1031 (1995), by which the Security Council underlines the
relationship between the fulfilment by the parties of their
commitments in the Peace Agreement and the readiness of
the international community to commit financial resources
for reconstruction and development. The parties should
realize that the international community can only assist in
securing peace in the region. Whether or not it becomes a
lasting peace completely depends on the political will of the
leaders of the former Yugoslav republics.

Ukraine supports the authorization by the Security
Council of the multinational implementation force (IFOR),
which will provide monthly reports to the Council on its
activities. This will serve as an appropriate means of
political monitoring by the Security Council of the IFOR
operation. By authorizing the establishment of a
multinational implementation force, the Security Council is
taking a decisive step towards a comprehensive settlement
of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. IFOR will be
deployed as a neutral and impartial force capable of
ensuring implementation of the provisions of the Peace
Agreement, and capable of protecting itself.

In our opinion, this provides proper guarantees that the
parties will live up to their commitments. At the same time,
the delegation of Ukraine hopes that the IFOR commanders
will interpret paragraph 17 of the draft resolution in a
restrictive manner. The right given to IFOR to take all
necessary measures to defend itself from threat of attack
should not be abused.

Ukraine, as one of the major troop contributors to the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), was invited
by the North Atlantic Council to participate in IFOR. We
see this as a great honour, and at the same time as
recognition of the constructive role played by Ukraine in
the efforts of the international community to achieve a
peaceful settlement of the conflict in the Balkans. We are
confident that the experience and authority of Ukrainian
peace-keepers, shown during their participation in the
United Nations operation, will constitute a reliable
guarantee of our effective contribution to IFOR.

Several days ago in London, Ukraine voiced its
support for the process of post-conflict peace-building in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and expressed its willingness to
actively join in that process. The establishment of the post
of High Representative under the civilian implementation

 

Annex to the Peace Agreement will contribute to the
enhancement of international efforts in providing
humanitarian aid, in the rehabilitation of infrastructure and
economic reconstruction, in the establishment of political
and constitutional institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in the promotion of respect for human rights, in the return
of displaced persons and refugees, and in the holding of
free and fair elections. The delegation of Ukraine shares
the satisfaction expressed by other delegations at the fact
that the Security Council has agreed the designation of
Mr. Carl Bildt as High Representative.

My delegation would like to reaffirm its readiness to
place at the High Representative's disposal experts in the
field of the establishment of democratic institutions, and
in the organization and monitoring of elections.

The success of the peace process in Bosnia will
depend on the restoration of confidence among the
peoples of the country. In our opinion, the States
members of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council recently formed at London
should take early action in Sarajevo to create an
atmosphere of confidence between the communities and
extend the guarantees of respect for their rights. In this
context, Ukraine supports the Security Council's request
to the Secretary-General to ensure early redeployment of
elements of United Nations civilian police from the
Republic of Croatia to Sarajevo.

In our opinion, the restoration of the war-torn and
exhausted economy of the region should be a prerequisite
for lasting peace in the Balkans. Ukraine has already
declared its interest in and readiness to participate directly
in the economic reconstruction of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The delegation of Ukraine believes that the
establishment of a special regime of participation in the
rehabilitation and development of Bosnia for the States
economically most affected by their strict observance of
the regime of sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia would be fair and timely. This could be
regarded as partial compensation for the billion dollars in
losses suffered by the States neighbouring the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

Equitable distribution of international assistance
among all regions of Bosnia and Herzegovina is of
extreme importance. A sound economy should become a
unifying factor and a reliable basis for preserving the
territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which would guarantee the
prosperity of all peoples living in its territory.

 

Bearing in mind the unique, extraordinary and
complex character of the present situation in Bosnia, which
requires an exceptional response, I cannot but recall the
words of the famous British writer Somerset Maugham:

"You can do anything in this world if you are
prepared to take the consequences".

I hope that by adopting this resolution the Security Council
has shown the readiness of the international community to
shoulder such a responsibility.

