Mr. Lowcock: I am pleased to be here together with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict today. The appalling
suffering that this war has wrought on Syria's children
is truly unimaginable. Yet it is Syria's children who are
the future of the country. Ensuring that their rights are
respected, protected and fulfilled must be at the centre
of all of our efforts.

The Secretary-General's Envoy briefed the Security
Council comprehensively in closed consultations on
Wednesday on the hostilities in south-west Syria. I
agree with everything that he said and I do not believe
that I need to repeat it. What I would like to say is that
the United Nations and its partners have mobilized
a response, which is reaching tens of thousands of
people across much of the south-west. That has built on
sustained efforts to preposition supplies through cross-
border deliveries and now draws on programming
from inside Syria, implemented through the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent in agreement with the Government.
That has included the delivery of food from the World
Food Programme for approximately 200,000 people
across Dar'a governorate in recent weeks. United
Nations personnel went to Al-Sahwa and Kahil in Dar'a
governorate to assess needs and deliver food on 12 July.

On 15 July, United Nations personnel participated
in a high-level mission to Nasib and Um Al-Mayazen
in Dar'a, as well. However, an estimated 110,000 newly
displaced people remain in Quneitra governorate in
areas that have largely been cut off from sustained
humanitarian assistance. Prepositioned supplies of
shelter materials and basic household items for those
people have now run out. That leaves displaced people
exposed to soaring temperatures and desert winds.
Access to water and sanitation is also of increasing
concern, with deaths resulting from dehydration and
contaminated water already reported. The response
therefore now needs to be urgently scaled up across the
south-west, and in Quneitra in particular.

Since November 2017, the total number of people in
need of assistance in Aleppo and Idlib governorates has
increased by close to 600,000 to a total of 4.2 million
people. Of those people, half are in acute need owing
to new displacement, exposure to ongoing conflict,
reduced access to food or water and other factors.
The recent arrival of thousands of evacuees from the
south-west follows a pattern seen elsewhere earlier this
year, which resulted in nearly 120,000 people being
displaced into the north-west from March to May. With
violence continuing and the risk ofa further escalation
looming, prepositioning of aid, together with efforts to
scale up our ongoing response to immediate needs, is
increasingly critical.
I have briefed the Council many times on the
appalling suffering of the people of Fo'ah and Kefraya,
who have been besieged by armed groups for years.
On 16 July, an agreement was reportedly reached to
evacuate the towns with approximately 120 buses
transporting people to the Mahalej shelter in Aleppo.
The United Nations was not party to the agreement,
and we have not had access to the evacuees. However,
efforts continue to provide the necessary emergency
support, in coordination with Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and other local organizations.

The United Nations and its partners continue to
respond to the needs of people displaced from Afrin
district in Tell Rifaat subdistrict, Nubul and Zahra
towns, and in surrounding communities. Protection
remains a key concern across the area, including in
relation to freedom of movement for those wishing
to return to their homes and relatedly ensuring that
housing, land and property rights are fully respected.
We also note worrying reports of insecurity in Afrin
town itself, including two vehicle-borne improvised
explosive devices being detonated late last month and
killing 15 civilians and wounding 23.

Humanitarian needs remain high in eastern Ghouta,
although there are also reports of markets beginning to
function again and some other normalizing activities.
Close to 10,000 people from eastern Ghouta - mostly
men between the ages of 15 and 65 - are reported to
remain in displacement sites across rural Damascus. In
the north-east, returns to Raqqa city have continued,
despite risks related to high levels of explosive hazard
contamination. There are also very serious concerns
about civilians trapped in areas held by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham in the eastern part of Deir ez-Zor
governorate, reports of civilian casualties in air strikes
in Al-Sousa and Baghour Fukhani earlier this month,
and hundreds of cases of diarrhoeal disease, including
at least 12 deaths resulting from the consumption of
contaminated water. Humanitarian demining in Raqqa
city and Deir ez-Zor remains a key priority, together
with ongoing efforts to scale up broader humanitarian
assistance. The humanitarian situation at Rukban, on
the Jordan-Syria border, remains dire, with reports of
diarrhoea and dehydration in the camp. Discussions on
the deployment of an aid convoy to the area continue.

Humanitarian organizations continue to reach
millions ofpeople throughout Syria. More than 3 million
people received food this past month, but in many
areas, needs have continued to increase, in particular
in the south-west and north-west, as well as in Raqqa.
Our efforts to keep pace with the rapidly evolving
situation depend on support from many Member States.
That includes financial contributions to the projects in
the Syria humanitarian assistance response plan, aid
provided by neighbouring Governments and in-kind
donations such as those provided by France, which
were facilitated by the Russian Federation earlier this
week and distributed in Douma yesterday.

Unfortunately, the United Nations appeal for
Syria this year remains substantially underfunded.
Sustaining and increasing the confidence of donors
depends on the ability of the United Nations and the
humanitarian organizations, with which we work, first,
to independently assess needs; secondly, to prioritize
responses; and, thirdly, to provide assurance and
evidence that help is reaching those in greatest need.
That in turn requires safe, unimpeded and sustained
access in line with the obligations of the parties to the
conflict under international humanitarian law. The
United Nations remains fully committed to working
with the Syrian authorities and other stakeholders in
that regard to demonstrate the principled nature of our
collective effort and to ensure that we reach as many
of the most vulnerable people as possible throughout
the country.

