Mr. McNee (Canada): At the outset, I would like
to commend the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Ambassador Mufioz of Chile, for
his strong and effective leadership and for his
presentation today.

We now have three years of experience with the
Peacebuilding Commission since the 2005 World
Summit Outcome. The record so far leads us to several
conclusions.

First, the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office are filling important gaps in the United Nations
response to crisis and conflict. They are helping to
prioritize and sequence tasks, identify overlooked areas
of programming and funding and facilitate a more
unified international presence in post-conflict
countries.

Secondly, institutional progress has been made.
The Peacebuilding Commission has provided useful
support to the countries on its agenda, reformed its
working methods and developed a pragmatic and
strategic approach.

Thirdly, in our View, it is time to be more
ambitious. The Commission's agenda can and should
be expanded, and its impact should be greater at the
earliest and most tenuous stages of post-conflict
recovery. That is precisely when the international
community's concentrated attention and resources can
play their most critical role in consolidating peace.

The past year has shown signs of promise in
several areas. Canada particularly welcomes growing
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. In my capacity as Chair of
the Sierra Leone configuration, I have had the honour
of regularly briefing the Security Council on
peacebuilding progress in that country. In my most
recent briefing, I noted that the PBC's engagement
with Sierra Leone has evolved. In June, the Sierra
Leone configuration aligned itself behind the
Government's national strategy, the Agenda for
Change, and also endorsed the new joint peacebuilding
approach developed by the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations country team. That streamlined approach
specifically prioritizes the issues identified by Sierra
Leone as major risks to peace consolidation and
economic growth, such as good governance, drug
trafficking and youth unemployment. At the same time,
the configuration has also advocated for support to
Sierra Leone on critical issues highlighted by the
occurrence of political instability in March, notably
deepening democratic dialogue and enhancing police
capacity. That is one example of how the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission can work
together to achieve more coordinated and integrated
peacebuilding in the field.
Another positive outcome is the development of
the Secretary-General's report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304). This
process demonstrated the value of institutional
cooperation on important policy questions.

The PBC has a diverse membership, a unique
mandate to work at the nexus of security and
development, and growing links to other international
institutions. It can serve as a useful forum for input
into Security Council deliberations. The Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission should
consider better defining and implementing this
advisory role.

Finally, the PBC itself has made great strides. All
of the country-specific configurations have taken
significant steps to align their engagement with
national priorities, adapt to changing circumstances on
the ground and reduce administrative burdens. The
tools of engagement are being modified and refined. A
more flexible and strategic Peacebuilding Commission
is gradually emerging, one that is better prepared to
fulfil its political mandate and identify opportunities to
add value to existing efforts.

Today's debate takes place as Member States
prepare to embark on the 2010 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. In our view, the
review should begin by taking stock and consulting
widely with post-conflict States and all relevant
peacebuilding partners. At the same time, it will be
important at the end of the process to retain the
Peacebuilding Commission's current flexibility and
adaptability.

With that in mind, Canada would like to propose
three issues for discussion in the review.

(spoke in French)

First, the Peacebuilding Commission should be
prepared to vary the intensity and nature of its
engagement depending on the circumstances in a
country and stage of post-conflict recovery. To do that,
modifications to working methods and tools of
engagement may be required. Closer cooperation at the
United Nations itself with the Security Council,
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
will also be required.

Secondly, the Peacebuilding Commission should
consider adopting a multi-tiered agenda to
accommodate the need for different kinds of

approaches. Indeed, not all countries emerging from
conflict will require or want the level of engagement
that includes the creation of a full country-specific
configuration. In such case, the Commission's role may
be limited to monitoring progress in peacebuilding or
providing more targeted support.

Thirdly, as the recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/444) demonstrates, the Commission
must pay greater attention to thematic issues and
lessons learned. It must focus more on the policy
dilemmas, strategic challenges and operational
difficulties that peacebuilding presents. That includes
the central question of knowing how to manage the
transition from peacekeeping and humanitarian action
to early recovery and development. Similarly, the
Peacebuilding Support Office should become a focal
point for peacebuilding expertise, particularly by
drawing more regularly on the knowledge and
experience of peacebuilding actors outside the United
Nations.

The creation of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture was part of a broader recognition within
the international community of the need to improve
support for States recovering from conflict. In this
respect, the Peacebuilding Commission has made
progress and holds great potential. It is time to turn
potential into reality and to address the remaining
challenges. The 2010 review is thus a critical
opportunity to realize the full ambition of the original
vision articulated four years ago.

It is our view that, if we wish to assist the people
of States emerging from conflict and working to build a
more peaceful and prosperous future, that is the least
we can do.

