Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I offer Equatorial
Guinea a warm welcome to the Security Council and
congratulate it on assuming the presidency for the
month of February. I also thank and congratulate the
Dominican Republic for its excellent stewardship of the
Council in January.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat,
and His Excellency Mr. Richard Sezibera for their
briefings today. Let me also wish a very happy new
year to our Chinese colleagues.

The United Kingdom welcomes this debate and the
focus on stability, conflict prevention and peacebuilding
during Equatorial Guinea's presidency of the Council.
The United Kingdom recognizes the deeply negative
effect that contemporary forms of mercenary activity
can have. That includes the link between their activities
and barriers to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), particularly SDG 16 on peace, justice
and strong institutions. We are committed to supporting
our African partners in achieving their vision of a more
peaceful and prosperous continent. We are working
jointly to tackle a range of shared security challenges,
and we are working on the provision of capacity-
building for African security and justice institutions
and training for African peacekeepers.

We are also committed to aligning our development
support with initiatives that will foster Africa's long-
term stability. It is clear that there is a mutually
reinforcing link between stability and security and
prosperity and growth. That is why we are stimulating
high-quality investment into Africa to create wealth,
build infrastructure and create jobs. It is why we are
supporting Africa's youth in accessing life-changing
education and skills. And it is why we support so
strongly the empowerment of women and girls, so
that African development can be truly inclusive and
therefore truly sustainable.

The holistic approach we take to supporting
Africa's security and stability must also be applied
to the modern mercenary phenomenon. We must
recognize that it is not just a source of conflict, but a
symptom of underlying causes of instability. Mercenary
groups thrive where there are fragile State institutions,
a culture of impunity, weak rule of law and extreme
poverty. Some have links to serious and organized
crime threats, including the trafficking of small arms
and light weapons and the illegal exploitation of
resources. Their activities can undercut the rules-based
international system which the Council was designed
to uphold. Where this occurs, we should bring the full
range of mechanisms at the Council's disposal to bear,
including sanctions regimes.

As you pointed out, Sir, it is important to draw
a distinction between mercenaries - a term clearly
defined in international humanitarian law - and
properly regulated and responsible private security
companies. The legitimate global private security
industry provides an essential service, supporting
diplomatic, commercial and humanitarian activity in
complex environments around the world.

The United Kingdom remains committed to
raising standards in the private security industry. In
this regard, we welcome the important work of the
Montreux Document Forum and the International Code
of Conduct Association (ICoCA). We urge all States,
companies and non-governmental organizations that
employ private security companies to recognise ICoCA
membership and certification to relevant standards in
their contracting process and to abide by the International
Code of Conduct for Private Security Providers.

In this context, the United Kingdom is troubled
by reports of the involvement of some private military
companies in destabilizing activities in a range of
countries. This is particularly troubling when those
countries - such as the Central African Republic, Syria,
Ukraine or Venezuela - are on the Security Council's
agenda. We urge all such private sector organizations to
ensure that their actions do not cross the line between
legitimate security service provision and irresponsible
or destabilizing activities. There may be a role for the
relevant Security Council sub-committees to consider
whether there is evidence that any such actors have
perpetuated or exacerbated conflict or instability.

In closing, I would like to pay tribute to the ongoing
efforts of the African Union and African subregional
organizations to prevent unconstitutional changes
of Government. This includes preventing the use of
mercenaries to destabilize or replace democratically
elected Governments. The United Kingdom urges the
African Union to continue to strengthen its capacities
in this regard by making effective use of information
gathered through the Continental Early Warning
System, and greater use of preventive diplomacy and
mediation practices.

