Mr. Holliday (United States of America): I
should like to welcome Special Representative Saren
Jessen-Petersen and to thank him for his instructive
and thorough briefing. We commend him and his staff
for bringing new life to the standards process. The
United States appreciates his strong leadership and his
hard work in Kosovo. We look forward to continuing to
support him and the rest of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) as they
work to implement Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).

Next month will mark the one-year anniversary
of the deplorable violence that erupted in Kosovo. This
moment of reflection one year later provides an
opportunity for Kosovo's leaders and people to
recommit themselves to fulfilling the internationally
endorsed standards and to ensuring security and
freedom of movement for all its communities.

In that regard, we welcome the energy and
determination that the new government of Kosovo's
Provisional Institutions has brought to the
implementation of the standards for Kosovo. Although
some progress has been made, it is important that more
be done, particularly in securing the right of refugees
and displaced persons to return to their homes, in
ensuring security for all communities and in reforming
local government. The momentum and the focus that
has been applied in recent months must continue,
especially at the local level, where progress in some of
those areas has thus far been insufficient.

In addition to helping to improve the lives of all
residents of Kosovo, sufficient progress on the
standards is necessary so that the international
community can begin a process to determine Kosovo's
future status. We reaffirm that mid-2005 will present
itself as the first opportunity for a comprehensive
review of Kosovo's progress in implementing the
standards, as set out in the Council's presidential
statement of 12 December 2003 (S/PRST/2003/26).

We welcome UNMIK's prioritization of the
standards as an important step in helping Kosovo to
prepare for the mid-2005 review. We also welcome
UNMIK's effort to work with the Provisional
Institutions to reform local government throughout
Kosovo. Decentralization is an area of special
importance in implementing the standards and will
help make local governments more responsive to the
needs of their residents. We welcome recent progress
in producing a work plan for the Ministry of Local
Government Administration, and we urge the
Provisional Institutions to launch an initial tranche of
pilot projects as soon as possible.

The best chance to build a multi-ethnic,
democratic Kosovo will come if all of Kosovo's
communities participate. We encourage the Kosovo
Serbs to rejoin Kosovo's political institutions and
working groups, and we urge Belgrade to support that
engagement. It is not appropriate to deride the
conditions for minorities in Kosovo while refusing to
engage in efforts to improve them. In that regard, we
welcome the plans to resume the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina on missing persons, and we
encourage the resumption of all aspects of the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue.

We also reaffirm the need for all the
Governments of the region to cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. That would be not only an important step
in moving beyond the legacy of war, but foundational
to the establishment of the rule of law.

