Mr. Shinyo (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
thank Mr. Schwarz-Schilling for his comprehensive
and valuable briefing concerning the latest
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I also thank Mr. Adnan Terzie, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his valuable statement.

Japan, as one of the major contributors to the
peacebuilding process in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
takes this opportunity to express its continuing
commitment to assisting the reform efforts of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its full support for the work of
the High Representative.

First, let me welcome the successful holding of
the national and entity-level elections on 1 October.
The election was conducted generally in line with
international standards for democratic elections, and in
a peaceful manner. As the country moves toward the
expected closure of the Office of the High
Representative, that election represents the first time
for Bosnia and Herzegovina to elect its own sovereign
leaders since the end of the armed conflict. In that
light, it is highly commendable that the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina conducted that important
election entirely by themselves. Going forward, we
encourage the leaders of all political parties to work
together in order to form a new Government as early as
possible and to tackle the remaining reforms, including
constitutional reform.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is now making the
transition from post-conflict reconstruction to
consolidating stability and prosperity through
participation in the Euro-Atlantic community. The
signing of a Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union (EU) will be the first step in
that process. However, much still remains to be done,
particularly on the tasks which the EU has set as
priorities for European partnership: full cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, police reform, public broadcasting reform
and other requirements. We call upon the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to exert maximum efforts to
make concrete and rapid progress in those areas, for
the early signing of a Stabilization and Association
Agreement.

As the country moves towards independence, we
appreciate the intention of the High Representative to
respect and cultivate the ownership of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and therefore support his plan to close
the Office of the High Representative by the end of
June 2007. At the same time, Japan also welcomes the
decision by the European Union to strengthen the
Office of the EU Special Representative, so as to
enable it to provide a continued international presence
upon the termination of the activities of the Office of
the High Representative.

Although Japan remains concerned about the
recent exchanges of ethnic rhetoric, which have
continued to intensify throughout the period of election
campaigning, we reiterate our call for the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to take the necessary actions
to gain the confidence of the international community,
and thereby to advance the European integration
process.

