Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today's informative meeting
on the situation in Ukraine. We also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Jenca, Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller, Ambassador Apakan and Ambassador Sajdik
for their briefings.

Today's meeting coincides with the fourth
anniversary of the Minsk agreements, which, when
signed on 12 February 2015, had raised great hopes in
the international community. The Minsk agreements,
in the Normandy format, set out not only the
commitments of each party, but also a precise timetable
for implementation. However, my delegation notes
with regret the lack of progress in the implementation
of the agreements, due to differing interpretations
of the sequencing of the measures to be taken. The
situation continues to be marked by recurring ceasefire
violations and obstructions to the movement of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. Those
facts, including the serious incidents that occurred
on 25 November 2018 in the Kerch Strait, undeniably
constitute major obstacles to the implementation of
the Minsk agreements and thwart the international
community's efforts to ensure the sustainable return of
peace and stability in the region.

The deterioration of the security situation in
Ukraine, as illustrated by the continued fighting along
the line of contact in the east of the country, continues
to cause many casualties and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure essential for the provision of basic social
services to civilians. That is why my country, whose
position has always been in favour of the peaceful
resolution of crises through dialogue, calls on Ukrainian
stakeholders to fully implement the Minsk agreements,
including by complying strictly with the ceasefire in
force, in order to put an end to the suffering of the
Ukrainian people. In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire supports
the efforts of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
and the Joint Centre for Control and Coordination to
de-escalate the conflict. It therefore calls on the parties
to the conflict to take all appropriate measures to
ease the situation, in particular by allowing the Joint
Centre for Control and Coordination to play its role in
supporting OSCE in monitoring the ceasefire.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its support
for all efforts to find a political solution to the crisis in
Ukraine. To that end, it encourages all stakeholders to
respect their commitments to effectively implement the
Minsk agreements and resolution 2202 (2015), which
endorsed them.

