Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The acceding country Croatia;
the candidate countries Montenegro, Iceland, Serbia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Georgia and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.

Given that this is the first time that I am taking
the floor under the presidency of Guatemala, I would
like to first of all congratulate you, Mr. President, and
wish you every success over the course of this month.
I would also like to thank the German delegation and
Ambassador Wittig for the work accomplished under
the German presidency of the Security Council last
month.
I shall take this opportunity to touch upon three
priority topics: the political situation, security and
MINUSTAH's role and development aid. We are pleased
that since the appointment of a new Prime Minister,
Mr. Laurent Salvador Lamothe, in May 2012, and the
establishment of a new Government there has been a
relative stabilization of the political context in Haiti.

We are also pleased that important headway
has been made in moving forward democratic
reforms, particularly with the entry into force of
some amendments to the Constitution of 1987, the
establishment of a Superior Council of the Judiciary
and the establishment, even if it is still ongoing, of a
permanent electoral council.

We call upon the Haitian Government to continue
that path, in particular during the holding of the next
elections. It is important that the obstacles which so far
have impeded the full implementation of the permanent
electoral council be resolved as swiftly as possible. A
stable political context and a security situation that
is under control are preconditions for supporting the
reconstruction and economic recovery process. The
European Union, in promoting development, continues
its financial support and technical assistance to improve
administrative capacities, including the ability of the
State to promote and uphold human rights, as well as
to advance reforms related to governance, security
and strengthening the democratic system. Creating
conditions conducive to foreign investment is a priority
of the Haitian Government and would be another matter
to deal with.

In spite of progress achieved by the Haitian
authorities, among other things in enhancing the
capacity of the Haitian National Police, we note that
MINUSTAH's presence continues to be crucial in
guaranteeing the security and stability in the country.
The European Union and its member States welcome
the proposals of the Secretary-General to extend
the mandate of the Mission and to reconfigure and
progressively withdraw on the basis of stabilization
benchmarks. That is a difficult and ambitious challenge
but one that, in our view, can be achieved.

The withdrawal must go hand in hand with
strengthening the Haitian National Police. It is also a
matter of strengthening Haiti's State institutions, which
must fully undertake the civilian duties that were part
of MINUSTAH's mandate up until now, in particular
the organizing and funding ofthe electoral process. The
European Union is currently envisaging the possibility
of implementing measures to support security sector
reform in Haiti, with particular reference to the Haitian
National Police. Moreover, establishing an integrated
border management system for internal and external
borders, recommended by the Haitian Administration,
is also an area in which the European Union could
provide assistance.

Over the past 12 months, the European Union
has supported Haiti in its long-term rebuilding and
development process. In that regard, 85 per cent of
the €522 million pledged at the International Donors'
Conference, held in New York in 2010, has already
been disbursed. With regard to the rate of disbursal,
we hope that over the next year the pace of expenditure
will accelerate, thereby enabling us to honour by the
end of 2013 the commitment we made in New York.
Finally, we hail the efforts of the Haitian Government
to implement a new mechanism for aid coordination,
and we reiterate our willingness to participate in that
endeavour. We hope that it will be an instrument
that contributes to improving the effectiveness and
transparency of aid management. We are also pleased
with the progress made in implementing the strategic
development framework for 2013-2015.

In conclusion, the Secretary-General's
recommendations are part ofa process of consolidating
and stabilizing security and democracy in Haiti. A
progressive handover of MINUSTAH's duties should
contribute to that process.

The European Union and its member States remain
fully committed to providing Haitian authorities with
the support they need to achieve that goal. It also
goes without saying that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General can also count on our full
cooperation, and we thank him for the work he has
done.

