Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the President
of the Security Council for having convened this
important meeting. Venezuela expresses its disgust at
the acts of terrorism carried out against United Nations
facilities in Nigeria and the regrettable loss of human
life.

Our delegation aligns itself with the declaration
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement by
the Permanent Representative of Morocco.

Peacekeeping operations are valuable tools within
the various political resources available to the United
Nations to assist in the resolution of conflicts within
the framework of its efforts to strengthen international
peace and security. The nature of their mandates has
recently been subject to an important transformation
process. These operations have increased over the past
two decades, both in the number of field missions and
in the number of troops deployed.

Some political and military Powers call for
strengthening the persuasive capacity of peacekeeping
missions, but what they really want is to undermine the
full exercise of sovereignty of the countries involved.
The doctrines that certain Powers seek to introduce
violate the basic principles of peacekeeping operations,
namely, the consent of the parties, impartiality and the
non-use of force except in self-defence.
Given the current climate of rampant
imperialism, which seeks to maintain or regain
political and military dominance over developing
countries, it is more necessary than ever to safeguard
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of nations. In the light of recent experiences, it is
imperative to ensure that peacekeeping operations
fulfil the noble purpose for which they were created. It
is therefore imperative that, in implementing mission
mandates, no threat be posed to their legitimacy and
the complex relationship of trust that they must
maintain with the countries in which they are deployed.
On this basis rests, in large measure, any political
process that seeks to achieve ajust and lasting peace.

The increase in peacekeeping operations is
evidence of the growing tensions and conflicts in the
world. Conflict situations will continue to proliferate
so long as the structural situations of poverty, injustice,
oppression, exploitation and foreign domination
promoted by neo-colonial ambitions persist.

Since we are talking today about peacekeeping
and conflict resolution, we would like to refer to the
assault perpetrated against the accredited embassy and
diplomatic residency of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela in Libya on 23 August by an armed and
violent mob, causing extensive damage to its facilities
and endangering the lives of the people who were
there. As they publicly proclaimed, the irrational
assailants had planned to assassinate the accredited
Venezuelan Ambassador, Mr. Afif Tajeldine.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela deplores
the fact that those responsible for these criminal
actions answer to the self-styled National Transitional
Council which, with irrational stubbornness, has
criticized Venezuela's firm position in defence of
international law, expressed by its respect for the
sovereignty and self-determination of the Libyan
people.

It is well known that the National Transitional
Council is protected by the United States of America
and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela denounces these
countries for seeking to seize the invaluable water
resources, hydrocarbon reserves and international
assets of the Libyan people, which amount to some
$200 billion dollars.

Following the destruction of one of the best
infrastructures on the African continent, built for the
welfare of the Libyan people, the aggressor Powers
have begun to redistribute among themselves, through
acts of pillage, the lucrative contracts for the
reconstruction of that country, thus turning the
destruction of a developing country into an immoral
business transaction.

Resolution 1973 (2011) established that the
sovereignty and territorial unity and integrity of Libya
must be respected. Who authorized the killing of
thousands of civilians in Libya in the name of
defending civilians? Who authorized the destruction of
civilian facilities, such as schools, hospitals and
universities, in that country? The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela declares that arming, training and
supporting internal subversive groups in Libya,
promoting and financing a regime change, ordering the
assassination of the leader of a sovereign nation, and
attacking the territorial integrity and political
independence of Libya are clear and systematic
violations of the now unspeakable resolution 1973
(2011) and the Charter of the United Nations,
undermining the fundamental principles and norms of
international law.

At this tragic, historic time when international
peace and security are threatened, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela reiterates its call on all the
parties to the conflict in the Libyan Arab J amahiriya to
establish an immediate ceasefire that allows for
negotiations towards reaching a political solution in
order to avoid further bloodshed and that lays the
foundations for a lasting peace in that sister nation,
under the good offices that the African Union has
proposed since the beginning of the conflict.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
that it recognizes only the Government led by
Muammar Al-Qadhafi and that it will not recognize
any Government set up in Libya as a result of that
interventionist imperialist aggression.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has
requested the Secretary-General to condemn the
violation of the sovereignty of the homeland of the
liberator Simon Bolivar and to reiterate the
international obligation to guarantee the inviolability
of diplomatic missions accredited to the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.

