Mr. O'Brien: I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing. I echo
his call and that of so many others for an end to the
carnage in Aleppo, and in Syria generally. For the sake
of the people of Aleppo, Syria and beyond, we cannot
squander the opportunity provided by the negotiations
in Geneva. I am glad to note the news that havejust been
received, as announced by Mr. Feltman, of a further
agreement and hope that it can be implemented in full.

But I am horrified by the continued death
and destruction in Aleppo. Over the past 10 days,
indiscriminate attacks and the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas by Government forces,
non-State armed groups and listed terrorist groups
has intensified, mostly affecting innocent civilians.
While the dead are still being counted and while
medical personnel are trying to save lives and tend to
the injured, we can already estimate that hundreds of
civilians have been killed or injured, including dozens
of women and children.

Life for people in Aleppo is horrendous and has lost
all sense. Access to basic and essential services such
as water and electricity is sporadic at best. People are
living under daily threat and terror. Those who remain
in eastern Aleppo, roughly 300,000 people, live in
constant fear of the next attack from the air, including
from barrel bombs. School activities for thousands of
children have been suspended, and Friday prayers have
been cancelled. The estimated 1.3 million people living
in western Aleppo city are crowding into basements,
seeking refuge from volleys of shells and mortar
rounds, which continue to slam into what is left of their
homes, as people and humanitarian workers are pinned
down in their respective factional quarters in the city.
There can be no explanation or excuse, no reason or
rationale for waging war on civilians.

I am going to focus again on the inexcusable,
deeply disturbing attacks on medical facilities. We
have all seen the harrowing images of bombs and
mortars raining down on medical facilities and
medical personnel across Aleppo in recent days. On
22 April, an air strike hit an ambulance en route to
assist people wounded in an earlier air strike in the
Al-Huluk neighbourhood of eastern Aleppo, killing
the driver and the paramedic. On 27 April, Al-Quds
hospital, the most advanced paediatric care centre in
Aleppo - let me repeat, a hospital dedicated to treating
children - was destroyed after being hit by a wave of
air strikes, which by all accounts had been launched
by the Government of Syria. Fifty people were killed,
including several doctors, and eighty more people were
injured. On 29 April, air strikes destroyed a United
Nations-funded primary health centre in the Marjeh
Square neighbourhood and the Boustan Al-Qasir
health-care centre in eastern Aleppo, which are both
currently controlled by non-State armed groups,
injuring several people and putting the facilities out
of service. In western Aleppo, currently controlled
by the Government, Ibn Rushd hospital was hit by
mortars, allegedly fired by non-State armed groups last
week, and just yesterday an attack on the Al-Dabeet
maternity hospital, in western Aleppo, again allegedly
by non-State armed groups, resulted in three fatalities,
injuring fifteen more. Those terrible attacks have
not only claimed innocent lives, but have also had a
multiplier effect, leaving tens of thousands of civilians
unable to obtain even the most basic levels of care, even
as fighting intensifies around them.

More broadly, according to Physicians for Human
Rights, there have been over 360 documented attacks
on some 250 medical facilities during the course of
the conflict. More than 730 medical personnel have
been killed. Hospitals dedicated to treating children
and those serving pregnant women are no longer
places where civilians can safely go for treatment. And
it is now considered a risk, as I said in my previous
statement to the Council (see S/PV.7682), to live near a
medical facility.

Clearly enshrined in international humanitarian
law and as the Council reconfirmed yesterday (see S/PV.7685), the protection and provision of medical
assistance and health care to the wounded and sick is at
the heart of humanitarian action. Whoever they are and
whatever side of the fight they are on, those responsible
for such repeated, unconscionable acts of inhumanity
must understand that their acts cannot and will not be
forgotten. Such attacks against civilians are violations
of international humanitarian law. Some of them
amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Those who are responsible must know that they will
one day be held accountable,

I want to pay tribute to the tireless efforts of
humanitarian actors and first-responders, most of whom
are Syrian, who continue to risk their lives to stay and
deliver assistance in Aleppo and across the country.
So far this year, the United Nations and partners have
delivered life-saving aid to hundreds of thousands of
people per month in Aleppo city, originating both from
within Syria and from across the border in Turkey.

However, we remain extremely concerned about
how the security situation in Aleppo city is impeding
humanitarian access and operations. Already, in the
past few days, many humanitarian actors have had
to suspend their operations, unable to reach tens of
thousands of children, who could not be vaccinated last
week. We are dismayed that the Government of Syria
did not approve our request for a cross-line inter-agency
convoy to eastern Aleppo city in May. The suspension
of the activities of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent in the
east of the city over the past weeks is also a worrying
development, as that organization is a key partner of the
United Nations in Syria, and we call on all concerned to
allow it to resume its activities in eastern Aleppo city
as soon as possible. In fact, now, there is not a moment
to lose.

We are reporting today on Aleppo, but make no
mistake, indiscriminate attacks and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure continue to inflict tremendous
suffering on Syrians across the country. We are very
concerned about the escalation of violence and the
impact on civilians in other parts of the country; for
example, in Dar'a, where there have been reports
of heavy fighting between Government forces and
non-State armed groups, including shelling and aerial
bombardment over the past week.

The bottom line is that attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure need to stop immediately. There
also needs to be full, unhindered, unconditional, safe
and sustained access to all people in need, including in
besieged and hard-to-reach areas, access for all types of
assistance, including medical and surgical supplies. In
short, all parties must finally and unequivocally live up
to their obligations under international humanitarian
law and the demands of the Council's resolutions.

My question to Council members today is again:
how many more deaths, how much more suffering can we
tolerate before there is a collective push towards an end
to this senseless and shameful crisis affecting Syrians,
their neighbours and many more people beyond?

