Mr. Salame: Seven and halfmonths into the conflict
in Libya, and given the recent dangerous escalation of
hostilities in and around Tripoli, we find ourselves ever
more in a race against time to reach a peaceful solution
that would spare many lives. I will provide the Council
with an update on the security situation before turning
to political developments.

I am angry and sad to report that today there was
another mass civilian casualty event. A biscuit factory
in the Wadi Rabia neighbourhood of Tripoli was hit by
an air strike, according to early information. The attack
has caused what we currently believe to be 10 fatalities
and over 35 injuries. It appears that the majority of the
dead were migrants, but that at least two were Libyans.
Regardless of whether the attack deliberately targeted
the factory or was an indiscriminate attack, it may
constitute a war crime. We are working to verify the
facts and will update the Council accordingly.

Beyond today's tragedy, the front lines in southern
Tripoli are highly fluid. The dangers and direct
consequences of foreign interference are increasingly
evident. To fill gaps in manpower, there is growing
involvement of mercenaries and fighters from
foreign private military companies. The insertion
of these experienced fighters has naturally led to an
intensification in the violence. I am gravely worried
by the expansion of artillery fire northwards into the
city. In recent days, the number of civilians killed and
injured has been rising and many families are leaving
the areas impacted by the shelling. A further escalation
of ground fighting in these densely populated areas
would lead to disastrous humanitarian consequences.

The use of air power and precision technology has
become a dominant feature of an otherwise low-intensity
conflict the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) estimates the total number of drone strikes
in support of Libyan National Army (LNA) forces at
well above 800 since the beginning of the conflict.
The total number of drone strikes in support of the
Government of National Accord is estimated at around
240. It is our judgment that the drone infrastructure
and operations are facilitated by parties external to the
conflict There were also several incidents of precision
airstrikes conducted by unknown aircraft between
September and November. In addition, the increasing
use of unguided bombs in airstrikes conducted by LNA
forces in populated areas of Tripoli caused an increase
in the number of civilian casualties.

The violence is facilitated by Libya's plethora of
Al-Qadhafi-era arms, as well as by continued shipments
of war materiel brought into the country in breach of the
arms embargo. Reports indicate that everything from
spare parts for fighter aircraft to tanks, from bullets
to precision missiles, are being brought into Libya in
support of different groups involved in the fighting.

Mitiga airport remains closed. It has been more
than two and a half months now that this key outlet for
the civilian population of Tripoli and western Libya
has been forced shut due to indiscriminate shelling
and airstrikes. Misrata airport, a small mixed civilian-
military facility located 250 kilometres east of Tripoli,
is now the only exit point for Libyans in the west of the
country - who comprise the majority of the country's
population - to travel abroad by air. Misrata airport,
too, has been targeted at least ll times by precision
airstrikes since early September.

Mitiga airport in Tripoli needs to reopen as soon as
possible. Together with the Ministers of the Interior and
Transportation of the Government of National Accord,

I am working on a number of practical steps to achieve
that goal, including the clear delineation between the
civilian and military sections ofthe airport, as well as the
establishment of a dedicated United Nations terminal.

I am determined to see the end of this debilitating
conflict. My colleagues at UNSMIL and I are fully
engaged and have been working tirelessly with Libyans
and international partners to prepare for the second and
third steps of the initiative I announced on 29 July (see S/PV.8588). I would like to thank the Government of
Germany for its work in preparing for an international
summit. Three senior officials meetings have already
taken place and there will be a crucial fourth meeting
on Wednesday 20 November.

In their most recent discussion on 21 October,
participants worked to agree a draft communique that
outlines six baskets of activities necessary to end the
conflict in Libya. Those six baskets include the need
for the return to the Libyan-led political process and
accompanying economic reform; a ceasefire; the
implementation of the arms embargo and security
reform; and the upholding of international human rights
and humanitarian law. Putting the implementation
of the arms embargo at the heart of international
commitments is essential in practical terms and as a
message to the Libyan people.

UNSMIL has worked to substantiate an operational
annex to the draft communique. The annex has two
purposes. It serves to outline the commitments that the
members of the Berlin group have made to ending the
conflict and advancing the political process through
tangible actions that are benchmarked by indicators,
which outline the responsibilities for those actions. It
also serves as the bridge to the intra-Libyan political
dialogue, which will be launched under United Nations
auspices immediately following the Berlin summit.

One of the tangible outcomes of the international
summit would be the establishment of a follow-up
committee that would work with UNSMIL to implement
the outcomes agreed in the final communique.
Such a committee would play a fundamental role
in terms of ensuring respect for a ceasefire and the
better implementation of the arms embargo. It would
contribute to supporting a return to the political process,
the implementation of agreed economic and financial
reforms and practical ways and means to ensure that
there is no impunity for Violations of international
humanitarian law. The committee would also support
the necessary disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process for groups across the country.

I have been actively engaged with Member States
on a bilateral basis. I was, in particular, grateful for
the visit to Libya of Mr. Heiko Maas, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Germany, to brief Prime Minister
Serraj on the Berlin process on 27 October. I also
travelled to Cairo last week for very positive meetings
with Mr. Sameh Hassan Shokry Selim, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Egypt, and other high-level officials.
International unity and agreement are essential to
stopping the violence and pursuing the resolution of the
crisis through political dialogue.

I have high hopes that the Berlin process will end in
success. Let me stress once more that the endorsement
of the Berlin communique does not mean the end of
the process, but rather marks the beginning of the
most important part of our journey to put Libya back
on the path to peace and stability. In support of the
Berlin process, I have engaged extensively with Prime
Minister Serraj and the commanders of the Government
of National Accord forces. I have also met with General
Haftar and politicians who support him. There is scope
for agreement on ending the conflict and a basis for
returning to the political process.

UNSMIL has also engaged in extensive outreach to
Libyan constituencies, including in the diaspora. These
meetings have involved commanders ofunits engaged in
the fighting, their civilian representatives and political
constituencies from across the country. The anger and
frustration at the conflict and the strong desire for it to
end emerged clearly from these discussions.

I am pleased to report that efforts continue to
support the political process. The Egyptian Government
has been working with members of the House of
Representatives to try to unify that body. As a group of
western members continues to meet independently in
Tripoli, we are in permanent contact with the various
factions in the House of Representatives and have been
encouraging them to maintain the integrity of their
assembly. Partner organizations have also held second-
track consultations, in which participants have again
emphasized their desire for a peaceful resolution to the
conflict and proposed ideas for a way forward. These
are all positive developments that reflect a will and a
commitment to ending the conflict and returning to the
political track to end the crisis in the country.

In parallel with our efforts at the national level, we
also continue to work directly with Libyan communities.
To address the polarization in the country, we have now
hosted two workshops to stem the incitement of and
the use of hateful rhetoric in the media. The workshops
have brought together journalists, editors and social
media activists, as well as instructors in human rights
and representatives of social media platforms. Our
ultimate goal is to conclude a code of conduct for the
media in Libya.

At the grass-roots level, in mid-October we held the
last ofa series ofthree events to support local mediators.
Over 120 Libyans - including 23 women - attended
those meetings, the aim of which was to establish a
national network of mediators that would include tribal
leaders, elders, representatives of civil society, youth
and women activists, academics and businesspeople,
all of whom enjoy the credibility and respect of their
various constituencies.

Municipal elections remain on hold following
a court ruling in June that cancelled the electoral
regulation administering the elections. It is a positive
reflection of the democratic spirit in Libya that many
mayors are nevertheless requesting to renew the
expired mandate of their councils by way of elections.
I recently met with the chairperson of the Central
Committee for Municipal Council Elections, who
assured me of the readiness of the Committee to resume
municipal elections once the legal basis is restored. On
4 November, the Sabha Court of First Instance validated
the results of the municipal elections in Sabha that
took place on 27 April. While another legal challenge
against the results remains pending and while the
petitioner has announced that the validation ruling will
be appealed to the Supreme Court, this is nevertheless a
welcome and important development for the largest city
in southern Libya. In northern Libya, in Sirte, United
Nations agencies launched a project to support youth
and adolescents in becoming active agents of change
and peace. This is a welcome first effort to implement
resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security in
the Libyan context.

Let me take this opportunity to raise once again
the case of Ms. Siham Sergewa, a member ofthe House
of Representatives who was abducted from her home
on 17 July. For over four months, authorities in the
east have been unable to produce information about
the fate of that woman legislator and outspoken rights
activist. Ms. Sergewa's fate is part of a larger pattern
of Violence against women across the country. The
Mission is documenting instances of killing and forced
disappearances, including the case of a 70-year-old
Libyan woman who was abducted from her home in
Benghazi after she was accused of practicing witchcraft.
In addition, both detained and non-detained women
migrants and refugees in Libya are at risk of rape and
other forms of sexual and gender-based violence, sexual
exploitation and forced prostitution.

On a positive note, I am pleased to report that
Libyan women have been were recognized for their
peacebuilding efforts. On 16 October, the BBC named
Ms. Rida Al Tubuly - a peace campaigner and the
Co-Founder and Director of the Together We Build It
organization, and whom the Council will have a chance
to hear from today - one of the 100 most influential
women of 2019.

In Tripoli, the effects of the conflict continue to
impact the civilian population. More than 200 civilians
have been killed and more than 128,000 people have
fled their homes since the conflict began on 4 April.
More than 135,000 civilians remain in front-line areas,
and an additional 270,000 people live in areas directly
affected by conflict. Since the beginning of 2019,
Violence in Libya has had a devastating impact on
health care in the country; 60 attacks against health-
care facilities, medical personnel, and ambulances have
been registered. We have observed a clear pattern of
precision air strikes targeting the medical facilities of
Government of National Accord forces. Intentionally
directing attacks against medical facilities and
personnel, as well as the wilful killing or harming of
sick or wounded people, may constitute war crimes.

Migrants and refugees continue to be at risk of
unlawful killings, torture and other ill-treatment;
arbitrary detention and unlawful deprivation of liberty;
rape and other forms of sexual and gender-based
violence; slavery and forced labour; and extortion
and exploitation. Serious concerns also continue with
regard to the transfer of migrants intercepted at sea
by the Libyan Coast Guard to official and unofficial
detention centres, including to the Zawiya detention
centre and the Tajoura detention centre, which the
authorities reported on 1 August was to be closed.

A health-care sector assessment conducted in
October 2019 revealed a sharp increase in unmet health
needs, particularly for women and girls. More than
24 per cent of health-care facilities are closed owing
to the conflict, electricity cuts or structural damage,
and services are interrupted in many other health-care
facilities. Children are unable to reach schools, dozens
of which have been destroyed. Nearly 30 more schools
are being used as shelters for displaced persons.

The United Nations and its humanitarian
partners have reached more than 310,000 people with
humanitarian assistance this year. Unfortunately, the
humanitarian needs exceed the means at our disposal.
To date, less than half of the appeal for $202 million
under the Libya humanitarian response plan has been
funded. I encourage donors to help us shrink the
funding gap.

In southern Libya, the United Nations country team
continues to support the Ahali population displaced
from Murzuq, very few of whose members have
returned to their homes. UNSMIL has continued to meet
with Ahali and Tebu leaders to resolve the underlying
grievances between the communities and enable the
safe and dignified return of the Ahali population.

I regret to inform the Council that there are no
new developments in my appeal for more information
regarding the 10 August attack, which killed three
United Nations staff members and severely injured
two others. A board of inquiry sent from Headquarters
arrived some days ago, and I call on all Libyan parties
to cooperate positively with that body. Our two injured
staff members continue to recover. We are committed
to remaining in Libya to serve the Libyan people.

It is somewhat of a cliche to say that the weeks
ahead will be critical, but once again it is true for Libya.
External investment in the conflict risks surpassing
the amount of national involvement, taking control of
Libya's future away from the Libyans and placing it in
the hands of foreign parties. Once invited in, foreign
intervention is the guest that settles in and seizes
control of the house.

It is in the interests of all Libyans to reject outside
interference in their country's affairs, and I look to
them for their support in calling for external actors to
adhere to the arms embargo and commit tangibly to
ending the conflict on the ground before it is too late.
Ending the conflict and agreeing to the way forward
is a realistic prospect. The parties are known. The
outlines of the agreement are known. Options for a
temporary and longer-term constitutional framework
exist. Electoral legislation has been produced before. It
is all eminently possible.

All that is needed now is for the international
community to come together to provide the necessary
umbrella under which the Libyan parties themselves
canjoin hands to end the conflict and resume dialogue.
The United Nations is and will remain in Libya to
support the Libyan people on their journey.

