Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated

with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - the associated

countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the European
Free Trade Area countries belonging to the European
Economic Area Iceland and Liechtenstein also align
themselves with this statement.

After decades of war and internal strife the
Afghan people are closer to reconciliation. Challenges
remain enormous in scale and complex to resolve, yet
the Bonn Agreement is being implemented. The
emergency loya jirga is absolutely crucial for success.
The first phase of the election of candidates is well
under way and the results thus far are encouraging. The
Special Independent Commission for the Convening of
the Emergency Loya Jirga, backed by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) is finding wholehearted and often
enthusiastic support in local communities. It is
essential that the loya jirga take place on schedule,
without hindrance or manipulation. The European
Union shares the concern recently expressed by
Mr. Brahimi about the consequences of manipulating
the loya jirga process, and calls upon all Afghan parties
to seize this historic opportunity. The European Union
is supporting the process toward the loya jirga, and
would back the deployment of international observers.

The commitment undertaken in Bonn to hold free
and fair elections within two years of the convening of
the emergency loya jirga should be strictly adhered to.

The United Nations has been entrusted with a
central responsibility for the peace process. We
commend Mr. Brahimi for his commitment to an
effective leading role and reiterate our full support for
the objective of a fully integrated United Nations
presence in Afghanistan that respects the principles of
local ownership and interagency cohesion.

Security in Afghanistan is an essential element
for the achievement of the Bonn goals. The European
Union is concerned by the unrest in the northern
regions of the country and supports the efforts by
UNAMA to decrease tension between ethnic groups.
Several European Union member States are assisting
with the creation of Afghan security institutions,
including the establishment of a national army and a
police force. The European Union welcomes the results
of the Geneva conference on the financing of the
security sector in Afghanistan, whose latest meeting
was held on 17 May and at which European Union
support for institution-building was confirmed. Three
of our member States, the United Kingdom, Germany
and Italy, have pledged to play leading roles,
respectively, in the areas of the war against drugs,
police and reform of the judicial system.

The European Union supports the adoption of a
Security Council resolution extending the mandate of
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) beyond
20 June 2002 well in advance of that date, thus sending
a strong signal of support to the loya jirga and the rest
of the Bonn Agreement implementation process. We
welcome the decision taken by Turkey to take over the
leadership of ISAF from the United Kingdom, to which
we would also like to express our gratitude.

The cooperation and commitment of
neighbouring countries will be very important for the
successful reconstruction of Afghanistan and the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement. The European
Union will integrate this regional dimension in its
Afghanistan policy, enhancing the political dialogue
and promoting joint initiatives with those countries.

The European Union will work for a peaceful and
prosperous Afghanistan, and is a key partner in the
reconstruction effort, as witnessed by its support for
the Afghan Interim Authority and its important
commitment of support pledged at the Tokyo
Conference. We have actively monitored and supported
the implementation of the Bonn Agreement, inter alia
by appointing a special envoy for Afghanistan. In
addition, the European Union is a major source of
humanitarian assistance. Furthermore, European Union
member States, including Spain, participate in ISAF
and are key contributors to operation Enduring
Freedom.

International assistance to Afghanistan should be
based upon the respect for and promotion of its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Bonn
Agreement is the basic road map for the political future
of the country. European Union reconstruction
assistance will be conditional on all Afghan parties
positively contributing to the process and the goals
agreed in Bonn with the aim of establishing peace, a
representative Government and stability in
Afghanistan, as well as helping to eradicate terrorism
and the illicit production and trafficking of narcotic
drugs.

Given the harmful consequences of drug
production and trafficking for Afghanistan, for the
region, and for our own countries, the European Union
reaffirms its readiness to support efforts undertaken by
the Afghan Interim Authority, with the help of the
United Nations International Drug Control Programme
with a view to solving this most important problem. In
particular, we welcome the success of the Interim
Administration's recent crop eradication programme,
which has destroyed a significant proportion of the
current harvest in the main poppy-growing areas.
The European Union will continue its dialogue
with the Interim Authority on how best to achieve
reconstruction and attain the political objectives set out
in the Bonn Agreement while ensuring greater
ownership by the Afghans themselves. We welcome the
creation of the Afghan Assistance Coordination
Authority and acknowledge its contribution to the
reconstruction effort. Sustainable economic
development and the effective use of donor funding
urgently require that sound currency arrangements, as
well as strong and transparent budgetary and treasury
systems, be put in place.

The European Union will encourage and support
the Afghan Interim Authority and the United Nations in
the establishment of the Judicial Commission and the
reform of the judicial system. Likewise, we encourage
the early establishment of the Civil Service
Commission and will assist in establishing an efficient
public administration, a legal system and other
mechanisms necessary to ensure respect for the rule of
law and democratic principles, including freedom of
expression.

Respect for human rights is essential both in itself
and as a means of achieving reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence among the various ethnic groups.
The European Union will thus offer to assist the
Interim Authority and its successor in establishing
structures to ensure respect for human rights without
discrimination, including the establishment of the
Human Rights Commission foreseen in the Bonn
Agreement. The European Union is concerned by
recent reports about allegations of human rights abuses,
and supports the prompt initiative taken by UNAMA to
request a thorough investigation through the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights.

The European Union considers that Afghan
women must enjoy full human rights as well as equal
access to health care, education and employment; they
must have the opportunity to participate on equal terms
in the political and social life of their country and to
play a central role in the reconstruction of Afghanistan.
The European Union will therefore ensure a gender-
sensitive approach in its activities, including in
development assistance.

Although the pace of return of refugees has
exceeded expectations, as witnessed by the recent
closure of the 22-year-old Nasir Bagh camp in
Pakistan, many are still hosted by neighbouring
countries, and many of those who return join thousands
of internally displaced persons. Their needs continue to
demand attention and humanitarian assistance from the
international community.

In my last statement on Afghanistan before the
Council, on 26 March, I stressed that security, stability
and reconstruction should be sought primarily by the
Afghan people. In that connection I must insist on the
importance of the emergency loya jirga, which will
offer the first real opportunity to reach a nationwide
consensus on common national institutions based on
democratic traditions. We appeal once more to all
Afghan leaders to fully support the constitutional
process that will begin with the emergency loya jirga.

