Mr. Douste-Blazy (France) (spoke in French): It
is rare that the Security Council meets to discuss a
happy event, but that is the case today. We are
particularly glad to welcome the agreement reached in
Abuja that finally lays the groundwork for peace in
Darfur.

It is equally gratifying that this meeting is being
held under your presidency, Sir. The Abuja agreement,
is above, all a success for the African Union. We know
the important role your country and you, personally,
played. We would also like to pay tribute to the
international community for its support for the African
Union (AU) in this matter. I would also like to
welcome the personal commitment of the Secretary-
General in this regard.

That success, of course, creates obligations. We
are only too aware that the Abuja agreement, although
an essential step, is just a point of departure. It is, in a
way, the first page of a road map that concerns us all
and that should mobilize us all.

First, we must ensure that all the parties to the
conflict join with the Sudanese Government and Minni
Minawi's Sudan Liberation Movement in rallying to
the peace agreement. We must encourage the parties to
hold a conference representing all of the people of
Darfur. It will be of fundamental importance to include

in the process those forces that were not represented in
Abuja.

Finally - and in this regard we are counting on
the AU and the Secretary-General we must
absolutely take the necessary measures as soon as
possible to strengthen the African force in Darfur. The
African Mission in Sudan (AMIS) has played an
essential role; it will be given new tasks as a result of
the Abuja agreement. It must also be ready to pass the
baton to the United Nations. Indeed, it is incumbent
upon us - in particular the Security Council - to
accelerate preparations for a transition from AMIS to a
United Nations peacekeeping operation, as the
conditions for such an operation are now almost in
place.

In referring to the road map, I want to be careful
not to omit two other major concerns.

First, it is essential that the international
community remobilize in order to overcome the very
troubling deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
Darfur, as well as in Chad. Since the summer of 2004,
France has committed military aircraft to provide all
necessary assistance to Darfurian refugees in Chad. In
that same spirit we call on the international community
to support United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations in their remarkable efforts.

Secondly, it is now absolutely necessary that we
approach the question of Darfur from a regional
perspective. Already, the stability of Chad has almost
been compromised by developments in Darfur. Nothing
would be worse for Darfur than regional
destabilization. We must work to ensure that peace in
Darfur provides an opportunity to foster peace in the
region.

We hope that that message will be heeded by all
and that the Security Council will provide itself with
the means necessary to ensure that that is the case. The
tragic incidents that occurred in Nyala during
Mr. Egeland's visit to a camp of internally displaced
persons are very disturbing. They show the degree of
tension that exists and should prompt us to act quickly
at the security level as well as at the level of
humanitarian assistance. In this context, I would like to
say that the killing of an AMIS interpreter was
absolutely unacceptable.

Above and beyond those incidents, the Abuja
agreement is a sign of hope, first and foremost for
those suffering people to whom our thoughts go out
today. But that sign of hope will be translated into
reality only if the various parties marshal their strength
to exploit all the potential of the agreement. In this
area, as in others, the United Nations will have a key
role to play, notably - when the time comes - by
taking over from the African Mission in Darfur, whose
efforts have been remarkable.

