Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I wish you every success in carrying out
your duties. I would also like to thank you for having
convened this important meeting, which addresses
one of the most important tools in enabling the United
Nations to carry out its tasks in the maintenance of
international peace and security. I also wish to express
my gratitude to the Secretary-General and all of today's
briefers for their valuable presentations.

Based on our vision and the humanitarian
role of the Jordanian Armed Forces 4 the Arab
Army - and the General Security Apparatus, the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has been participating
in United Nations peacekeeping operations all over
the world for many decades, contributing more than
100,000 men and women. Throughout that period, the
Kingdom of Jordan has never hesitated to participate
in United Nations missions, despite the difficult tasks
and dangerous environments. We are a model example
in respect of conduct and discipline, while maintaining
high levels of readiness and competence, which have
been internationally recognized.

The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan attaches special importance to and greatly
supports the Secretary-General's efforts to reform
and restructure the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations with a view to improving the performance
of its missions. Jordan is proud to be among the first
countries to support the Secretary-General's Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, in line with our country's
principles. We also support the Secretary-General's
great efforts to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping
operations and preventive diplomacy.

As a result of the continuing evolution of the
concepts of United Nations mandates and their different
nature, Jordan established a National Peace Operations
Training Institute in 1996 to train members of the
Jordanian Armed Forces of all ranks on peacekeeping
operations, as well as training sisterly and friendly
troops. From its establishment to the beginning of
this year, the Institute has trained 66,000 soldiers
from Jordan and other countries. The Institute offers
several courses, including mechanisms of action for
peacekeeping operations, the protection of civilians
and children, disarmament, rehabilitation, international
law and humanitarian law, among others. The Institute
has started to provide courses on cultural awareness in
2003, given the importance ofthat topic for the success
of peacekeeping missions in different areas of conflict.

The courses are divided into two. The first is
directed at friendly foreign countries and aims to
increase the knowledge and experience of participants
in terms of their cultural awareness regarding Arab and
Islamic traditions and customs, as well as social, ethnic
and family structures, religious aspects, stereotypes,
and working with translators and negotiators, taking
into account the nature and place of the mission. The
second is directed at the Jordanian Armed Forces
and other Arab countries and aims to increase the
knowledge and experience of participants in terms
of their cultural awareness regarding the customs,
traditions and religions of different peoples.

At the level of peacekeeping policing, Jordan's
General Security Directorate decided in 2015 to
establish a Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
which includes the Police Training Institute for
Peacekeeping Operation, in order to provide participants
with advanced policing skills, in line with the highest
international standards. Through development and
restructuring, Jordan looks forward to becoming a
regional centre for specialized training in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is committed to
implementing its action plan for women and its priorities
with a view to increasing the participation of women
in peacekeeping operations at all levels. The Jordanian
Armed Forces - Arab Army - managed to increase
the number of women observers and staff officers to
15 per cent by the end of last year. We reaffirm our
continued support for the Secretary-General's efforts
regarding a zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan will continue
to support the efforts of the United Nations to achieve,
maintain and build peace at all levels. I wish to
recall Jordan's pledge during the latest Peacekeeping
Ministerial at the end of March to provide a mechanized
infantry battalion, a special operations unit, a level-II
field hospital and a protection unit, in addition to the
resources we have already provided. We look forward to
the Jordanian police unit beginning its work in the near
future, having been selected to participate in the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei. We also look
forward to reviving our participation in peacekeeping
operations, which has been limited over the past few
years owing to the situation in the Middle East.

In conclusion, I can only ask for God's mercy for
those peacekeeping martyrs who have sacrificed their
lives for a world of peace and security.

