Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
thank the President for her leadership in convening this
open debate. I would also express my appreciation for
the valuable briefings given by His Excellency Mr. Jan
Eliasson, DeputySecretary-General, Mr. Richard Engel
of NBC News, Ms. Kathleen Carroll of the Associated
Press and the Committee to Protect Journalists,
Mr. Mustafa Haji Abdinur of AFP and Mr. Ghaith
Abdul-Ahad of The Guardian.

In 2012, the number ofjournalists killed globally
was tragically high, totalling more than 120, a number
that includes several Japanese journalists. We would
like to express our sincere condolences for those who
have fallen in the course of their efforts to investigate
and deliver facts to all the world's people. Against that
backdrop, it is both timely and meaningful that the
Security Council is holding an open debate focused on
the protection ofjournalists. It is especially important
that the Council, which is responsible for international
peace and security, hear directly the views of journalists
who have worked in the field and who have broad
experience covering active conflicts in the face of
grave personal danger.

Attacks against journalists are assaults against
freedom of expression. As pointed out in the United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity, without freedom of expression,
and particularly freedom of the press, an informed,
active and engaged citizenry is impossible. In particular,
without the courageous actions of journalists, the world
would not know about the suffering of people during
ongoing conflicts, when numerous human rights abuses
and humanitarian crises occur. Protecting journalists
means shedding light on suffering, informing people
of the truth and contributing to improving the situation.
In other words, journalists are not only defenders of
freedom of expression; they also play a significant role
in consolidating democracy through their reporting and
contributions to the advancement of human rights.

The Geneva Conventions constitute the first legal
framework for protecting journalists, one that was
further developed through the adoption of resolution
1738 (2006) and the Plan of Action I just mentioned.
However, we still face challenges in implementing
those frameworks.

In particular, the fight against impunity, especially
in terms ofprevention, is of critical importance. In cases
when Japanese journalists have died or been killed,
the Government of Japan has requested the countries
concerned to provide detailed information on each
incident, and it expects justice to be done. Japan both
commends and emphasizes the importance of efforts
to document instances of the killing of journalists,
to monitor Government responses to such acts and to
publicize the outcomes, including activities undertaken
by the Committee to Protect Journalists and UNESCO.

Resolution 1738 (2006) clarifies the issue of
protectingjournalists. However, the security conditions
for journalists have yet to improve. Furthermore, we
should remember that many non-conflict related
cases also exist where journalists are in grave danger.
The Security Council should find ways to prevent
journalists from falling prey to tragic situations and
further encourage good practices.

