Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting on the
very important issue of HIV/AIDS in the context of
peacekeeping. I wish also to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno and the Executive
Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Peter Piot, for their respective
briefings.

This is a timely occasion to discuss the
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000), five years
after its adoption by the Council, as well as to assess
the achievements made and challenges ahead. As we
know, the resolution refers to personnel to be
employed, or already deployed, in peacekeeping
operations.

Given the extent of the HIV/AIDS pandemic
worldwide, and with around 100,000 uniformed
personnel involved in United Nations peacekeeping
every year - taking into account troop rotations - the
deployment of peacekeepers, whether in high- or low-
HIV/AIDS-prevalence countries, is an issue that
continues to draw our attention. The latest UNAIDS
report, entitled "On the front line", states that
uniformed service personnel continue to be at high risk
of acquiring or transmitting HIV/AIDS while deployed
in the field.

To respond to the challenge, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) has included the
topic of HIV/AIDS in pre-deployment training for
troop-contributing countries. It has also assigned
HIV/AIDS policy advisers to 10 missions, as
Mr. Guehenno said in his briefing this morning, with
focal points designated in smaller missions, which is
extremely important. In providing sensitization for all
personnel, such units are responsible for awareness
training, including behaviour-change intervention and
personal risk assessment.
Within missions, UNAIDS, as pointed out by
Mr. Piot, distributes booklets and HIV/AIDS awareness
cards in a number of languages among peacekeepers.
The availability of condoms is ensured, leading
personnel to adopt safer attitudes. Attention is also
devoted to ensuring that applicable codes of conduct
are taken into account, so that prohibited behaviour is
clearly stressed. Voluntary and confidential counselling
and testing is another component, conducted within a
rights-based approach.

Brazil welcomes the cooperative work done by
DPKO and UNAIDS in terms of the response in the
field. At the end of the day, peacekeepers will not only
have received awareness training, but some of them
will also have been trained as peer educators.

HIV/AIDS advisers also become involved with
outreach projects to local communities, as mentioned
by Mr. Guehenno. In that respect, aside from their
contribution to awareness-raising activities, it is
important to reflect on their role, in a high-prevalence
area, in dealing with people living with HIV/AIDS who
do not have access to life-saving medicines and
treatment.

Another challenge stems from the cultural
diversity of peacekeepers, as well as the frequent
rotation of troops, which puts at risk the sustainability
of programmes. This shows the importance of
HIV/AIDS initiatives among national uniformed
services. In that respect, we commend UNAIDS and its
sponsors for having worked so closely with a number
of countries. Starting last year, the Brazilian
Government, in partnership with UNAIDS, has been
intensifying its efforts in working with young people in
the military.

If I may take a wider view as concerns
HIV/AIDS, the alarming statistics underscore the
gravity of the problem. The pandemic is one of the
greatest challenges of our times. Today, at least 40
million people worldwide are living with HIV/AIDS,
most of them in developing countries. The pandemic
does not show any signs of weakening, but is spreading
very rapidly. Every year, there are 5 million new
infections and 3 million deaths. Only 12 per cent of
those who need treatment outside rich countries receive
it.

In sub-Saharan Africa, the most affected region,
HIV/AIDS is aggravating economic and social crises.
The devastating losses of human capital threaten
political stability and food security. That dramatic
situation requires urgent and exceptional action at all
levels.

The United Nations must continue to send a
strong signal as to the urgent need to strengthen the
global response to the pandemic. However, at the
current rate of progress, the international community
will not reach any of the time-bound targets and goals
set out in the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS. As stressed by the Secretary-General
during the high-level meeting of the General Assembly
held last June, the response has not matched the
pandemic in scale. Indeed, resources to combat the
pandemic worldwide fall short of what is needed. But,
aside from the funds required, for there to be any real
hope of success in the global fight against HIV/AIDS,
our commitment must be comprehensive.

The results that Brazil has achieved in combating
the pandemic are based on a balanced approach and a
simultaneous emphasis on prevention and treatment, as
well as on the protection of human rights. The number
of people living with HIV/AIDS now totals less than
half of what estimates used to predict. Our campaigns
have been based on frank awareness messages. A wide
range of preventive measures have proved successful,
such as the distribution of free condoms. With regard
to treatment, Brazil's positive experience related to the
impact of free and universal access to anti-retroviral
therapy is widely acknowledged. However, there is
room for improvement. We need to move forward with
strategies to reduce the price of drugs.

Access to treatment has a positive impact on
prevention efforts, because it puts people in closer
contact with the health system. Where treatment exists
and is accessible, individuals are more likely to seek
voluntary testing and counselling. Moreover, the
availability of treatment reduces stigma and
discrimination by enabling people to openly address
HIV/AIDS issues.

We encourage UNAIDS and its partners to
intensify their efforts to reach the global "3 by 5"
target and urge Governments to continue to work
collaboratively beyond 2005 towards the goal of
making HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment, care and
support services accessible to everyone. Those
elements are indeed mutually reinforcing and also
reinforce an effective response; they must be integrated
in a comprehensive approach to combat the pandemic.

Finally, we support the draft presidential
statement circulated by the Greek delegation.

