Mr. Richardson (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join in adopting this draft
resolution expanding the size and mandate of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT), in
recognition of the commitment the parties have made to
national reconciliation and reconstruction in Tajikistan.
We especially commend their actions to enact an amnesty
law, exchange prisoners, repatriate refugees and begin the
demobilization of military forces. There is still much to
be done, including working out the details for an
equitable sharing of power, and we wish them success in
the coming months as they implement fully the provisions
of the General Agreement.

The parties' inclusion in the General Agreement of
an increased role for UNMOT in the peace process is a

 

clear statement of the confidence they place in Gerd
Merrem, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and in the personnel of UNMOT, whose
performance under trying circumstances has been
exemplary. We support the expansion of UNMOT at this
critical time in the peace process so that the parties can
demobilize rapidly and turn their efforts towards rebuilding
Tajikistan. We can now look forward to the day when
United Nations peacekeepers can depart and all United
Nations involvement in Tajikistan can be reoriented towards
reconstruction and development.

The road ahead will be difficult. This is especially true
because of the proliferation of armed groups beyond the
control of the parties that threaten the security and
tranquillity of Tajikistan.
We are concerned for the security of the unarmed
UNMOT observers. The United States therefore appreciates
the agreement by the parties to establish a joint unit to
protect UNMOT personnel. We consider this a bold
response to a troublesome problem that will serve as a
model for future cooperation between the parties as they
integrate other elements of their armed forces.

The problems facing the peace process in Tajikistan
are daunting, even more so because the war depleted the
resources Tajikistan will need to fulfil all the provisions of
the General Agreement. In view of this, the United States
endorses the Secretary-General's proposal to hold a donor
conference in Vienna on 24 to 25 November. We note that
the Secretary-General is appealing for $65 million
specifically aimed at ensuring the success of the peace
process. The United States intends to contribute to this
effort, and urges all States to donate generously.

I note that the transit of Tajik refugees through
Uzbekistan has begun, and I want to thank the President
and Government of Uzbekistan for their assistance in this
critical humanitarian effort.

We understand that, in addition to this appeal for
peace and reconciliation activities, the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs plans to issue an appeal for
emergency humanitarian assistance. We support this effort.
Finally, we ask all States to join us in supporting the
demining effort in Tajikistan so that future generations will
not continue to suffer death and maiming from devices left
behind from the war.

The resolution of the conflict in Tajikistan has been a
quiet but important United Nations success story. Only a
year ago the sides were hopelessly deadlocked, caught in
a downward spiral of ceasefire violations and refusing to
deal with the core issues. Although Tajikistan is not out
of the woods yet, we can take strength from the progress
it has made in the last year as we challenge other parties
in other conflicts to take risks for peace.

