Mr. Baum (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of Costa Rica,
Jordan, Liechtenstein, Singapore and Switzerland.

The group of five small countries ("S-5 group")
thanks you, Mr. President, for having organized this
open debate. We are pleased to note that the Council
responded favourably to our letter of 20 June 2008
(S/2008/418), in which our group requested that a
meeting be held on the implementation of the measures
set out in the note by the President of the Security
Council (S/2006/507) and that all interested Member
States be invited to participate in the discussion. I shall
confine myself to a few general comments, as my
colleagues in the S-5 group will make separate
statements on specific aspects of the Council's working
methods.

Mr. President, you have provided us with an
excellent concept paper (S/2008/528, annex). It clearly
shows that an increased number of Council decisions
require active implementation by all United Nations
Member States. For example, sanctions regimes have
multiplied, and their implementation has become a
costly and complex task for Member States. In
addition, the increase in the number of United Nations
peacekeeping operations is causing an unprecedented
burden in terms of personnel, logistics and financing. It
is thus important that non-members of the Council be
informed in a timely manner about its deliberations and
that they enjoy sufficient access to the Council's
decision-making process. That is why I should like to
briefly explain why the S-5 group requested this debate
and why we consider it important.

The S-5 group welcomed the submission of the
2006 note by the President of the Security Council and
considers it a significant step forward. We
acknowledge the progress made thus far. However, we
think it is also important to proceed more
systematically with the implementation of the note if
we wish to further enhance the Council's effectiveness.
We believe that, two years after the note's submission,
the time has come to take a closer look at what has and
has not been accomplished to date. We also believe that
a further step should be taken, and we encourage the
Council to consider measures beyond those envisaged
in the note.

More specifically, we agree with the analyses
presented in the concept paper, to which we would like
to add the following comments.

The S-5 group welcomes the substantial increase
in the number of public meetings. However, they
should not serve as a pro forma exercise, while the
essential information continues to be shared behind
closed doors. We share the view that the Council
should better explain why it has chosen a particular
format and that it should strive to make the best
possible use of various forms of meetings, particularly
when acting on issues directly concerning
non-members of the Council, which would thus like to
be involved at an early stage.

We hope that briefings to non-members on the
monthly programme of work will continue to be
systematically given by future presidencies. However,
we regret that briefings after important consultations
are given only on an ad hoc basis and that they
continue to depend on the goodwill and the available
time of members of a given Mission.

The access of non-Council members to subsidiary
bodies has been improved but remains at a very formal
level. That is why we invite the Council to explore
ways in which directly affected third parties can
establish contact and engage in dialogue on specific
points with the relevant organs.

Finally, before establishing or renewing a
mission's mandate, the Security Council should seek to
enhance consultations with Member States deploying
civilian and military personnel as well as with
significant financial contributors.

In the past, the S-5 group has submitted various
additional measures for consideration by the Security
Council. Here, I should like to recall some of them:
reports to the General Assembly on specific subjects,
as well as assessment and analysis of the
implementation of Council decisions; additional
measures aimed at enhancing the equity of standards
for the process of listing and de-listing regarding
sanctions; non-use of the veto in the event of genocide,
crimes against humanity and grave violations of
international humanitarian law; and, finally,
announcement in the Journal of the United Nations of
all meetings of the Security Council and its subsidiary
bodies, including expert-level meetings.

The S-5 group sincerely hopes that this public
debate will not be an isolated event, but will trigger a
thorough evaluation of the 2006 note by the President.
Such a process could take place as follows. At the end
of this open debate, the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions could
be mandated to undertake a comprehensive review of
the implementation of the 2006 note and to involve
interested non-members in that review.

Based on its findings, the Working Group could
then formulate a set of measures and present them to
the Council before the end of 2008. The Council could
then convene a follow-up meeting to discuss these
recommendations; on the same occasion, the Council
could seek the Views of the broader membership, in
particular on those measures which have a direct
impact on non-members of the Council. Finally, the
Council could adopt a follow-up note by the President
reflecting the progress made and containing new
measures to improve its working methods.

The constant evolution of Security Council
working methods and their consistent application are in
the interest of members and non-members of the
Council alike. Therefore, the implementation of the
2006 note requires the sustained commitment of all
Council members; non-members should also stay
engaged and actively use the platforms of interaction
that the Council offers to them. The Small Five group
remains fully committed and stands ready to cooperate
with the Council in this process.

I would again like to congratulate you,
Mr. President on having convened this important
meeting, which represents a considerable step in the
right direction.
