Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for her briefing and for the efforts she has
made under difficult circumstances. Notwithstanding
the following remarks, we maintain very high respect
for her.

Ethiopia's position on the issue of the Sudan in
the International Criminal Court (ICC) reflects that
of the African Union, which has repeatedly called for
the suspension of proceedings against President Omar
Al-Bashir ofthe Sudan and urged the Security Council to
withdraw its referral of the case concerning the matter.
We have always thought, together with African Union,
that the case is so weak that its continuation makes no
sense at all. No more evidence is required to validate
this point of view than the report of the Prosecutor.
The spectrum of countries in non-compliance is a call
for change.

As ever more information emerges and the fog
enveloping the issue lifts, the case is losing any leg it
may have had to stand on. Frankly, it is almost becoming
an embarrassment, with the ICC, under what seems like
marching orders from the Security Council, chasing an
African Head of State in what appears to many to be
a charade or the fight against impunity gone haywire.
This will only damage the credibility of the Council,
since what to many looks like a lack of seriousness
concerning the matter is inconsistent with the immense
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security incumbent on the Council. This is
becoming even more manifest as recent events have
accentuated the need for the Council to seriously
reexamine its position on the matter.

The fact that the Sudan has been playing a
constructive role in fighting terrorism, combating
human trafficking and illegal migration, and dealing
with other regional peace and security issues is now
widely recognized. It has enhanced its bilateral and
multilateral cooperation and engagement on all these
issues, with enormous positive implications for the
respect of human rights and for peace and security,
which we believe are intertwined with development.
The lifting of the bilateral economic sanctions imposed
on the Sudan by the United States for the past two
decades is a major positive development resulting from
the Sudan's enhanced International engagement.

Fairly or not, the Security Council is often
criticized for underperformance. On this matter, it has
been hyperactive, at the cost of its credibility.

President Omar Hassan Al-Bashir has demonstrated
the necessary political leadership and commitment
to resolve the Darfur issue as well as in addressing
outstanding issues with South Sudan. As we have said
for some time and as acknowledged by various reports
of the Secretary-General, the situation in Darfur
continues to show marked progress. The hostilities
between the Government of the Sudan and rebel forces
have decreased substantially and the security situation
on the ground has improved significantly. The Darfur
peace process, led by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel and supported by African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, has
also achieved some progress, despite the fact that the
lack of constructive engagement by the leaders of the
remaining armed movements has been a major obstacle.

Ofcourse, we also recognize that a lot remains to be
done in addressing the root causes of conflict in Darfur
and ensuring long-term stability. It is for this reason
that we call on the Government to redouble its efforts
to implement all remaining tasks. The international
community should also live up to its commitments;
the Council in particular should exert pressure on the
armed movements to negotiate seriously in order to end
the suffering of the people of Darfur.

As I conclude, I must stress that, in light of the
positive developments I have highlighted and the
constructive role of the Sudanese Government on a range
of issues, it is only appropriate that the international
community changed its approach in dealing with the
Sudan. That is why we welcomed the lifting of the
unilateral sanctions imposed by the United States
against the Sudan. It is also high time that the Council
began to seriously consider the issue of the Sudan and
the ICC. It is in the interest of the Council to do so, as
the status quo does not serve to enhance its credibility.

