Mr. Wittig (Germany) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me to
address the Security Council in my capacity as
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission. Allow
me to thank you in particular for your initiative to
bring us together to discuss peacekeeping and
peacebuilding in the Security Council.

(spoke in English)

May I recall that a core mandate of the
Peacebuilding Commission is to promote coherence
among all relevant actors. That is all the more
important for peacekeeping and peacebuilding actors
on the ground in order to ensure an integrated,
sustainable and consistent approach to the post-conflict
response.
Ideally, therefore, the linkage between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding should not be
approached as an issue of reducing the mounting costs
of peacekeeping operations. Rather, we should take an
approach aimed at protecting the enormous
investments in peacekeeping by introducing a
peacebuilding perspective early on. Investment in
peacekeeping will be optimized by securing sustainable
and long-term engagement by the United Nations and
other international, regional and subregional actors
through an early peacebuilding perspective.

As noted by Special Adviser Brahimi in his
landmark report on peace operations,

"Although multi-dimensional United
Nations peacekeeping operations may be required
to initiate a limited number of critical
peacebuilding activities, they are neither designed
nor equipped to engage in longer-term institution
and capacity-building efforts."

In other words, while peacekeepers are early
peacebuilders, they are not long-term peacebuilders.
That is why it is so important that the Security Council
draws on the experience of, and works closely with, the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Let me briefly highlight the objectives of
peacebuilding and the role of peacekeepers therein.

In his report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict, the Secretary-General underlined
that

"The immediate post-conflict period offers
a window of opportunity to provide basic
security, deliver peace dividends, shore up and
build confidence in the political process, and
strengthen core national capacity to lead
peacebuilding efforts." (S/2009/304, para. 3)

The Secretary-General's report specifically
identified five peacebuilding priority areas in the
immediate aftermath of conflict, namely, support for
basic safety and security, support for the political
process, support for the provision of basic services,
support for restoring core Government functions and,
finally, support for economic revitalization.
Peacekeeping can assist in laying the foundations for
socio-economic recovery and long-term development
through work in the first two of those priorities.
Indeed, it is through their work in supporting those
priorities that peacekeepers lay the foundation for
stability and development.

From the perspective of the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the key challenges in
transition lie in searching for the right timing and
sequencing among the many other priorities in post-
conflict situations. Prioritization needs to take place
within the framework of a coherent strategy. Timing
and sequencing are also closely linked to setting
indicators and benchmarks for transition to longer-term
peacebuilding engagement.

While peacekeepers contribute to peacebuilding,
their transition and exit strategy should be conceived in
terms of peacebuilding's core function of stabilization,
including overseeing the implementation of peace
agreements. The drawdown and withdrawal of
peacekeeping missions should not be conceived as a
sign of dissipating international attention and
engagement but rather as a transition to longer-term
peacebuilding that should indeed upscale the
international and United Nations engagement.

Finally, let me point out the opportunities and
potential for a role for the Peacebuilding Commission
in a transition situation and period. The period before
the drawdown and withdrawal of a peacekeeping
operation should be the ideal moment for
peacebuilding engagement with the Commission and
the country. Especially at that time, the Commission
can offer an inclusive and flexible platform for
engaging all relevant actors and advising the Council
on approaches to secure a coherent and integrated
approach in this critical transition in United Nations
engagement. For the same reason, the Commission's
advisory role can be crucial throughout the life of a
peacekeeping mission.

Concretely, the Peacebuilding Commission could
potentially play an early and critical role in four major
areas. First, the Commission could provide early
peacebuilding perspectives in the design and review of,
or transition from, peacekeeping mandates. Secondly,
the Commission should be able to identify and promote
country-specific sustainability factors. That is
particularly critical in jumpstarting early efforts for
institution-building and national capacity development
in the areas of security, governance and economic
generation.

Thirdly, the Commission should be able to
catalyze early partnerships with the international
financial institutions and regional and bilateral political
and economic actors. Finally, the Commission may
benchmark for and monitor the progression from
stabilization to transition and consolidation, which is
essential for a well-informed exit strategy for
peacekeeping operations.

All this suggests that the Peacebuildinq
Commission would report periodically to the Security
Council on progress in peacebuilding in countries
where peacekeeping operations are also deployed.

Let me conclude by saying that the early and
consistent engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission in the design, review and drawdown of
peacekeeping mandates would increase the chances of
sustaining our collective attention and our engagement
with countries emerging from conflict.

