Mr. Motoc (Romania): It is not without a certain
sense of sorrow that I proceed with the presentation of
the discharge reports as outgoing Chairman of the 1518
and 1540 Committees of the Security Council, all the
more so since for once, this afternoon, the action does
not really seem to be in this Council.

Both Committees that I had the honour to preside
over had in common - beyond certain differences -
the fact that they were novel undertakings of the
Council, with the full range of challenges and
opportunities that come with such endeavours. I can
safely state at this point that we put the best resources
behind those two commitments, and I have put all my
energy into rising to the expectations of the Council,
and ultimately of the international community, in two
crucial areas: that of restoring to the Iraqi people the
funds and assets estranged from them by the former
regime of Saddam Hussein, and of preventing weapons
of mass destruction from falling into the hands of non-
State actors, including terrorists.

The Council will therefore have to bear with me
for one slightly longer presentation covering both
mandates, but I will try to be quintessential on each.
Before starting, allow me to note that, while in 2004
the double tasking of an elected member at the helm of
subsidiary bodies was rather rare, the trend
encompassed many of my distinguished colleagues
beginning this year. That not only makes elected
tenures in the Council an ever more complex
undertaking, but also raises the question of the
modalities in which the Council as such can effectively
and systematically oversee the evolution of the work of
its subsidiary bodies.

I will speak first on the 1518 Committee. We
conducted eight meetings in the interval under review.
A great deal of work was undertaken informally among
Committee members and in cooperation with the new
Iraqi Mission to the United Nations. I do not intend to
describe that work in detail, since the 2004 annual
report is on the website and the one for 2005 will be
issued shortly. Allow me only a few brief comments
here.

The 1518 Committee was entrusted with the
mandate to continue managing the list of individuals
and entities associated with the deposed Iraqi regime in
connection with the removal of financial and other
assets from the country. Such funds, or other assets and
economic resources, were to be frozen and repatriated
to the Development Fund for Iraq (DFI). At this
moment, the list of individuals comprises 89 names,
while the list of entities has 206. I am pleased to report
that the regime put in place by successive resolutions
of the Security Council in that regard works. Data
confirmed by Iraqi officials testify to the return of
proceeds resulting from such freezes to the Iraqis
through the DFI coming from 26 countries, in an
amount exceeding $1 billion.

This month, the first movable asset - an
executive jet - was returned to Iraq, thanks to the
efforts of the Government of Liechtenstein and other
Member States. I am also satisfied to report to the
Council that this month the Committee adopted its
delisting guidelines.

That, Sir, is our factual work. I should like to add
that it was rewarding to work for such a noble cause as
facilitating the return to Iraqis of what is rightfully
theirs and contributing to the redress of one major
injustice inflicted by the dictatorship on its own
people. It was good to see, throughout these two years,
how the cooperation with the Iraqi authorities has
improved at the pace of that country's overall
transformation.

Let me now pass swiftly to outlining the work of
the 1540 Committee in 2005. I will concentrate on the
examination of national reports on the assistance-
related issues and outreach activities, recalling that the
full report will be available as Security Council
document S/2005/799.

As of 16 December 2005, 124 States had
submitted their initial reports to the Committee. The
examination of all is already completed. In addition to
that, as of the same date, 40 Member States had
responded to the Chairman's letters requesting
additional information. To assist the Committee in
examining the reports in a structured and consistent
manner, a matrix has been developed based on the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004). All
information - reported or identified from official data
provided by States to various international
organizations - on measures adopted by States to
implement resolution 1540 (2004), is now reflected in
individual matrices that the Committee subsequently
decided to share with reporting States.

On the basis of operative paragraph 7 of
resolution 1540 (2004), the Committee undertook to
operate as a clearinghouse on matters related to
facilitating assistance to countries lacking the legal or
regulatory infrastructure, implementation experience
and/or resources for full compliance with the
provisions of the resolution. So far, the Committee has
compiled in a structured manner and posted on its
website all information on both available offers for
assistance and needs evidenced by the reports. As the
assessment by the Committee progresses, it will
become clearer to what extent Member States and
international and regional organizations can support
the implementation process by providing directly, or
otherwise facilitating, such assistance to those
requesting it.

In terms of outreach activities, the Chairman and
members of the Committee and its experts have
continued to raise the issue of further reporting and
promoted the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) through a great number of meetings,
conferences, seminars and workshops addressing a
wide range of constituencies concerned. The
Committee recently reached out on the reporting issue
to the membership of the Latin American and
Caribbean and Asian regional groups at the United
Nations. In 2005, the Committee conducted interactive
meetings with the Directors General and
representatives of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Chairman of
the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG).

As transparency and cooperation have been
constant guidelines for the work of the 1540
Committee, and as such an important guarantee for the
effectiveness of the regime put in place by the
resolution, the Committee and I have strived hard to
reach out on a regular basis to Member States,
including through joint briefings systematically
conducted with my Danish and Argentinean colleagues
chairing the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
1267 Committee, respectively. In September, we
addressed in that format the global gathering of
Speakers of national parliaments here in New York.
Our experts cooperated closely in all areas related to
the execution of regimes instituted by resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). We have also
interacted constantly with the valuable work conducted
by the Permanent Representative of the Philippines at
the helm of the Security Council Working Group
established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004).

A lot of work remains to be done to achieve
universal reporting, as required by resolution 1540
(2004), and to put available assistance to work. Two
years after the passing of the landmark Security
Council resolution 1540 (2004), which reaffirmed that
the proliferation of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons and their means of delivery is at all times a
threat to international peace and security, and which
filled a major gap in existing international instruments
and arrangements by regulating against the spread of
such deadly tools to terrorists, I believe we are
significantly more advanced in our knowledge of the
strengths and weaknesses of national systems in terms
of preventing the nexus between WMDs and terrorist
groups. We have made headway in our endeavour to
secure our world with the safety belt of common,
minimal protective measures against that dreadful
prospect. As Chairman of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I am proud of our
implementation work so far and believe that it makes
the extension and consolidation of the regime put in
place by the Security Council in 2004 fully
worthwhile.

On a final note, I wish to say a word of special
appreciation to the Vice-Chairmen of the 1518
Committee, Brazil and Denmark, and of the 1540
Committee, Benin, the Philippines and the United
Kingdom. I am indebted to them for their outstanding
dedication and support. None of the achievements
listed above would have been possible without the
contribution and professionalism of the colleagues
sitting on those committees, representing the members
of the Council. I feel very humbled by the outstanding
contribution made by Mr. Volker Beck and his
colleagues who make up the 1540 Committee's group
of experts. I wish to recognize the dedicated work of
those members of the Secretariat from the Department
of Political Affairs who assisted the 1518 and 1540
Committees in their undertakings. Let me add all my
commendation to Ambassador Abe and his colleagues
from the Department for Disarmament Affairs.

While it is not with a light heart that we part with
the chairmanships of the 1518 and 1540 Committees, I
should like to pledge, on behalf of my delegation, our
full readiness to support in every helpful way the
future work that the Security Council may entrust to its
subsidiary bodies in these areas. I also wish every
success to those who will succeed Romania. And to
you, Mr. President, I extend my thanks for arranging
for this meeting and for bearing with me.

