Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank the delegation of France for having organized
this debate and Under-Secretary-General John Holmes
for his briefing this morning.

My country is grateful to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and to
other United Nations entities for their committed
efforts in the area of civilian protection.

I should like to focus my statement on the
following several points. First, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is a permanent necessity and
requires the concerted action of many actors. The
Emergency Relief Coordinator has rightly mentioned a
number of specific situations that show the importance
of having a conceptual framework that is clear but that
is applied in a flexible manner. Our strategic objective
must be to strengthen the protection framework and to
ensure that it is actually implemented in conflicts on
the ground.

Secondly, we appreciate the work undertaken by
OCHA to update the aide-memoire. That very practical
text illustrates the developments made in this area over
the past few years. In terms of the work of the Council,
we identify several major challenges. It must ensure
that best practices are applied more systematically and
that the language of protection is better integrated into
country-specific resolutions. There must be further
development of specific implementation mechanisms;
hence the importance of the establishment of a group
of experts on the protection of civilians. Resolutions
should better reflect needs on the ground; this requires
better articulation of protection mandates in the terms
of engagement of peacekeeping operations, the
enhancement of monitoring capacities, more systematic
methods of information gathering and the integration
of some of these activities into the budgets of
peacekeeping operations.

Moving forward in that way, efforts to ensure
better coherence will also need to be stepped up. Good
practices learned in one case should be applied in
others. Representatives from throughout the United
Nations system and experts should be invited more
frequently to present their views, thus enabling the
Council to reach decisions fully aware of the facts.
Thirdly, the current situation in Gaza dramatically
illustrates the importance of the issue we are discussing
today. The main victims of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict are civilians. Switzerland is deeply shocked by
the high number of civilians who have been killed or
wounded, in particular the high number of children.
This situation underlines how important it is that the
law not go unheeded and that it be truly implemented.
It also reminds us that the protection of civilians
cannot be ensured by purely humanitarian means but
that political negotiations are the only path to
achieving lasting solutions.

Switzerland therefore reiterates its call for the
immediate cessation of hostilities, the protection of the
humanitarian space and the strict respect for
international law by all parties to the conflict. This
includes in particular the obligation to respect the
principles of distinction, proportionality and the taking
of precautions. Switzerland also wishes to recall that
all the parties to the conflict are under the obligation to
protect medical personnel, hospitals and other health
facilities.

We welcome the call made by the Security
Council in its resolution 1860 (2009) for an immediate
ceasefire and for the unimpeded provision and
distribution of humanitarian assistance throughout
Gaza. This call must be respected immediately by all
parties to the conflict. However, we are disappointed
that the resolution makes no mention of the importance
of respect for international humanitarian law. It is to be
deeply regretted that this body of law and therefore its
references to the Geneva Conventions have become the
object of political negotiation and discretion. It is by
insisting on the strict application of international
humanitarian law in situations of armed conflict that
the Council will be able to better protect civilians - a
fact that the Council itself underlined in its presidential
statement of 27 May 2008 (S/PRST/2008/l8).

Furthermore, last week Switzerland called for an
impartial inquiry into the allegations of violations of
international law committed during these hostilities,
including the attacks on two schools run by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. In this context, it is
essential that light be shed on all allegations of
violations committed by all parties.

Although our attention is currently turned
towards the situation in Gaza, we should nevertheless
09-20856
not forget the other extremely worrying situations
concerning the protection of civilians. We are thinking
in particular of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including in terms of children in situations of armed
conflict. We are also thinking of the situation of
internally displaced persons in Sri Lanka. We also
remain extremely concerned by the situation in Darfur,
where humanitarian access remains a problem.

Finally, we are well aware that the often complex
realities of crisis situations demand considerable
training, clarification of law when necessary, and the
application of law in order to respond to realities on
the ground. In this regard, following a meeting of
experts held in July 2008, Switzerland is considering
drafting a practical guide for humanitarian actors
which would make explicit and clarify the relevant
legal framework. The Council could give political
support to this kind of expert work in implementing the
recommendations of the aide-memoire.

