I am grateful for this opportunity to update the Security Council on the situation in Somalia. I am especially pleased to be briefing the Council today as we are joined by the Prime Minister of Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Hussein Roble; the Founder and Chairwoman of the Somali Gender Equity Movement, Ms. Zainab Hassan; and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia, my dear friend and colleague Ambassador Francisco Madeira. We are meeting at a time when Somalia is facing critical decisions, with an electoral process in the coming few months to choose the country's Parliament and President, a security transition to allow Somalis to assume lead security responsibility by the end of 2021, and urgent priorities with regard to humanitarian response and economic reforms. When I last briefed the Council in August (see S/PV.8755), the Somali leadership was meeting to agree a plan for the 2020-2021 elections. In September, it reached consensus on an indirect electoral model, ending a two-year political stalemate between the Federal Government and federal member states. The agreed model of voting, regrettably, fell short of the constitutional requirement for the direct universal suffrage election of Parliament. Yet the agreement reflected broad Somali political consensus and ownership. In addition to being supported by the President and the leaders of the federal member states, the indirect model was also endorsed by other key Somali stakeholders, including political parties and members of civil society, and had been ratified by the Federal Parliament. Going forward, that broad political consensus must now be preserved and deepened as the agreement is implemented. The agreed process must be conducted in a fair, transparent, widely accepted and peaceful manner, and it must be more participatory and inclusive than it was four years ago. We welcome the political leaders' agreement to ensure a 30 per cent quota for women for seats in Parliament, and we urge full respect for that commitment. The electoral schedule foresees selecting the members of the two Houses of the Federal Parliament by the end of December and the election of the Federal President by the new Parliament in February 2021. Nominations to the electoral management bodies were several weeks behind schedule and remain the subject of some contention. Also pending is the finalization of the electoral security plan, with a view to ensuring that the elections are as safe and secure as possible and minimizing the risk that Al-Shabaab may disrupt or influence the process. In order to support those Somali-led efforts, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) plans to contribute to the implementation of the electoral agreement within the scope of its mandate and in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Support Office in Somalia and international partners. We will also continue to make efforts towards universal suffrage elections in future. To that end, we urge Somali leaders to consensually prepare a road map with clear timelines and benchmarks in order to ensure that one-person-one-vote elections take place in 2024-2025. In September, President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo appointed Prime Minister Mohamed Hussein Roble, who subsequently named his Cabinet. The new Government has a challenging task before it, not only in steering the country through the electoral process but also in pursuing the reform agenda across the political, security and economic spectrum. The United Nations in Somalia stands ready to support the Government in advancing the national priorities. I commend the Somali leaders for their spirit of compromise in reaching an agreement between the Federal Government and federal member states. That spirit must now be sustained. Beyond elections, we also urge further progress through consensus on other democratic reforms, including the constitutional review process and the establishment of the Judicial Service Commission, the Human Rights Commission and the Constitutional Court, inter alia. Political dialogue is also key to addressing other pressing priorities, including operations against Al-Shabaab, economic and security reforms and collaboration in tackling the multiple humanitarian challenges facing the country. We encourage political actors to institutionalize that dialogue among leaders - for example, through the newly formed National Consultative Forum. In order to promote that dialogue, I recently undertook a series of visits to the capitals of federal member states together with Special Representative Madeira and representatives of the European Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. I understand that Prime Minister Roble has also started a tour of the regions to engage with state leaders in order to continue the dialogue, and we welcome that initiative. The security situation in Somalia remains of concern, with persistent attacks by Al-Shabaab, which remains the primary threat to Somalia's security. Continuing efforts aimed at protecting the Somali people and degrading Al-Shabaab's capabilities must be the main objective of the national security forces, the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and other security partners, in particular as we enter the sensitive electoral period. Next year will be a transition year in which Somalia takes lead responsibility on security matters. That requires an agreement involving all security stakeholders on a strategic vision for Somalia's security. The Federal Government has already started that work, as it is drafting an updated Somalia transition plan. It is crucial that that plan address the many long-standing challenges, including the need for realistic operational objectives, credible plans for force generation and clear coordination structures. The updated transition plan will serve as a baseline for further discussions over the coming months in order to guide the role of the Somali security forces as well as external actors, including AMISOM, the United Nations and bilateral security partners. I welcome the plan announced by the Prime Minster to convene in early December the Executive Committee of the Comprehensive Approach to Security, also known as the Security and Justice Committee. I pay tribute to the Somali security forces and the African Union Mission in Somalia for their steadfast and courageous pursuit of peace and stability in Somalia. We also welcome the continuing support and commitment of federal member states to the development of Somalia's rule of law and security sector. It is through collective gains in the security realm that the space is created for the political process, governance and institution-building. Human rights and justice remain at the centre of our work for Somalia's development. With elections approaching, I underscore my previous calls for the protection of political space, tolerance of divergent opinions, respect of free speech and association, and media freedom. I reiterate the concerns over the recent increase in instances of sexual violence against women and girls and the regressive legislation relating to sexual rights and freedoms that has entered the parliamentary process in both Mogadishu and Hargeisa, contravening international standards. Humanitarian needs remain acute. Somalia has been hit hard by the triple shock of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, flooding and locust infestation. The national trends in COVID-19 cases are broadly favourable, but we must remain vigilant. I commend once again the Somali authorities for their rapid response to the COVID-19 outbreak and thank the Somali health workers who are working on the front lines to defeat the pandemic. I welcome the new five-year Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework between the Somali Federal Government and the United Nations, which will guide the United Nations support for Somali-owned and Somali-led development priorities. The Framework aligns with Somalia's ninth national development plan. We urge the Government to remain steadfast in its commitment to the reform agenda in order to make progress on the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative benchmarks until it reaches completion point. We look forward to the upcoming Somalia Partnership Forum, announced by the Prime Minister for early December, to take stock of the progress made since last year and agree on the priorities for the future. In conclusion, let me assure the Council of the ongoing engagement of UNSOM with Somali stakeholders to promote political cooperation in the interests of the country. Our good offices are aimed at fostering the widest possible levels of inclusion and consensus. As the country focuses on the electoral process, the United Nations in Somalia will continue to press for the participation of historically underrepresented groups, among them women, youth and marginalized communities. They all have much to contribute to peace, stability and development in their country. The coming months will set the course of Somalia for the next several years. At this critical time, I am grateful for the Council's support as our United Nations team strives to help Somalia's leaders and people achieve national priorities.
