Mr. Auvaeart (Estonia): Allow me also to extend my condolences with regard to the attacks near Niamey. I thank the briefers for their thorough reports on the latest developments and the peacebuilding activities carried out in Guinea-Bissau. I would like to express Estonia's full support for the work of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Sori-Coulibaly and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the continued political and institutional crisis in Guinea-Bissau have put a significant burden on the mission. With this in mind, we commend the mission's steps towards drawdown as well as the ability to quickly take a more pandemic-sensitive approach to its activities. At the same time, the developments in Guinea- Bissau have been less than encouraging. The ongoing political impasse and the military's interference in politics are very concerning. The decisive steps taken by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) have been very useful, and we commend them for having done so. We further call on ECOWAS to continue on this path of active engagement in helping to solve the institutional crisis. We also urge the people of Guinea- Bissau themselves to take constructive steps towards finding a peaceful way out of the current political crisis. It is especially important now, in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic and to avoid any potential destabilization of the country. We are extremely concerned about reports of an increased number of human rights violations and the excessive use of force by State security forces. The reports of women being beaten up to enforce the lockdown measures are simply appalling. We urge that investigations be carried out in these cases and the perpetrators held accountable. We commend the international organizations present in Guinea-Bissau for taking an integrated approach to addressing the humanitarian challenges in the country. Furthermore, it is important to take a holistic and gender-sensitive approach to peacebuilding activities, which will be especially important after the closure of UNIOGBIS. The role of the Peacebuilding Commission in this regard is essential. It is also a positive development that the Peacebuilding Fund has approved a new project to address the destabilizing effect of drug trafficking and organized crime.
