Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
would like to welcome Mr. Boris Tadie, President of
the Republic of Serbia, and to thank him for his words.
I would also like to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for his briefing and Mr. Hyseni for his
statement.

Mexico has closely followed the process of
reconfiguring the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to circumstances on the ground, and we welcome the
fact that coordination and information exchange with
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) have been strengthened in the context of
neutrality, as provided for by resolution 1244 (1999).
We are also pleased that relations between UNMIK and
the parties have improved in recent months, with
positive repercussions for cooperation and the
resolution of matters of mutual interest.

In accordance with international humanitarian
law, human rights and refugee law, the parties are
obliged to create conditions conducive to the safe,
voluntary and non-discriminatory return of the
displaced and to the adoption of measures to facilitate
that return. My delegation is concerned about the lack
of conditions favourable to the return of the displaced
and refugees to their homes. Although the security
situation in Kosovo has remained stable, factors such
as discrimination, inter-ethnic tensions and the lack of
development opportunities are among the greatest
impediments to ensuring a sustainable return in the
region.

Despite the slight increase in the number of
people voluntarily deciding to return to their
communities of origin, it is clear that much remains to
be done in that area. In that regard, we encourage
UNMIK, together with the United Nations
Development Programme and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to continue
to support the local authorities in promoting
community development programmes aimed at housing
reconstruction, job creation, access to services and
security, and at defining strategies to foster dialogue
and reconciliation among the various communities.
Further, we encourage the parties to establish, under
UNMIK coordination, a mechanism to protect cultural
heritage, and to adopt the measures necessary to stop
the attacks on historical sites important to preserving
the cultural heritage of the peoples of the region.

Strengthening the rule of law continues to require
priority attention. We encourage UNMIK and EULEX
to spare no effort in building up the capacities of local
authorities to provide access to justice, fight impunity
and promote respect for human rights. We see the
campaign to promote the Anti-Discrimination Law in
Kosovo as very timely, and we welcome the decision to
strengthen UNMIK's work in the area of human rights
with the establishment of the Human Rights Advisory
Panel.

Regarding the issue of Kosovo's unilateral
declaration of independence and whether it is in
accordance with international law, Mexico wishes to
reiterate its position that the matter has been referred
for consideration to the International Court of Justice,
the highest judicial organ for resolving disputes arising
from the interpretation of international law, and that,
until the Court decides, the principle of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity incumbent of all
Member States under the United Nations Charter
remains fully in force in this case.

Historically, Mexico has resolutely and
consistently supported the principles of justice and
international law enshrined in the United Nations
Charter and the work of the International Court of
Justice. In that regard, we have been informed by the
Court that, on 11 December 2009, that organ concluded
the public hearings on the General Assembly's request
for an advisory opinion on the legality of the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo (see resolution 63/3) and that it was ready to begin its deliberations.
We eagerly await and will respect the Court's decision.

