Mr. Heusgen (Germany) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to acknowledge all of this
morning's briefers, and in particular I want to thank
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for his work and to wish
his successor good luck.

I would like to begin by underscoring something in
Mr. Sma'il Chergui's briefing, in which he said that the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic of 6 February was a success
for multilateralism. I would like to emphasize that and
the examples he gave of the close cooperation between
himself and Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix and between the African Union and the United
Nations generally. I believe that is extremely important
and an example for all of our work in Africa. I also want
to commend the cooperation between the European
Union, the African Union and the United Nations. I
believe that the work that the European Union is doing in
training security forces is very important. Cooperation
among the countries of the region is also crucial. All of
that does indeed represent success for multilateralism.

Secondly, as Mr. Chergui stated with regard to the
Agreement, we have completed only the first stage.
That means that we must now truly move towards its
comprehensive and genuine implementation. To that
end, as all my colleagues have emphasized, it is very
important that there now be a real cessation ofhostilities
and for disarmament, reintegration and repatriation to
take place. I think that cooperation between the forces
and the various armed groups, as well as joint patrols,
are also very important. In that context, as colleagues
said earlier, I would to emphasize that there must be an
end to child recruitment.

Going forward, it is very important to have a
robust follow-up process. As Mr. Koen Vervaeke said
in his statement, I, too, would like to stress that the
follow-up process must be inclusive and comprise all
stakeholders, in particular women. In that context, I
wish to congratulate the Central African Republic on
having a woman Minister for Foreign Affairs. Women
and civil society must be a part of the process.

My colleague Omar Hilale described in his
briefing the strong desire for peace and justice among
the population. I think that that is very significant,
and I would like to pledge our full support for his
recommendations, of which I would like to mention
one, namely, communication about the Agreement.
Apparently, there are many rumours circulating in the
country. The importance of truly communicating the
substance of the Agreement to the entire country is
therefore very important.

In terms of priorities, the implementation of the
agreement is of course essential. However, in our view,
the fight against impunity is also of great importance.
I believe that to really succeed in a true reconciliation
in the country, there must be justice. To that end, the
establishment of the Special Criminal Court is highly
relevant. I believe that it is vital that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) support the
work of the Court and its investigators.

With regard to MINUSCA, I would also like to
thank all the troops and Blue Helmets for all that they
have done and for what they have suffered in very
difficult circumstances. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/147) mentions attacks in Batangafo
and Alindao, in which there were many civilian
victims. In that context, I would like to emphasize the
importance for the Blue Helmets, in accordance with
their mandate, to truly protect civilians, including
children, and to combat sexual violence during the
Central African conflict. Unfortunately, that is not the
only case. There are too many women who have been
victims of sexual violence.

I would like to thank France for supporting
MINUSCA. We have just heard that the show of force
by the French troops was significant. I do not want to
get into the arguments made by our Russian colleague,
but I would have liked to hear more about the activities
of the Russian mercenary group Wagner, which is in
the country.

