At the outset, allow me to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Olof Skoog for their briefings. A leitmotif emerges from their statements: a resolute commitment in favour of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), adopted by the international community in 2015. That commitment is also shared by the vast majority of the members of the Security Council, including my country, Belgium. I see three main reasons for that, which were also mentioned by our briefers. First, since its entry into force the JCPOA has ensured the transparency and the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. Specifically, on the ground, International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) inspectors ensure that constant monitoring, thanks to the most comprehensive inspection system in the world and thanks to Iran's cooperation. Secondly, the Plan is a landmark of multilateralism. Negotiated by the five permanent members of the Council, accompanied by Germany, Iran and the European Union, the JCPOA is more than a nuclear agreement; it is a tool for building trust and the result of 12 years of intense diplomatic activity based on dialogue and respect among the parties. Thirdly, the Plan is one of the great successes of nuclear non-proliferation. It occupies a prime place in the non-proliferation architecture, as patiently built and guaranteed by the international community since the entry into force of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1970. Those achievements should not, however, obscure the challenges facing the Plan today. I will cite three. First, I must join my European partners and echo their concerns about the arms transfers by Iran and its ballistics programme. Those behaviours remain incompatible with the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) until 18 October 2020 with regard to arms transfers. However, it would be foolish to believe those challenges could be solved in isolation, without taking into account the regional security context. Belgium therefore encourages any regional approach to dialogue, cooperation and ultimately the construction of a regional security architecture. That idea is not new. The time has come to implement it in practical terms, and the debate organized by the Russian presidency of the Council on 20 October was an opportunity to reflect upon that together (see S/2020/1037). Secondly, the Plan has suffered due to the United States withdrawal in May 2018 and the various actions it has taken to date, which not only undermine the central objectives of the Plan but effectively prevent other Members of the United Nations from implementing its provisions. At the same time, we regret the increasing non-compliance by Iran with its nuclear obligations, in particular the law recently adopted by the Iranian Parliament - the Majlis - that could pave the way to the significant development of Iran's enrichment programme and reduced access for the IAEA. Those measures are incompatible with the JCPOA and with our Iranian partners' nuclear commitments. Belgium therefore calls for the return of the United States to the JCPOA. It urges Iran to end its "less for less" policy and restore the integrity of its nuclear commitments. Thirdly, the JCPOA must bring economic benefits to the Iranian people. That is and must remain one of its central objectives. Especially amid the current pandemic, the importance of that aim could not be clearer. In that regard, Belgium welcomes the establishment of the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges by its European partners - France, Germany and the United Kingdom. That instrument aims to facilitate trade with Iran, and my country joined it in November 2019, alongside Denmark, Finland, Norway, the Netherlands and Sweden. Other countries could follow. We must not give in to pessimism on account of those challenges. On the contrary, the diplomatic road remains open and the lights are green for re-engagement. In that regard, we welcome the determined efforts of the remaining participating States - France, Germany, the United Kingdom, the Russian Federation, China and Iran, as well as the European Union - in the context of the dispute resolution mechanism and the Joint Commission. Only yesterday, on (21 December, in a joint statement, the Foreign Ministers of these countries expressed their resolve to address the current challenges related to the implementation of the JCPO in terms of nuclear non-proliferation and the lifting of sanctions. Belgium echoes the 7 December joint statement by France, Germany and the United Kingdom in welcoming the encouraging announcements by President-elect Biden in favour of American re-engagement in the Plan. In conclusion, Belgium encourages all the parties concerned to bravely return to the path of diplomacy, trust and multilateralism, with a view to reaching collective solutions, which are in the interests of all.
