Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke in French): I thank the three briefers for their statements
highlighting the many facets of the ongoing crisis in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am especially
proud to see Ms. Jutsine Masika Bihamba among us
today. She was the first winner of our national human
rights champions prize. Her presence here highlights
yet again the gratitude of the international community
for her important work in the fight against sexual
violence and on behalf of the protection of civilians,
women and children in particular.

On behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
I would like to address three points today: first, the
electoral process; secondly, the current humanitarian
and security situation; and thirdly, the crucial role of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
in the coming months.

Concerning the electoral process, last week
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council urged the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to guarantee the
holding of elections on 23 December. Progress is
certainly being made in legislative and technical
preparations, but the confidence of many stakeholders
in the process is low. A year and a half has passed
since the New Year's Eve agreement. The Council
and the regional and international stakeholders have
repeatedly called for the full implementation of the
confidence-building measures.

There is a great deal ofwork left to do. More than 100
political prisoners remain imprisoned. The harassment,
intimidation and threats faced by many members of
civil society organizations and parties must stop. The
total ban on demonstrations has not been lifted. The
political space is shrinking. The participation ofwomen
in elections is another aspects that requires our attention
and support. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
cannot afford to hold elections that lack credibility.
The women and men of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo aspire to a credible transfer of power, in line
with the Constitution, the New Year's Eve agreement
and the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
Governance. We must see significant progress.

We take note of the fact that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has postponed the visit of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission that was scheduled for earlier this
month. We hope that a new date can be fixed quickly.
Cancellation could diminish the confidence of the
international community and the Congolese people in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo's commitment
to the New Year's Eve agreement. The Security Council
must continue to monitor the situation and remain
closely involved, including through a possible visit to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My second point concerns the current humanitarian
and security situation. Elections are just one piece
of the puzzle. The humanitarian situation remains
extremely worrying. Three months ago, the donor
community pledged $500 million for emergency
assistance. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
announced the creation of a humanitarian forum and
fund. Millions of Congolese, however, urgently need
humanitarian measures right. Hunger, massive internal
displacement and health risks are heightening the
threats to their security. It is a vicious circle. Armed
groups and their ravages are growing. They terrorize
vulnerable communities, attack units of the Forces
arme'es de la Republique democratique du Congo, and
kill peacekeepers. While security has improved in Ituri
and Tanganyika provinces, it has further declined in
North and South Kivu provinces. The situation in some
parts of Kasai remains serious.

It is women and children who pay the highest
price, including due to systematic sexual violence,
the recruitment of child soldiers, sexual slavery and
impediments to humanitarian assistance. The Council
cannot remain a passive observer. It must act, including
through the sanctions regime, and put an end to the
impunity of those whose involvement in these practices
has been proven.

My third point concerns the role of MONUSCO.
The challenges are complex and numerous. The
Mission's mandate is to protect civilians and to support
the implementation of the New Year's Eve agreement
and the electoral process. These two priorities require
the full political commitment of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, clarity concerning
the demands and the expectations of MONUSCO, as
well as the full support ofthe Council. We are concerned
that a further deterioration in the security situation
would pose a real challenge to the implementation of
the mandate.

I congratulate the Special Representative and her
team for their ongoing adjustments and responses to
multiple threats in the most difficult circumstances.
The protection through projection approach will require
continuous and enormous efforts if it is to bear fruit.
The Secretary-General's letter on emergency planning
(S/2018/727) emphasizes that fact once again.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has many
partners willing to help, listen and contribute to
strengthening the country's security and stability. The
situation deserves our full attention. There must be no
doubt about our commitment or our willingness to act.
Time is pressing.

