Mrs. Mulamula (United Republic of Tanzania):
We thank you for convening this important meeting,
which is the first following the outbreak of war in Iraq.
The general membership of the United Nations,
through this meeting, will have the opportunity to
communicate their views on this very critical issue
involving international peace and security.

The Government of the United Republic of
Tanzania is deeply saddened by the decision taken by
the United States and the coalition to resort to armed
action in Iraq. With the declaration of the Movement of
the Non-Aligned Countries adopted in February in
Kuala Lumpur, the Government of the United Republic
of Tanzania had hoped that reason would prevail and
time would be allowed to have the situation resolved in
an amicable manner. Tanzania is therefore deeply
troubled by the raging war and its inevitable
consequences, not only in the region, but also
throughout the world.

It is very ironic to note that the decision to disarm
Iraq forcefully was taken while the international
community, through this body, was in the midst of
implementing resolution 1441 (2002). According to the
periodic reports of the international inspectors
presented in this forum, the work was progressing well
and had started bearing positive results. Furthermore,
at the time of the decision to embark on armed attack,
there was no evidence found by the inspectors that Iraq
possessed weapons of mass destruction.

After observing the signs indicating that the
United States and its coalition were slowly inching
towards adopting unilateral measures, the international
community expressed its concerns and called on the
United States to change direction. I can cite here
members of the African Union, the Movement of the
Non-Aligned Countries, the League of Arab States and
many other countries, including some members of the
European Union, who strongly expressed the view that
the United Nations should be given more time to
complete the task before any decision to use force
against Iraq could be taken. The overwhelming view, it
may be recalled, was that any decision to resort to the
use of force should be taken by the United Nations, and
this only after ensuring that all efforts towards a
peaceful settlement had been exhausted and had failed.
We are familiar with the fact that that course of action
was rejected out of hand.

In that respect, the decision to resort to the use of
force against Iraq is null and void, as it goes against
United Nations Charter provisions that require the
decision to use force against a country threatening
international peace and security to be adopted by the
Security Council. Article 39 of the Charter clearly
states that only the Security Council can determine the
existence of a breach of peace or of an act of
aggression, and only the Security Council can
recommend, or decide on, what measures are to be
taken.

The decision to go to war without the authority of
the Council not only weakens the United Nations -
the only institution serving all countries all over the
world - but also has the potential to endanger
international peace and security. One cannot predict
with any certainty what will happen to the very volatile
region of the Middle East. The question of Palestine
has long required urgent action, but none has been
forthcoming. Every day, more deaths fill the media
screens. How many more must die before the Security
Council decides to act? Tanzania hopes and expects
that all countries will continue to respect and honour
the procedures that have been laid down for the taking
and implementing of decisions of high import through
the United Nations.

The United Nations was established out of the
need to save future generations from the scourge of
war, which had brought immense misery to mankind
and whose effects are still felt to this day, over 50 years
later. Tanzania does not believe that that mission has
changed. Hence, besides infringing the provisions of
international law, the war will definitely lead to the
loss of many innocent lives in Iraq. The economy of
Iraq and those of many other countries, particularly
poor and developing ones, will be adversely affected
by the consequences of war. In addition, the war will
further exacerbate the political and social problems
currently facing the world - particularly that of
international terrorism, which we all are working hard
to combat.

In conclusion, Tanzania urges the Security
Council to see to it that everything that can be done is
done, as soon as possible, immediately to bring the war
to an end and to address the ever-deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Iraq.

