Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa was
honoured that Ambassador Kumalo was afforded the
opportunity to lead the Security Council mission that
visited Timor-Leste from 24 November to 30
November 2007. As was explained last week during
our briefing (see S/PV.5791), the purpose of the Visit
2

was to address three issues: first, to encourage the
Government, the parliament, the political parties and
the people of Timor-Leste to continue to work together
and engage in political dialogue and to consolidate
peace, democracy and the rule of law, security sector
reform, sustainable social and economic development
and national reconciliation in their country; secondly,
to discuss and exchange views with the Timorese
authorities on ways and means to assist the country in
developing capacities necessary to build on security
and democracy and other gains achieved thus far and to
express the Security Council's full support for the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and the United Nations presence in
Timor-Leste; and thirdly, to assess progress made on
the ground relating to the implementation of UNMIT's
mandate.

During the visit, the mission met with various
interlocutors in the Government, including the
President, the Prime Minister and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, and with members of the judiciary and
the national parliament, and it held a meeting with the
leader of the main opposition party and other political
parties.

The mission also held interactions with
non-governmental organizations, women, youth and
church representatives and representatives of UNMIT
and other United Nations agencies on the ground. The
mission also received a briefing from the International
Stabilisation Force led by Australia and New Zealand.

The report presented to the Council (8/2007/711)
covers the following key areas and issues: national
reconciliation and democracy, the general security
situation and security sector reform, capacity-building;
justice and the rule of law, the situation of internally
displaced persons, human rights and socio-economic
development issues. From the report it is evident that,
despite relative progress, Timor-Leste still faces
enormous challenges associated with political
differences among leaders in resolving critical issues
facing the country and socio-economic difficulties
associated with widespread unemployment and
poverty. In the humanitarian sphere, the plight of the
internally displaced persons remains a big task facing
the people and Government of Timor-Leste.

The report clearly indicates that despite these
challenges, the mission left Timor-Leste convinced that
the country is on the right path towards sustainable
07-64195
peace, stability, unity and prosperity. In this context,
the mission noted that political dialogue, national
reconciliation and continuous engagement aimed at
resolving challenges facing the country are the crucial
to resolving the country's challenges.

Much still needs to be done, and the engagement
of the international community cannot be over-
emphasized. In this regard, we urge the international
community, as well as United Nations agencies and
multilateral financial institutions, to continue providing
resources and assistance for the implementation of
projects towards sustainable and long-term
development in Timor-Leste.

In conclusion, we once again wish to express our
sincere gratitude to the Government and people of
Timor-Leste for their hospitality, assistance and
cooperation, as well as the entire staff of UNMIT for
providing us with the necessary support during the
Council's mission to Timor-Leste. We particularly wish
to note the invaluable support from the Government of
Indonesia for assisting the delegation with smooth
transit to Timor-Leste.

Appreciation and gratitude are also extended to
the Security Council secretariat and United Nations
security personnel for their tireless efforts and support
during the mission's preparatory stage and during the
mission itself.

We commend this report for the consideration of
the Security Council.

