Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate. We know
how important the issues we are discussing today
are for your country. Guatemala has faced the awful
realities of conflict and the difficult challenges of post-
conflict accountability, and you personally, have been
at the forefront of the fight against impunity.

The Security Council is a political body, charged
with maintaining international peace and security.
But one of the most important lessons of the past
two decades is that peace can neither be achieved in
the absence ofjustice, nor sustained in the absence of
justice. When communities, even whole countries, are
subjected to horrendous war crimes against innocent
civilians, any subsequent peace will be very difficult to
sustain unless the perpetrators of those crimes are held
accountable.

So it is not sufficient for the Security Council
to focus only on politically pragmatic solutions;
it must also systematically apply the justice and
accountability mechanisms that are now available to
it. The International Criminal Court (ICC) is now an
important feature of that justice and accountability
landscape, so it is very timely indeed to address the
relationship between the Council and the International
Criminal Court.

During its most recent term on the Security
Council, New Zealand played important roles in the
establishment of the first two international criminal
tribunals, the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, and we have been a very strong
supporter of the ICC since the idea of a permanent
tribunal was first mooted. Sadly, we know that, in
the future, there will still be cases where the Security
Council must again use its power under the Rome
Statute to refer a case to the ICC. But we also firmly
believe and hold the view that when the Council does
make a referral to the ICC, it should do so with a clear
commitment to follow through and ensure the Court
receives the necessary cooperation. We endorse the
statement of the representative of Liechtenstein on
behalf of the former presidents of the Assembly of
States Parties in that regard.

Moreover, New Zealand believes that, where the
Council has referred a matter to the ICC, it should also,
and as a matter of course, establish a working group to
monitor and follow up on that case.

The Council already has a Working Group on the
Tribunals, and it needs to devote at least as much effort
to the cases it has initiated with the ICC. Moreover, it
should not encroach on the prerogative of the General
Assembly to decide on funding for those situations that
have been referred to the ICC. The Council already has
a working group on the tribunals, and it should devote
at least as much effort to those cases it has initiated
with the ICC. Moreover, it should not encroach on
the prerogative of the General Assembly to decide on
funding for those situations that have been referred to
the Court, and it should never refer a case to the ICC
simply because of political outrage at an intractable
problem, or because it has no other political strategy to
deal with it. We join with Brazil and others that say that
the Council should not use its powers under the Rome
Statute to shield nationals of States that are not party to
the Statute.

The credibility of both the Security Council and
the ICC will be damaged if referrals are perceived to
be politicized or justice is seen to be discriminatory. In
that regard, I reiterate New Zealand's call at last month's
general debate (see A/67/PV.18) for the permanent
members of the Council to agree voluntarily not to use
their veto in situations involving mass atrocities.

As I said earlier, New Zealand is a very strong
supporter of the Court. However, the ICC is a court of last
resort, with jurisdiction only where national courts are
unwilling or unable to investigate and prosecute. There
will be times when the ICC is not the best mechanism
to be applied in a particular case. It is equally clear that
even where it is the appropriate mechanism, the timing
of its application needs to be very carefully judged,
particularly in situations of ongoing conflict.

It seems to us that, in the future, the Council
will have to think very seriously about a number of
questions, especially in situations where violent conflict
is continuing. Issues for possible consideration include
whether an ICC referral might be an incentive or a
disincentive for a peace settlement, including whether
there is a risk of prolonging the violence, resulting
in yet more victims; and also the likelihood that any
indictees can actually be brought to trial. In particular,
it should consider the willingness of the Council itself
to ensure that indictees are brought to trial. The extent
of cross-regional support for the decision might also be
a factor.

Finally, New Zealand also emphasizes that
experience in criminal justice jurisdiction, whether
national or international, shows that credible
restorative justice processes can also help to promote
accountability and build sustainable peace in societies
emerging from conflict. We have seen this in your
own country, Mr. President, with the International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala, in
South Africa and Sierra Leone with their truth and
reconciliation commissions, in Rwanda with the gacaca
tribunals, and, in places such as Timor-Leste, with
even more nuanced individual solutions. The Security
Council should respect the fact that conventional
judicial mechanisms are not the only credible ways of
establishing accountability in post-conflict situations
and, where appropriate, it should encourage the use of
such mechanisms.

For New Zealand, the establishment of the
International Criminal Court was a most welcome
development, and it has our strong, ongoing support. In
this, the Court's tenth year, it is now clear that it is ahugely
valuable resource for the international community in its
efforts to deter, to ensure accountability for the most
serious crimes, and to end impunity. But, as with all
such resources, we must be careful in its application
and wise in its use.

