Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I should also like to
commend your initiative to convene this debate to
enhance the Security Council's role in strengthening
the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union,
in the maintenance of international peace and security.

I take this opportunity to express our appreciation
to your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation, for his successful presidency
of the Council last month.

In view of the geographical and historical ties
between the African Union (AU) and the League of
Arab States, I want to stress the importance of
horizontal cooperation among regional organizations.
This is exemplified by the distinguished record of
cooperation between the Arab League and the AU.
Eighty per cent of Arab League citizens reside on the
African continent, and 50 per cent of the League's
member States are also members of the African Union.
Moreover, 20 per cent of African Union member States
are members of the League of Arab States. This unique
situation must be taken into account in considering the
advantages offered by horizontal cooperation between
the two organizations.

In the light of their common responsibilities and
the interrelated interests of their member States,
regional organizations possess distinct advantages that
enable them to address regional challenges and threats
to international peace and security. These include their
proximity to conflict areas and their knowledge and
well-informed views on the specifics of the conflicts.

The great challenges of the first years of the
twenty-first century have resulted in stronger
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the implementation of the relevant
resolutions and statements of the Security Council and
of the provisions of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(General Assembly resolution 60/1).
In the framework of the shared responsibility of
the United Nations and regional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security and of
the geographic and demographic interrelationship
between the Arab League and the African Union, the
two organizations have been taking positive steps in
the settlement of conflict issues. Effective cooperation
between our organizations has proven to be a viable
approach to resolving a number of crises and other
issues, along with strengthened cooperation between
the United Nations and our two organizations with a
View to safeguarding security and stability throughout
the African continent. We have witnessed this in the
Sudan peace negotiations and in the process of finding
a way to resolve the Darfur crisis, as well as in the
effort to attain security and stability in Somalia and,
more recently, in the Union of the Comoros. This
embodies the concept of tripartite cooperation among
the United Nations, the League of Arab States and the
African Union.

The Charter of the United Nations gives the
Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. But
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations has become inevitable; it is at the heart
of the interests and the policies of regional
organizations, owing to the positive and effective role
those organizations play in addressing regional issues
and in the peaceful settlement of disputes. Regional
organizations make an effective contribution to
strengthening United Nations capacities, especially in
the spheres of preventive diplomacy, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and exchanges of expertise.

The Security Council should undertake effective
cooperation with regional organizations, including the
African Union, in order to bolster its important role in
the maintenance of international peace and security and
in conflict prevention. It should define guiding
principles for the expansion of dialogue and
cooperation between the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council in order to foster the political will needed to
maintain peace and to implement the relevant
resolutions.

In the context of strengthening the partnership
between the African Union and the Security Council in
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Council must be more responsive and must make a
greater effort to achieve the partnership we are seeking
and to overcome the challenges it is facing. This would
be facilitated by early warning systems to address and
manage crises before they escalate, as well as by a
process by which to allocate responsibilities and by an
expansion of the scope of AU-Security Council
cooperation and consultation.

Enhancing the regional dimension of
peacemaking and strengthening the leading role of the
AU in conflict prevention and resolution in Africa are
of great importance, and the Security Council must
provide logistical and technical support to AU member
States as they work to maintain the peace in post-
conflict situations. It is also important to improve
coordination among various African initiatives, to
provide peacekeeping training and to establish regional
centres in order to prevent crises from recurring and to
enhance the financial and administrative capacity of
the AU with respect to peacekeeping operations, the
protection of civilians and the delivery of humanitarian
aid to those affected by conflict.

Issues related to international peace and security
are closely linked with those related to development
and economic growth in Africa; thus, the United
Nations must not view African issues in strictly
security or political terms. These are economic and
development issues as well, and they require greater
political will to provide further support to the AU,
enabling it to address and overcome the challenges
facing it, to make progress in the implementation of the
New Partnership for Africa's Development and to free
the continent from conflict.

In addition, cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security must be enhanced in
the framework of United Nations reform. That means
reforming its institutions and improving its
performance to equip it better to confront the
challenges facing the international community.

