Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank President Mbeki and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios for
their briefings and for the tireless work of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel on the Sudan,
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in support of peace in the Sudan. We welcome the
news that they have given us this morning that the
parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
have signed an agreement on interim security and
administration arrangements for Abyei. That is an
important step forward.

I note also the statements that Ambassador
Osman and Mr. Ezekiel Lol Gatkuoth have made to the
Council, reiterating the commitment of their
Governments to a peaceful resolution in Abyei and
Southern Kordofan and of outstanding CPA issues. The
Council will hold them to those commitments, which
must be delivered and implemented without further
delay.

The signing of an interim agreement on Abyei is
a necessary, but insufficient, step on the road to the full
implementation of the CPA and to peace for all the
Sudan because today, the Council meets amid violence
and the threat of further conflict. In Southern
Kordofan, escalating violence has led to the
displacement of at least 60,000 civilians, including
30,000 to 40,000 from Kadugli town. Civilians
elsewhere in Southern Kordofan state have suffered the
effects of aerial bombardment by the Sudanese Armed
Forces. We unreservedly condemn that, as we do
summary executions and other abuses reportedly
committed by both sides.

The United Kingdom calls on all parties
immediately to cease fire, and for all crimes against
civilians to be fully investigated and the perpetrators
brought to justice. We urge UNMIS to do all it can to
implement its Chapter VII mandate to protect civilians,
and remind the Government of the Sudan of its primary
responsibility in that respect.

The humanitarian situation in Southern Kordofan
is deeply concerning. The United Kingdom calls
urgently on all parties to provide full and unimpeded
access for UNMIS and for humanitarian workers. It is
unacceptable that humanitarian access is being
restricted by the closure of airspace, in particular, of
Kadugli airport to the United Nations, roadblocks, the
laying of landmines and the imposition of restrictions
on other movement. Full humanitarian access must be
provided now and steps must be taken to ensure that
that is maintained after 9 July.

We welcome the fact that negotiations continue in
Addis Ababa. All parties must commit to reaching
agreement without delay on new security arrangements
for Southern Kordofan state that will ensure the safety
of the civilian population and that will enable them to
express their views on the future governance through a
credible and popular consultation process, as provided
for in the CPA. New security arrangements for Blue
Nile state must also be put in place. We call on all
parties there to maintain calm.

In Abyei, we have seen little change on the
ground. The Sudanese Armed Forces remain in control
of the Abyei Area, in violation of the CPA. They must
now withdraw, as demanded by the Council and
stipulated in the Abyei agreement signed today. For
now, the situation remains tense. Further clashes
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan
People's Liberation Army (SPLA) have been reported,
and Agok town has been shelled. The number of
civilians displaced has now reached more than
100,000. The rains are setting in and humanitarian
access is still not permitted.

Given the gravity of the situation, it is clear that
the parties must implement their commitments under
the Abyei agreement without delay. It was signed today
following negotiations in Addis Ababa, under the
auspices of President Mbeki, and included a
commitment to withdraw all Sudanese Armed Forces,
SPLA and other forces. The parties must also ensure
that a ceasefire in Southern Kordofan is established
and that new security arrangements for the two areas
are set up. We welcome President Mbeki's
confirmation that negotiations on that continue in
Addis Ababa. The parties must also engage seriously
and without further delay on the future status of Abyei
in line with the provisions of the CPA and the ruling of
the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague. That
needs to be completed before 9 July, when South
Sudan gains its independence.

We have repeatedly stated our belief that the
security of both the Sudan and South Sudan would be
greatly strengthened by a single United Nations
presence in Abyei and in the two areas after 9 July,
which could also support the parties in their
management of the common border.

The events of the past few weeks show that such
a presence will also be necessary to maintain
international peace and security. Reports of 6,000 internally
displaced persons gathering around the UNMIS
headquarters in Kadugli for protection underline the
risks that the civilian population faces if there is no
continued United Nations presence after 9 July. We are
ready and willing to enter a dialogue with both parties
on that subject. We believe that there are clear benefits
to the parties of a continued international presence to
allow monitoring and verification of the agreements
that they reach.

Today, 20 June, we are three weeks away from
the independence of South Sudan. Amid the noise of
conflict, we call on both CPA parties to reflect on the
future that they want to deliver for their people. The
statesmanship that delivered a peaceful referendum on
9 January is urgently needed now. Both parties must
renounce violence and negotiate in earnest in order to
provide a secure and prosperous future for their States.

