Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Nearly
five months ago, the Security Council met to listen to
the report of the Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General on Piracy, Mr. Jack Lang (see S/PV.6473). The
overall feeling then was one of urgency. More recently
still, in a message of 18 April, the Secretary-General
underscored that piracy was rapidly growing and that
the scale of the phenomenon seemed to be overtaking
the efforts being implemented by the international
community to overcome it.

I will make two comments today. First of all, the
diagnosis has not changed. By adopting resolution
1918 (2010), the Council noted that the absence of
legal solutions encouraged the pirates' impunity and
only increased the scourge of piracy. Since then, that
situation has only deteriorated.

The report before us (S/2011/360) notes that
attacks off the Somali coast, their geographical range
and the level of Violence used have continued to
increase. Since 1 January, there have been 177 attacks,
of which 18 were successful. In May, pirates detained
26 boats and 601 hostages. Crews that are taken
hostage are used as human shields. Recently, a Filipino
sailor was executed. Four American citizens have been
killed. According to estimates, there are about 50 pirate
leaders, 300 group leaders and 2,500 carrying out the
attacks. That being the case, 9 of 10 pirates are
released owing to the lack of capacity of judicial and
prison systems.

France once again thanks the States of the region
for their efforts - Kenya, where the prosecution of
69 people is still ongoing; the Seychelles, which has
23 on trial; and Tanzania, which is prosecuting six.
Their contributions must be acknowledged. However, it
would be unfair to think that those countries could
cope with the scale of the phenomenon. A new solution
is necessary. We must show pragmatism.

My second comment is that we know the
solution, and it is a Somali solution. In entrusting the
drafting of the report to Jack Lang, the Secretary-
General was proposing to the Security Council a
formula that could provide a rapid and effective
solution. Two months ago, the Council decided to
urgently study the possibility of creating specialized
Somali jurisdictions, including an extra-territorial
Somali specialized court. The Council also requested a
strengthening of the incarceration capacity in Somalia
and a report by the Secretary-General on modalities for
these initiatives, with a view to taking new decisions.

What does the report tell us? First of all, that the
legislative, penal and procedural framework in Somalia
for fighting piracy is incoherent and out of date. Duly
noted, but we must be proactive and try to adapt that
framework.

With respect to the issue of jurisdiction in
Somalia, the assistance of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) will
enable Puntland and Somaliland to try only "around
20 additional cases each per year" (S/2011/360, paragraph 10), but not for three more years. That is
why we must set up specialized jurisdictions and not
simply use what we have. Here also, the work has just
begun.

Finally, with respect to incarceration, UNODC
has the funds to build two new prisons, one in
Somaliland and one in Puntland, with the capacity to
hold 1,000 inmates, which, it is proposed, would be
reserved for pirates convicted outside of Somalia. How
can we deprive Somalia of the right to prosecute its
own nationals? In addition, the two-year delay is too
long. We therefore need to look, together with
UNODC, at ways of shortening that time period.

It is not a time to be discouraged, but a time to
take action. In reading the report of the Secretary-
General, I sometimes feel that the Secretariat is
overwhelmed by the magnitude of the undertaking.
This we understand, and we sympathize, but
opportunities do exist. The report notes that there is a
pool of international experts in the Somali diaspora
who would be ready to participate in specialized
jurisdictions, whether inside or outside Somalia.
Creating an off-site Somali court, an idea that
was supported by most of the speakers preceding me,
would, of course, be feasible. We know, for example,
where the court could be set up temporarily. Tanzania,
whose commitment to this matter I welcome, expressed
its readiness to host such a chamber in Arusha, on the
site of the current International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). The use of infrastructure from the
Residual Mechanism of the ICTR to deal with piracy at
the judicial level would be negligible in terms of cost.

Also, more generally, establishing an off-site
Somali court would be an easy solution. The court's
functioning would require an estimated $7.5 million
over three years, or hardly more than $2.5 million per
year. Above all, this cost is negligible in comparison
with the overall global cost of piracy. If we add up the
economic costs of this scourge and the cost of related
military operations, piracy every year costs us between
$7 billion and $12 billion.

The report notes the division among the Somali
authorities. It is up to the members of the international
community to make clear their expectations to the
Somali authorities. We expect the Transitional Federal
Government to shoulder its responsibilities in dealing
with this threat, which the Council has called a threat
to international peace and security. The proposed
solution offers an opportunity to develop Somali
judicial capacities with the assistance of the
international community.

Among the important questions raised by the
report concerning extraterritorial Somali jurisdiction, I
would highlight that of the scope of jurisdiction.
Should such a court investigate and prosecute those
who finance and plan acts of piracy, or prosecute only
those who carry them out? That is a good question. It is
clear that preparing comprehensive files on those
primarily responsible for such crimes would require
international expertise - more so than in other cases.
Could we consider a precursor group in Tanzania to
deal with such questions? Such prospects must be
investigated quickly and in a lasting manner in order to
effectively strengthen Somali capacities.

We must be creative and imaginative. It is clear
that obstacles remain, and my delegation is the first to
recognize them. But if we talk only about obstacles, we
will not accomplish anything.

Over a year after the adoption of resolution 1918
(2010), it is time to act. We owe it to the sailors and
users of the sea, who are on the front lines of the battle.
The Secretary-General stated recently - and France
shares his view 4 that their security and well-being
should be our primary concern. We are ready to work
with the members of the Council and with the

Secretariat to move forward in a concrete and speedy
manner.

