Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We are
pleased that you are presiding over today's meeting,
Sir. We thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for
his briefing. I also join previous speakers in welcoming
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio Jose Archila, High
Counsellor for Post-Conflict, to today's meeting.

In my statement, I will focus on three main issues.

My first concerns the latest developments in the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. The
measurestakenbytheColombianGovernmenttopromote
the implementation of the peace agreement and the plan
announced by the High Counsellor for Post-Conflict,
entitled "Peace with legality", are important and vital.
The tireless efforts of the Government to support the
socioeconomic reintegration process for the former
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and to link
that process with the regional development programmes
and initiatives launched within the framework of the

peace agreement - including rural development,
through cooperation with national authorities
and United Nations agencies - contribute to the

sustainability of the peace process and the promotion
of security and stability in Colombia. We underscore
the importance of continuing the full reintegration of
former members of FARC-EP at the political, legal,
social and economic levels, despite the slow progress of
this important process to date.

With regard to the comprehensive system of truth,
justice, reparation and non-repetition, which is a
mainstay of transitional justice, we commend the role of
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and other bodies and
committees that have recently started to work to achieve
full justice. We also urge the Colombian Government to
step up its efforts within the framework of the National
Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of
Illicit Crops and provide legal and security guarantees
for former members of FARC-EP in order to overcome
the challenges hindering the implementation of the
peace agreement, given the significant challenges
facing the Colombian Government in implementing the
peace agreement in all its aspects.

Secondly, with respect to the security situation, the
continued killings, violence and threats against social
leaders, human rights defenders and indigenous leaders
constitute an obstacle to the implementation of the
peace agreement. We strongly condemn the terrorist
attack in the Colombian capital on 17 January, which
targeted the police academy and resulted in a number
of fatalities and injuries. The security repercussions
of this incident will undoubtedly affect security and
stability in Colombia, and we offer our condolences to
the Government and the people of Colombia and the
families of the victims.

We also commend the national pact for life and
for the protection of social leaders and human rights
defenders, signed between the Colombian Government,
regional authorities and civil society organizations
in August 2018, as well as the Action Plan for the
Protection of Social and Community Leaders, Human
Rights Defenders and Journalists, which was signed
by President Duque Marquez in November 2018. The
Action Plan is considered to be an important step in
building the confidence required to provide security
and political conditions conducive to the complete
implementation ofthe peace agreement in all its aspects.

Thirdly, we commend the efforts made by the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
through coordination with Government officials,
national and regional authorities, the private sector and
the international community, as well as by promoting
dialogue with organizations and youth leaders at
all levels.

In conclusion, I thank Mr. Jean Arnault for
his efforts during his recently completed tenure as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Colombia and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia. We reiterate our support for
the Colombian peace agreement, which has ended a
50-year conflict and has become a success story to be
emulated in resolving other conflicts in the world. We
underscore the full support of the Security Council
and the international community for the Colombian
peace agreement. The State of Kuwait supports the new
Special Representative, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and
all members of his team.

