Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, Mr. Spanta, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Pakistan, Mr. Qureshi. We thank Mr. Eide
for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan and for
submitting the report of the Secretary-General. We are
grateful to Mr. Holmes for his comprehensive briefing
on the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan.

We support the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
Mission. We are carefully studying the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on
strengthening the potential of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
broadening its presence in the field. We expect the
Secretariat to provide detailed financial calculations
with justifications.

We are seriously concerned about the continuing
degradation of the military and political situation in
Afghanistan caused by the terrorist activity of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremists, the most recent
example of whose criminal activity was the explosion
at the Indian embassy in Kabul. Such actions
undermine the fragile foundations of Afghan statehood
and impede the achievement of long-term stability. In
that connection, we wish once again to emphasize the
need to pursue the uncompromising fight against the
insurgents and the fact that we cannot permit attempts
to end the Security Council sanctions regime against
individuals and entities involved with Al-Qaida and the
Taliban.

It is no secret that the activities of terrorists are
predominantly fuelled by the drug trade. Unfortunately,
the Afghan Government and the international military
presence in the country have not yet been able to curb
the growth of drug production. It is therefore essential
to mobilize joint efforts to create anti-narcotic security
belts that would enable us to stifle the drug trade. In
order to deprive the drug trade and terrorism of a
financial base, it is extremely important to add
financial security belts, an initiative that Russia
advanced in August 2007 at the summit of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization in Bishkek.

We must also make full use of the regional
organizations that have proven their effectiveness in
working in this area, in particular the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. At present, a very effective
mechanism for enhancing international efforts to stem
the tide of Afghan drugs is the 2003 CSTO anti-drug
initiative known as Operation Channel. In 2007 alone,
more than 28 tonnes of narcotics and precursors were
confiscated. The Operation enjoys the active
participation of representatives from Russia, other
CSTO member States, China, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, the United States and European countries. Our
Afghan colleagues joined the Operation in 2007.

We believe it necessary to develop practical
interaction between the CSTO and NATO in the area of
counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics work, which
would help to reinforce the efforts of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan. The
relevance of cooperation between those two
organizations in Afghanistan was highlighted by the
agreements reached at the NATO summit in Bucharest
on organizing transit for non-military cargo for the
needs of ISAF along the northern route through Russia
and countries of the Central Asia.

It is alarming that, as a result of ISAF operations,
there have recently been increasing casualties among
civilians in Afghanistan, many from errant air strikes.
We emphasize the need to end the harm being done to
the civilian population. In addition to the humanitarian
aspect, such incidents are exploited by the Taliban and
other extremist forces seeking to undermine the
country's process stabilization process.

We welcome the recent visit to Afghanistan of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy, We
share her concern regarding the death of children and
the use of underage combatants by anti-Government
groups. We must ensure the rights of children detained
in prisons, including those under ISAF control and
those accused of involvement with insurgent groups.

An effective settlement of the situation in
Afghanistan and the effective handling of serious
problems by the Government will be possible only if
the efforts of the international community are
coordinated under the auspices of the United Nations
and if more leeway is granted to Kabul's handling of
intra-Afghan problems. Of major significance in that
regard is the establishment of truly combat-ready
national armed forces and law enforcement agencies
equipped with modern weapons. Of course, the
significant support of the international community to
Afghan Government forces in resolving those key
issues is essential.

In that context, the results of the 12 June Paris
Conference in Support of Afghanistan are of major
significance. Russia actively participated in the work
of that forum. We confirmed our commitment to the
stabilization process in Afghanistan, especially in
terms of helping deal with security and combating the
drug threat.

Enabling non-military cargo destined for the
International Security Assistance Force to transit
through Russia, having forgiven the substantial Afghan
debt and participating in socio-economic
reconstruction programmes constitute Russia's
significant practical contribution to the renewal of
Afghanistan.

At this difficult time, we are prepared to extend
our uncompensated support to the Afghan people. With
regard to the appeal made by Afghanistan, the
President of the Russian Federation has instructed our
Government to expedite the delivery of 15,000 tons of
wheat humanitarian assistance. Moreover, in 2008 and
2009, Russia intends to invest $4 million in the
multilateral Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund. In
the context of overall international efforts, we
anticipate that Russia's support will help to transform
Afghanistan into an independent and thriving country
freed from its legacy of terrorism and narcotics.

