Mr. Morejen (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Ecuador reaffirms once again its position on the
Middle East conflict: full respect for the norms and
principles of international law, in particular with regard
to the peaceful settlement of disputes; condemnation of
the use or threat of use of force; compliance with
international treaties and agreements; and strict
compliance with resolutions of the United Nations and
its organs. In that connection, we support the
resolutions of the Security Council.

My delegation once again condemns the acts of
violence in the Middle East, which clearly violate
international law and prevent the achievement of a
global and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict - and, ultimately, the Arab-Israeli
conflict - within the framework of the relevant United
Nations resolutions and in accordance with the norms
and principles of international law.

We also condemn the military operations in the
Gaza Strip, which claimed many human lives -
particularly among women and children - and caused
extensive material damage. In addition to those
military actions, the blockade imposed on the
Palestinian territories has aggravated the suffering and
destruction of a people fighting to achieve a sovereign
and independent State. It was precisely those actions
that led the President of the Human Rights Council to
establish the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on
the Gaza Conflict.

Ecuador notes the recommendations set out in the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48) to various United
Nations organs, Israel, the competent Palestinian
authorities and the international community with
respect to accountability for serious violations of
international humanitarian law, reparations, serious
violations of human rights law, the blockade and
reconstruction, the use of weapons and military
procedures, the protection of human rights
organizations and defenders, and follow-up to the
Mission's recommendations. Ecuador also notes with
concern Israel's scant support for the Mission of the
Human Rights Council, as referred to in the Goldstone
report.

Finally, Ecuador joins in the demand of the
international community that the conflict be resolved
with respect for the right of the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples to live in peace and security as sovereign and
independent States within secure and recognized
borders. We urge the parties to seek to contribute to the
resumption of a dialogue that, through strict and
effective compliance with their commitments, may lead
to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace.

