Mr. Martin Prada: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member
States. Moreover, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Serbia and the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia align themselves with this statement.

Let me begin by reaffirming the European Union's
commitment to a just and comprehensive resolution
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict through a two-State
solution and an agreement that ends the occupation
that began in 1967, ending all claims and fulfilling the
aspirations of both parties.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
continued to deteriorate over the past three months,
with no prospect of a clear political horizon. Violence,
including terrorist attacks, and unrest increased in the
final months of last year, both in the West Bank and
Jerusalem. Civilians on both sides, including children,
were killed or wounded in violent episodes. While
acknowledging Israel's legitimate right to safeguard
the security of the Israeli people, the European Union
expects the Israeli authorities to adhere strictly to
the principles of necessity and proportionality in its
use of force and to take steps against the increasing
settler violence.

The EU firmly condemns all acts of violence,
terrorism and incitement to violence and hate, which are
fundamentally incompatible with advancing a peaceful
two-State solution. Today there is a risk of further
escalation that would move Israelis and Palestinians
further away from an end to the conflict. The risk is
compounded by the advancement in December 2018 of
Israeli plans for more than 2,000 settlement units and
renewed plans to legalize West Bank outposts. The
allocation of an area south ofBethlehem for the purpose
of planning a new settlement constitutes a serious blow
to the viability of the two-State solution.

The European Union's position on Israeli settlement
policy, including the eviction of Palestinians - for
example, in Sheikh Jarrah - and related activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory is clear and remains
unchanged: all settlement activity is illegal under
international law and erodes the viability of the two-
State solution and the prospects for lasting peace, as
reaffirmed by resolution 2334 (2016). In that context, we
wish to underline once again that, although we welcome
the fact that the planned demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar,
including its school, has not taken place, we continue
to call upon Israel to withdraw those plans indefinitely.

The political and security situation in Gaza remains
volatile, and the dire humanitarian situation a matter of
grave concern. Miscalculations could easily lead to the
outbreak of a dangerous spiral of violence, which would
be detrimental to both sides. The European Union,
working closely together with the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
will continue its support for the provision of lifesaving
health-care support, its engagement to increase access
to clean water and energy supplies and its efforts
to improve the overall humanitarian and economic
conditions. Our priority remains to reduce tensions and
avoid another conflict in Gaza.

Humanitarian and financial assistance directed
to Gaza may help address the most urgent needs of
civilians, but it cannot be a sustainable solution in
the long term. Financial efforts by any member of
the international community can have a constructive
and lasting effect only if they are coordinated with
the Palestinian Authority and the international
community and underpinned by progress towards a
political solution in Gaza. To ensure lasting results, a
fundamental change of the situation in Gaza is crucial.
That should include an end to the closure and the full
opening of crossing points, while addressing Israel's
legitimate security concerns. The EU calls on all parties
to ensure unfettered access inside the Gaza Strip for
humanitarian assistance and the protection of civilians,
including for all the relevant United Nations bodies.

The EU reiterates its call that Palestinian factions
engage in good faith towards reconciliation. The return
of the Palestinian Authority to the Gaza Strip is needed
to durably improve the conditions and the humanitarian
situation. Punitive measures on Gaza need to end.

Despite commendable Egyptian efforts,
intra-Palestinian reconciliation talks seem to have
reached a deadlock. Prospects for an effective
reconciliation deteriorated further after the decision of
the Constitutional Court in December to dissolve the
Palestinian Legislative Council and hold legislative
elections within six months. Only a few days ago, the
Palestinian Authority withdrew its personnel from the
Rafah crossing point, resulting in the border being
closed. Again, those are negative developments for the
people in Gaza.

The European Union calls on all Palestinian factions
to find common ground and work together to address
the needs of the Palestinian population. We expect the
Government to work towards genuine and democratic
elections for all Palestinians. Strong, inclusive and
democratic institutions based on respect for the rule of
law and human rights are crucial for the establishment
of a viable and sovereign Palestinian State. Palestinian
divisions do not serve the interests of the people and
undermine the prospects for a two-State solution.
In that context, it is important to underline that the
European Union will continue to support Palestinian
aspirations to statehood. However, it is of the utmost
importance that the positive results of the past not be
lost and that Palestinian institutions grow stronger,
more transparent, accountable and democratic.
The continued support of the international
community for the important work done by the United
Nations Reliefand Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) remains crucial. Stopping
UNRWA's assistance to Palestine refugees would affect
a large number of Palestinian refugees, cause more
instability - including beyond the occupied Palestinian
territory - and create a vacuum that would only serve
extremists. The European Union and its member States
are collectively the largest contributors to the UNRWA
budget. We will continue to support the agency in
its efforts to put in place cost-saving measures and
reforms. We are and will continue to be strong, reliable
and predictable supporters of the Agency, and we will
strive to enable UNRWA to continue its operations
until a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution to the
final status issue of Palestine refugees is reached.

Recent and increasing violence in Gaza and in the
West Bank remind us that there is no such thing as
the status quo. Restoring a political horizon for peace
between Israelis and Palestinians is essential to reducing
violence and containing extremism in the region.

Twenty-five years after the signing of the Oslo
Accords, their achievements are under increasing threat
because of negative developments on the ground, on
both sides. Palestinian institutions are weakened. The
Palestinian economy is not growing to its full potential,
not least because of the occupation and a lack of full
implementation of the Paris Protocol. The ability of
the Palestinian Authority to exert control over its own
resources is still hindered, particularly in Area C. Lack
of meaningful progress towards reconciliation and the
return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza continues
to impact negatively the situation on the ground. As
a result, the prospect of a two-State solution is being
dismantled piece by piece.

However, there is no credible alternative to it.
That is why the European Union remains committed
to the internationally agreed parameters for a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East, based on international
law, relevant United Nations resolutions, including
Security Council resolutions 1860 (2009) and 2334
(2016), and previous agreements. To be successful,
any peace plan should recognize those internationally
agreed parameters.

The European Union is truly convinced that
serious efforts must be made towards a resumption of
meaningful negotiations aimed at a two-State solution
based on the 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as the
capital of both States, that meets Israeli and Palestinian
security needs and Palestinian aspirations to statehood
and sovereignty, ends the occupation and resolves all
final status issues in order to end the conflict. The EU
will continue to work with our partners, the Israelis and
the Palestinians; with regional actors, such as Jordan
and Egypt; and with our partners within the Middle
East Quartet to that end.

