Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the way in which you are conducting
the work of the Council this month and for convening
this open debate on a theme of such great importance.

Our country was a member of the Council when
the reforms contained in presidential note S/2006/507
were adopted in July 2006. In the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, under the presidency of Japan, we
witnessed how difficult is to change the practices and
procedures that were not very transparent, established
by the permanent members over the past years. The
effort to improve the working methods of the Council
had started in earlier years. Allow me to recall the role
of Argentina, together with the delegation of New
Zealand, in the establishment of meetings to exchange
information with troop-contributing countries during
the 1990s.

We believe that the agreements reached in 2006
are positive but also insufficient. It is necessary to
continue the progress towards greater democracy in the
Council and greater openness to the membership,
which will greatly contribute to a more effective
organization.

Here, I should like to recall some of the proposals
we have made regarding the Council's working
methods. First, we must undertake an annual or
biannual revision of mandates and recommendations in
the case of conflicts that we all know will last a long
time. Council members should make the greatest effort
to focus the debate on specific action-oriented
proposals and decisions. In that regard, the Secretary-
General or the Special Representatives should place
more emphasis on the necessity to receive advice or
guidance from the Council. It is also necessary to
establish more frequent contact between the principal
organs of the United Nations, so as to mitigate negative
perceptions of the Council and to achieve more
coordinated joint action.

Meetings between the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council with
the Security Council president of the coming month
could be organized in relation to the Council's agenda.
We believe that regional groups could play an
important role here, increasing the legitimacy and
accountability of the Council.

We must also be more effective in public
meetings with regard to the use of time. States that are
not members of the Council could also contribute to
the work of the Council committees with their
experience of or participation in the region of the
conflict in question. Another point is that we must
produce an annual report that is more analytical and
substantive, and at the same time avoid lengthy
negotiation over its contents.

With regard to other matters, I shall mention very
briefly the question of the veto and its limitation,
which is an issue that belongs to the General Assembly
and the Open-Ended Working Group on Security
Council Reform. Despite that, we believe it is
necessary to mention it in this open debate, since its
use and the threat of its use operate as a procedural
device when permanent members pursue their national
interests, a process that affects both the working
methods and the effectiveness of the Council in
achieving its objective of enforcing international peace
and security. In that respect, we note our regret and
concern over the more frequent use of the veto this
year.

Finally, we once again call upon the Members of
the Organization to reach an agreement on Council
reform, based on a transitional approach, without
winners or losers, that would make it possible to
resolve the current impasse that has lasted a long time,
14 years to be precise.

The approaches proposed by the facilitators and
the task force on Security Council reform established
by the President of the General Assembly could lead to
a reformed Council that is more democratic and
efficient. For this, transparent and effective working
methods are also required. The Council must also
become more dynamic and incorporate more regional
decision-making.

The successive failures of the Council show that
the permanent members have not kept their part of the
bargain struck in 1945: permanent seats and a veto in
exchange for responsibility to the broader membership.
Indeed, they are clearly making any attempt at reform
in terms of composition or working methods
impossible. It is time for them reconsider and to make
possible true change that will revitalize the
Organization and enable it to fulfil its purposes and
principles.

