Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Minister Judeh, for presiding over this meeting.
Your presence testifies to the huge significance of the
issues before us.

On 8 April, two Israeli soldiers, a medic and
a paramedic, were stabbed in the West Bank by a
Palestinian man. On 20 April, a 28-year-old Arab
municipal worker was stabbed in Herzliya, north of
Jerusalem, by an Israeli who reportedly screamed
"Death to Arabs". Those arejust two ofthe recent attacks
that reflect the persistent and deadly tension between
Israelis and Palestinians. It is critically important that
leaders urgently re-engage in efforts to achieve peace,
which is the most effective way to prevent such tension
from escalating, as it has too many times before.

The United States remains committed to a two-
State solution that results in a secure Israel alongside
a sovereign and independent Palestinian State and that
can bring lasting peace and stability to both peoples. A
two-State solution is the only way for Israel to ensure
its future as a Jewish and democratic State, and it is the
best path forward for Israel's security, for Palestinian
aspirations and for regional stability. It is important that
both sides refrain from any actions that could further
destabilize the situation in the region and undermine
the prospects of reaching a two-State solution. It is
good that the parties have reached agreement on the
transfer of Palestinian clearance revenues, an important
step that will benefit the Palestinian people and help
stabilize the situation in the West Bank.

We welcome the arrival of the new United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Nickolay Mladenov, who brings with him deep
diplomatic experience in the region and has already
been meeting with key figures since he arrived on the
ground about a week ago. We encourage all sides to
work closely with him.

We also strongly support United Nations efforts to
encourage donors to disburse funds as soon as possible
to meet the commitments they made in Cairo in October
2014. To support that effort, the United States has

disbursed more than 95 per cent ofour Cairo pledges and
provided additional money above our original pledge
amount. However, although up 100,000 Palestinians
reportedly remain displaced in Gaza, only a fraction of
the funds pledged in Cairo have been released. Member
States must step up, and United Nations agencies must
be able to carry out their operations in Gaza without
disruption.

Let me now turn to Syria. In the weeks since
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), with
the support of the Al-Nusra Front, advanced on the
besieged community of Yarmouk, the already desperate
situation of its estimated 18,000 residents, most of
them Palestinians, has gotten even worse. People long
deprived of food, potable water, medical supplies and
other vital humanitarian support now find themselves
trapped between warring parties, which show a callous
disregard for the welfare of civilians. Residents have
reportedly been barrel-bombed by the regime from the
air and shot at by ISIL and other armed groups from
the ground.

While thousands appear to have escaped,
many thousands are still trapped. In Tadamon, a
neighbourhood bordering Yarmouk, some of those who
have managed to escape are sheltering in a school. Last
week, a man there said, of the Al-Assad regime's siege
in Yarmouk, "We lived inside a disaster. We were dying
there, for two years and six months, with no water, no
electricity." Another escapee said "We got out just
as you see us, with nothing else. We ate animals and
leaves." A woman named Fatima stood cradling her
baby boy, born less than two weeks earlier in Yarmouk.
Fatima told the officials she had fled because she feared
her son would die if they did not get out.

Siege is a tactic we see applied across Syria by both
the Al-Assad regime and terrorist groups. Last month,
Under-Secretary-General Amos told the Council (see S/PV.7418) that the United Nations estimates that
440,000 civilians are living in besieged areas, meaning
most people cannot get out, and assistance cannot get
in. Some aid groups estimate the total is much higher.
In Dayr Al-Zour, another besieged city, ISIL has
systematically blocked humanitarian access and even
cut off the water supply for months at a time while
regime forces have prevented residents from leaving.

The Al-Assad regime and the terrorists use the
suffering of Syrian civilians as just another tool to
advance their position or undermine that of their
enemies. This must stop. All parties have an obligation
to protect Civilians, and all parties have an obligation,
under resolution 2165 (2014), to enable the immediate
and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance
directly to people throughout Syria by United Nations
agencies and implementing partners. All civilians who
want to leave besieged areas must be allowed to do so
safely, without being detained, interrogated or separated
from their families. The Al-Assad regime's assurances
count for nothing, so international supervision for any
relocation from Yarmouk is urgently necessary.

We members of the Security Council have an
obligation as well to ensure that the reported use
of chemical weapons is investigated thoroughly
and promptly and that those responsible are held
accountable. Since members of the Council adopted
resolution 2209 (2015) on 6 March, condemning the
use of chlorine as a chemical weapon, we have seen
allegations of at least a dozen attacks involving the use
of chlorine or other chemical agents.

Last week, Council members heard first-hand from
Dr. Tenari, who works in Sarmin's field hospital, which
received more than 120 victims of just one of those
attacks. There were so many victims, he said, that they
were piled on top of one another on the floor. He told
us about how he and his colleagues did everything they
could to save three siblings, aged one, two and three
years, with the hospital's paltry resources. He told of
the doctors' and nurses' sense of helplessness as they
tried to pump oxygen into the delicate chests of these
small children. He told of his unspeakable grief as he
washed their tiny, lifeless bodies.

If we members are appalled upon hearing such
accounts, and I do not believe that there was a person
in that room who was not shaken by Dr. Tenari's
experience, we must channel our indignation into
stopping more attacks like it from occurring. That
begins with the Council enforcing the resolutions it has
already adopted, such as 2209 (2015) and 2118 (2013),
which the Al-Assad regime has repeatedly ignored.

Ending those attacks also requires countries to
stop propping up and arming the regime and instead
use their leverage to help stop Al-Assad from gassing,
barrel-bombing, torturing and starving Syrian civilians.
Countries of the region and those with influence must
come together to press for a political solution, which
is the only way to end this wretched conflict. To that
end, we welcome the renewed push by Special Envoy
De Mistura to expand ongoing dialogue efforts and the
Secretary-General's robust support for those efforts.

As President Obama has said repeatedly, the only
viable political solution is one without Al-Assad in
power. He has no legitimacy and no role to play in
Syria's future. Partnering with Al-Assad will not help
us defeat violent extremist groups. It will only make
them stronger.

One reason it is so important to reach a political
solution is the deeply destabilizing effect the conflict
is having on Syria's neighbours, such as Lebanon,
where one in four of the country's residents is now a
Syrian refugee. Since the influx of refugees began,
Lebanon's unemployment has doubled, and its schools
have taken to teaching double shifts. The crisis in Syria
has also exacerbated Lebanon's security challenges,
particularly those posed by violent extremist groups.
The Lebanese security and armed forces have played
a crucial role in countering these threats and defending
the State's authority. We also commend the ongoing
effort undertaken by the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and Special Coordinator Kaag to prevent
any escalation in hostilities along the Blue Line, an
effort made all the more challenging by Hizbullah's
dangerous actions, such as its acquisition and evident
willingness to use weapons in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon area of operations.

Resolving the Syria crisis and mitigating the
unrivalled suffering caused by the conflict inside Syria
and in neighbouring countries - and I thank Minister
Judeh for Jordan's generosity in sheltering so many
refugees from Syria - could not be more urgent.

