Mr. Serry: At the outset, I wish to inform the
Council that this briefing will focus mainly on
developments relating to Gaza; the Secretariat will
report fully on other developments in next month's
briefing.

Following the presidential statement of the
Security Council on 1 June on the flotilla incident of
31 May (S/PRST/2010/9), the Secretary-General and I
have been active in addressing the immediate aftermath
of the tragedy, and we renew our urgings for a
fundamentally different approach to Gaza, while
underscoring United Nations support for all efforts to
preserve and promote the broader political process. The
Secretary-General has been in contact with a number of
regional and world leaders, and I have been engaged on
the ground, including with the parties and Quartet
colleagues.

I reiterate the Secretary-General's regret over the
loss of life and injuries resulting from the use of force
during the Israeli military operation, and his
condemnation of the acts, which it now appears
resulted in the deaths of nine civilians and injuries to at
2
least 30 others, together with seven soldiers of the
Israel Defense Forces (IDF).

By 2 June, 682 detained civilians had been
repatriated. Five Israeli citizens were questioned in
Israeli custody and conditionally released between
1 and 3 June. The vessels remain in Israeli ports. A
further vessel, the Rachel Corrie, was intercepted by
Israeli naval forces as it sailed for Gaza on 5 June,
without violence from any party, and was rerouted with
its passengers and cargo to the Israeli port of Ashdod.
There continue to be reports of intentions to send
further ships from several quarters to try to reach Gaza.
I reiterate the Secretary-General's earlier comments
that all parties should act responsibly and with caution
to avoid any further incident.

In its 1 June presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/9), this Council called for a prompt,
impartial, credible and transparent investigation
conforming to international standards. The Secretary-
General held consultations with the permanent
members of the Security Council and a host of other
concerned parties on the modalities for complying with
the Council's call. In this context, he has proposed an
international panel under the aegis of a third party seen
as impartial and in which both Turkey and Israel
actively participate. He has briefed the leadership of
both Turkey and Israel.

On 14 June, the Israeli Prime Minister announced
the formation of a public commission to examine the
flotilla incident, to be composed of three Israeli
members and two international personalities, who will
participate as observers. The Secretary-General has
taken note of Israel's announcement and recognizes
that a thorough Israeli investigation is important and
could be consistent with the Secretary-General's own
proposals for an international panel. The two combined
would fully meet the international community's
expectation for a credible and impartial investigation.
The Secretary-General's proposal is not incompatible
with domestic inquiries; in fact, the two approaches are
complementary, so his proposal, accordingly, remains
on the table.

Consistent with the wish of this Council for the
cargo to reach its destination, as expressed in the
presidential statement of 1 June, and after consultations
with the parties concerned, I wish to announce that the
United Nations is ready to accept this responsibility on
an exceptional basis. The United Nations has obtained
10-40544
the consent of the cargo owners of the three Turkish-
registered vessels to take possession of and
responsibility for the entire cargo and ensure its timely
distribution in Gaza for humanitarian purposes, as
determined by the United Nations. The Government of
Israel has agreed to release the entire cargo to the
United Nation in Gaza, again on the understanding that
it is for the United Nations to determine its appropriate
humanitarian use in Gaza. We have reason to believe
that the de facto authorities in Gaza will respect the
independence of United Nations programming in this
regard. I appreciate the constructive role played by the
Government of Turkey in facilitating this process.

We will begin to operationalize this
understanding as soon as possible, maintaining close
contact and full transparency. It will be essential for all
parties to respect the independence of the United
Nation as we undertake this work. It is equally
important to stress that the amount of material on the
vessels in question, which includes medical and
construction supplies, is comparatively modest in scale
compared with the needs in Gaza.

It is these needs which must be the focus of
immediate action and the Council's attention. The
flotilla crisis is the latest symptom of a failed policy.
As the Secretary-General has repeatedly stated, the
situation in Gaza is unsustainable and the current
policy is unacceptable and counterproductive and
requires a different and more positive strategy. The
closure and blockade of the Gaza Strip need to come to
an end.

There is now a welcome international consensus
on Gaza. It is fully agreed by the Quartet that there
must be a fundamental change to the situation. To this
end, Quartet principals have engaged with the Israeli
leadership and Quartet representative Blair has had
several meetings with the Government. I have been
informed that Israel is now conducting a review of its
Gaza policy. I believe it is vital that this result in an
end to measures that punish the civilian population. It
is important that measures taken by all parties be part
of a broader strategy to implement resolution 1860
(2009) in all ofits aspects.

The basic principle that should guide the policy
on Gaza is clear. Everything should be allowed into
Gaza unless there is a specific and legitimate security
reason. Israel should therefore move from the current
policy - whereby only about 116 items are approved
10-40544

to enter Gaza - to a policy whereby all goods and
materials are able to enter Gaza unless there is a
legitimate security rationale against it. Even in such
cases, existing understandings between Israel and the
United Nations, which have enabled some United
Nations construction projects to begin recently,
demonstrate that even so-called dual use items can
enter Gaza and be used for proper civilian purposes.

Accordingly, Israel should facilitate and fast-
track United Nations projects on a large scale,
particularly in areas such as water and sanitation,
energy, education and health. At last month's briefing
to the Security Council (see S/PV.6315), I stressed that
the needs are immense in these sectors in the face of a
collapsing aquifer, a burgeoning student population,
pressures on the public health system, and an urgent
need for spare parts for the power plant and electricity
grid. Other key development projects should also be
approved on a similar basis to meet the needs of a
growing population, half of whom are under 18 years
old. In addition, we strongly hope that exports will now
be facilitated at a proper scale, and that the categories
of people permitted to enter and leave Gaza will be
significantly expanded.

To implement these measures, it will be crucial to
expand capacity at commercial crossings between
Israel and Gaza. Practical steps should be taken in this
regard to reinstate the framework of the Agreement on
Movement and Access, including the Palestinian
Authority's appropriate presence at crossings. A
fundamental change in policy would empower
moderation in Gaza while ensuring that its civilian
population was not reliant on an illicit economy that
empowers smugglers and militants.

It would also begin to address unmet needs in
Gaza, which are easily illustrated with a few statistics.
Given the state of economic collapse and rising
poverty levels, 61 per cent of Gaza's households are
food insecure and 80 per cent of the population
receives some kind of humanitarian assistance, mainly
food and cash assistance. At least 70 per cent of
industrial establishments are totally closed, with the
remainder working at very low capacity. According to a
survey undertaken by the United Nations Development
Programme, three-quarters of the damage wrought by
Operation Cast Lead - including to homes, schools
and hospitals - has not been repaired or rebuilt.
Electricity production from the Gaza power plant now
stands at 38 per cent of its full capacity, leaving the
majority of the population in Gaza with power cuts of
eight to twelve hours per day.

Between 16 May and 13 June, 566 truckloads
entered Gaza on average per week, a 6 per cent drop
compared to the previous reporting period. This
included building materials for the approved United
Nations package, on which work is proceeding, as well
as for a French project to repair a hospital in Gaza City.
Between 15 and 20 May, the Rafah border crossing
with Egypt was exceptionally opened for six days,
facilitating the entry and departure of thousands of
Gazans for humanitarian purposes. Since 2 June, the
Egyptian authorities have opened the Rafah crossing
for pedestrian travellers to and from the Gaza Strip;
some 5,000 Gazans flocked to Rafah on the first day.
Egypt destroyed a number of smuggling tunnels and
continues to install preventive measures, including
steel sheeting, along its border with Gaza. Over the
reporting period, eight people died and 14 more were
injured in tunnel-related incidents.

On 25 June, Israeli Corporal Gilad Shalit will
have been in captivity for four years. We call on his
captors to urgently allow third-party access to him and
to release him immediately. We also note the detention
of over 9,000 Palestinians in Israeli jails, among them
women and children, and persons detained without
charge. We urge the completion of a prisoner exchange
agreement, as well as further releases of Palestinian
prisoners to the Palestinian Authority.

Since the flotilla incident, the de facto authorities
have maintained comparative calm with Israel.
Nevertheless, militant groups fired some 29
indiscriminate rockets into southern Israel during the
reporting period, causing no injuries. The IDF
conducted 10 incursions and 12 air strikes, killing 13
Palestinians, all of whom were alleged militants, and
injuring 44, of whom 40 were reportedly civilians,
including six women and seven children. We continue
to condemn rocket fire, which indiscriminately targets
civilians, and acts of disproportionate military force,
which endanger civilians. We urge calm and full
respect by all parties for international humanitarian
law. We are also making it directly clear to
interlocutors in Gaza that, just as we urge a significant
change in Israel's policy at the crossings, we will be
looking for a significant change from Hamas in its
policies as well, in particular by declaring an extended
ceasefire and acting to prevent all forms of violence
against Israel.
During the reporting period, there was a worrying
spate of attacks on international and civil society
organizations in Gaza. The Secretary-General has
condemned the disturbing vandalism of a United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) summer camp for
Gazan children on 23 May with accompanying threats
to the safety of United Nations personnel. I am,
however, pleased to report that the UNRWA summer
games, which will provide much-needed recreation and
relief from the stresses of living in the Strip for some
250,000 children, have been successful under way in
144 locations since 12 June.

In early June, Hamas security forces broke into
the offices of a number of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), including United Nations
partners, in Gaza City and Rafah, closing them down
and confiscating their equipment. In a statement on
3 June, I called for the reversal of these repressive and
unacceptable actions, which only harm Palestinians.
The United Nations will continue to discharge its full
responsibilities towards the civilian population in Gaza
and will engage and work actively with NGO partners.

Despite continuing efforts to promote internal
dialogue by Palestinian figures, Hamas continues to
refuse the Egyptian-mediated proposal for Palestinian
reconciliation. I can therefore report no progress in
efforts to reunite Gaza with the West Bank within the
framework of the legitimate Palestinian Authority. I
would stress here that Palestinian unity is a key
component to finding a sustainable solution to the
crisis in Gaza. The need for tangible steps on intra-
Palestinian reconciliation is cited in resolution 1860
(2009).

I note that on 13 June the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States visited the Gaza Strip,
urging an end to the blockade of Gaza and Palestinian
reconciliation in order to advance towards legitimate
Palestinian aspirations for the creation of an
independent Palestinian State as part of a two-State
solution.

I have focused on Gaza and will speak only
briefly on other issues, pending a fuller briefing next
month. The Quartet is agreed that it is vital to push
ahead with the proximity talks. Special Envoy Mitchell
held a further round of talks with President Abbas on
19 May and with Prime Minister Netanyahu on
20 May, and both sides reaffirmed their commitment to
10-40544
continue the talks in the aftermath of the flotilla
incident. Special Envoy Mitchell visited the region
again from Wednesday, 2 June, for a further three days
of what he described as constructive and substantive
talks, and he is due to return to the region again this
week.

I wish to underline to the Council precisely how
delicate and urgent these negotiations are. Israel's
settlement restraint policy will expire three months
from now, while support for President Abbas from the
Arab League for continuing negotiations has a similar
time frame. Within that time, we must have made
sufficient progress at the table and on the ground to
enable a move to meaningful direct negotiations.
Otherwise, it is difficult to see how a political process
can be sustained, much less how negotiations can
converge, meaningfully and decisively, on an
agreement on the core issues of the conflict. That,
ultimately, is the only path to peace.

The proximity talks must be supported by
positive actions on the ground, and I urge the parties to
implement their obligations and refrain from
provocations. This includes Israel's obligation to freeze
all settlement activity, including natural growth, to
dismantle outposts erected since March 2001, and to
reopen Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem. It
also includes Palestinian action to combat violence and
terror and to continue the reforms that have made
important strides in recent years.

I particularly stress the sensitive situation in
Jerusalem, where tensions have continued in the
reporting period. I also stress the importance of calm in
the West Bank, where there have been a number of
worrying violent incidents, including Israeli settler
attacks on Palestinians and yesterday's attack on an
Israeli police patrol, resulting in the death of a
policeman, which was condemned by the Palestinian
Authority.

The second Palestine Investment Conference was
held successfully on 2 and 3 June in Bethlehem,
resulting in pledges of almost $1 billion of investments
in Palestinian businesses. This is an encouraging sign
of investors' trust in the Palestinian Authority's
institution-building efforts, including those to
restructure the Palestinian economy and create an
enabling environment for investors. Meanwhile, the
Authority has received $491 million to support
recurrent budgetary costs. In order to ensure continued
10-40544
support to the Palestinian Authority reform agenda, a
total of $1.2 billion in external financing is required in
2010.

The Israeli, Palestinian and other members of the
International Women's Commission (IWC) met on 1
and 2 June in Madrid, where participants gathered to
highlight the tenth anniversary of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and the work that remains
outstanding to ensure its implementation. I will be
working with the IWC and other groups in the coming
months to ensure that the provisions of the resolution
1325 (2000) and issues relating to the rights and
representation of women are advanced in the effort for
peace in the Middle East.

Regrettably, I can report no concrete
developments on renewing Israeli-Syrian negotiations
or on the broader regional aspects of peace. The
situation in the occupied Syrian Golan remained stable,
although settlement activity continued during the
reporting period. A fire was started on 26 May by an
Israeli military drill, which destroyed an estimated
5,000 acres.

Turning now to Lebanon, I will be brief, as the
Secretary-General's report on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) will be submitted to the
Council at the end of this month. The situation in the
past month has been stable. Municipal elections were
held on four Sundays during the month of May. The
elections were conducted in a peaceful and calm
atmosphere with the exception of Saida, where some
security incidents resulted in injuries but where no
fatalities were reported.

Funding for the reconstruction of the Nahr
el-Bared refugee camp remains a major concern. There
is currently a deficit of $209 million in funds needed
for rebuilding the camp. The United Nations urges the
international community to renew its financial support.

The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon remains
quiet. During the period under review, Israeli air
violations continued on an almost daily basis, mostly
by unmanned aerial vehicles but also by fighter jets.

The Security Council clearly stated two weeks
ago that the situation in Gaza is not sustainable (see S/PRST/20lO/9). We agree that it must change. There
is a welcome Quartet consensus on this and on the
policy changes expected from Israel to end the closure
regime in a manner consistent with its legitimate
security concerns. This should also be the catalyst for
addressing the broader issues as set out in resolution
1860 (2009). The Secretary-General is determined to
transform this crisis into an opportunity for real change
on the ground, and he will continue to work towards
that objective in close cooperation with the Quartet and
the Council. The United Nations is already playing a
crucial role in addressing the manifold issues
confronting Gaza and is ready to significantly expand
its interventions.

At the same time, we must not lose track of the
need to sustain the proximity talks on the core issues
and to buttress them with concrete progress on the
ground both in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and in Gaza, with a view to moving to
direct talks as soon as possible.

I call on the parties to keep up their cooperative
approach in this regard, and I count on the support of
the Council to help maintain a climate conducive to
peace.

