The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Papua New Guinea, in which she
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Takaku
(Papua New Guinea) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the First
General Elections for the President and Members
of the House of Representatives of the
Autonomous Region of Bougainville, held from
20 May through 9 June 2005, and considers that
they were competently and transparently
conducted, as noted by the International Observer
Team. The Council congratulates the
Autonomous Bougainville Government and the
people of Bougainville on this achievement and
takes note that these elections, which reflect the
expressed will of the people of Bougainville,
mark a significant and historical landmark in the
Bougainville peace process and make it possible
to enter into a new stage for further
implementation of the peace agreement.

"The Council further welcomes the
inauguration of the Autonomous Bougainville
Government in its full capacity and affirms its
the

continuing support for the people of
Bougainville.

"The Council urges those who did not
participate in the electoral process to respect the
outcome of the elections and support without
delay the Autonomous Bougainville Government
in its peacebuilding efforts.

"The Council pays tribute to the efforts of
the Government of Papua New Guinea and the
Bougainville leaders for fully implementing the
Bougainville Peace Agreement. The Council
commends the support by the international
community, in particular the significant
contributions made by the countries in the region
and partners in the donor community, as well as
the United Nations. The Council also expresses
its appreciation for the commendable role played
by the Commonwealth and the Pacific Islands
Forum in dispatching electoral observers for the
smooth conduct of the elections.

"The Council notes with satisfaction that
the performance of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB), as well as
that of its preceding United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB), manifested that
a small United Nations special political mission
with a clearly defined mandate can make a
critical contribution to a regional conflict
resolution effort in an efficient and effective
manner.

"The Council encourages the ongoing
support and commitment by the international
community to the efforts by the Government of
Papua New Guinea and the people of
Bougainville in pursuit of their economic and
social development, as well as for a sustainable
peace in the region."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/23.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.20 p.m.

