Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation was obliged to abstain
from voting because the draft resolution did not take
into account the substantive criticisms we expressed
during the consultations.

We recognize the importance of continuing the
work of Operation Althea of the European Union led-
peacekeeping force in providing security for Bosnia
and Herzegovina in the context of implementing the
Dayton Peace Agreement. At the same time, however,
we are against maintaining an international presence in
the sphere of security that could be viewed as a tool for
accelerating the country's integration into the European
Union and NATO.

Using a resolution of the Security Council based
on Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
to push Bosnia and Herzegovina in that direction is
unacceptable. Such a far-reaching decision cannot be
imposed from outside. It should be the result of the
sovereign choice and free will of all three peoples that
make up the country, the more so because, as we all
know full well, there is no consensus on the issue of
Euro-Atlantic integration in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We do not have to look far to find unfortunate examples
of external pressure for a European perspective.

We should also recall that according to the final
statements of the Steering Committee on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, almost none of the European Union's
priority requirements seen as conditions for applying
for candidate status have been met, that is, they have
not been approved in a country-wide consensus.
Besides that, a number of the country's major political
leaders believe, not without foundation, that a decision
on NATO membership can be taken only through a
national referendum. Nor should we ignore the overall
improvement of the regional security situation, which,
in particular, will enable the Council of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, at its forthcoming meeting in
Basel, to transfer the review under article IV of annex
1B of the Dayton Agreement to the Balkan countries
themselves. Against that backdrop, yet another wordy
resolution on Althea seems an anachronism.

At the same time, I would like to emphasize that the
Russian Federation supports maintaining the Dayton
Peace Agreement and strengthening the role of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
and is against the destruction of their foundations.
