Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you for convening this meeting, Madam President, and
we are also grateful to Special Envoy Martin Griffiths
and Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for
their valuable briefings.

Peru is following developments in Yemen closely.
It is clear that in recent months there has been progress
on the ground and that the level of violence has
decreased. But it is also true that the overall picture
remains uncertain and that millions of people are living
in conditions of extreme vulnerability. This morning
Mr. Griffiths noted some positive political signs, which
give us reason for cautious optimism. If acted on quickly
and pragmatically, they could lead to concrete progress
towards sustainable peace in Yemen. That applies
specifically to the renewed willingness to participate in
dialogue shown by some of the main stakeholders in the
conflict, assisted by the recent hopeful understandings
in southern Yemen that we are all aware of.

Peru encourages the parties to maintain this
dynamic of rapprochement in order to overcome the
deep-seated mistrust that still governs their relationship,
for which a genuine, good-faith commitment without
preconditions is critical. It is essential to make progress
in that regard because of the ever-present risk of
widespread famine, the persistence of cholera and the
collapse of public services and the economy, which
have claimed more lives than military action has. We
must therefore assume our responsibility to protect
the country's most vulnerable citizens, which includes
eliminating all obstacles to assistance and all threats
to humanitarian personnel in the course of their work.
Specifically, we urge the Ansar Allah authorities to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance by the
United Nations and other actors in the territory under
their control, and to refrain from setting conditions on
the location, form or beneficiaries of the aid.

We also emphasize that the ports, airports and land
routes in Yemen must remain open and operational in
accordance with the Council's direction in its various
statements. Opening Sana'a airport for the delivery of
medical supplies and to enable emergency humanitarian
evacuations is particularly important, and we hope
to see greater flexibility from the Arab coalition and
other relevant actors on that sensitive issue. We also
welcome the recent fuel supplies that have reached
Yemen, although we encourage the promotion of
comprehensive solutions to prevent future shortages.
To that end, we consider it a matter of urgency to
ensure that the international community continues to
contribute to stabilizing and reactivating the Yemeni
economy in order to consolidate the appreciation in
the local currency's value in the past few weeks and to
contain the inflation that has wreaked so much havoc
among the poorest populations.

In conclusion, I want to reaffirm Peru's full support
for Mr. Griffiths in his efforts to prevent further
escalation and promote dialogue between the parties, as
well as our unwavering commitment to the protection
of civilians in all situations and circumstances.

