Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for
his excellent briefing on the political, security and
humanitarian situations in Mali. I would also like to
thank Mr. Tieman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali,
for his presence here today. I welcome him to New York.

My delegation would like to commend the personal
commitment of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres to
work for the definitive settlement of the Malian crisis,
as demonstrated by his visit on 29 and 30 May, which
enabled him to exchange views with all stakeholders on
the challenges to be met with a view to the advent of
peace and stability in Mali.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the encouraging progress
made in the implementation of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which remains the
appropriate framework for all current initiatives to
restore peace and stability in that country. My delegation
therefore urges all stakeholders to take ownership of
the road map, adopted on 22 March, with a view to
the diligent implementation of the priority actions
defined by the Agreement Monitoring Committee, in
accordance with the recommendations of resolution
2295 (2016).

In that connection, the presidential elections on
29 July constitute an important means of settling the
crisis in Mali. My country calls on the United Nations
Integrated Multidimensional Mission for Stabilization
in Mali (MINUSMA) to invest in securing the elections
by lending technical and logistical support to the Malian
armed forces, as well as redeploying administration
throughout the country.
The security situation remains concerning in
parts of Mali, due to ongoing asymmetrical attacks
by terrorist groups against civilians and MINUSMA
camps, as well as community violence in central Mali.
My delegation therefore invites the international
community to provide MINUSMA with the logistical
capacity required to prevent attacks and protect
convoys, such as early warning equipment, armoured
personnel carriers and medical evacuation and health-
care helicopters. Furthermore, the deployment of force
multipliers would bolster MINUSMA's capabilities
and enable it to better protect United Nations staff
and civilians.

With regard to the protection of civilians, in
particular in the centre of the country, which has fallen
prey to inter-community violence, it is vital to deploy
United Nations police units and boost the capacity of
the local police in order to restore State authority. With
regard to the humanitarian situation, which is also a
source of concern, Cote d'Ivoire notes with regret
that the 2018 humanitarian response plan, which was
assessed at $263 million, has been financed at just
24 per cent.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes ongoing efforts to
operationalize the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-S Sahel), in accordance with resolution
2391 (2017). A strengthened partnership between
MINUSMA and the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, as
well as greater coordination with all forces on Malian
territory - the Operation Barkhane forces, the Malian
armed forces and the European Union Training Mission
in Mali - will be a valuable asset in combating
terrorism. It is also important to continue building the
capacities of the Malian armed forces so as to enable
the Government to take gradual and irreversible
responsibility for the security of the country and of
its people.

My delegation commends Ellen Margrethe Loj for
her outstanding work at the head of an independent
team within the framework of the MINUSMA strategic
review. The sound conclusions and relevant proposals
bode well for a better understanding of the current
security and political situation in Mali as we seek to
renew MINUSMA's mandate. Cote d'Ivoire agrees with
the experts of the independent team that combating
terrorism and organized transnational crime is a
challenge for regional security and therefore requires a
coordinated and comprehensive approach. My country
endorses the proposed pact for peace between the
Malian Government, the Security Council, the United
Nations and international partners.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to renew
MINUSMA's mandate. It urges all stakeholders in Mali
to redouble their efforts to implement the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in order to achieve a final
settlement of the crisis.

