Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): First
of all, I should like to join the sincere expressions of
deepest condolence and solidarity with the Government
and people of friendly Afghanistan in connection with
the devastating earthquake in the northern part of the
country, which has had tragic consequences, causing a
great loss of human life.

Today's meeting of the Security Council, devoted
to the consideration of the situation in Afghanistan, is
of exceptional importance in giving new impetus to the
peace process in that country after the fall of the
inhuman Taliban regime. It is deeply symbolic that the
Council is discussing this question under the able
guidance of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Norway, a country chairing the Afghanistan Support
Group and playing an important role in the efforts of
the international community to return Afghan society
to peace, national reconciliation and stability.
The report of the Secretary-General, submitted to
the Council today, not only gives a profound, objective
and dispassionate analysis of the situation in
Afghanistan, but also lays out clear guidelines for the
participation of the United Nations in the post-conflict
restoration of Afghanistan. The new role of the
Organization is an extremely broad-based and
responsible one. It provides for virtually all possible
forms of United Nations assistance to a reborn
Afghanistan and is designed to ensure that, with the
active participation of all levels of Afghan society, we
can carry out the extremely complex task of
strengthening the peace process and not allowing it to
go backwards.

It is obvious that the process of harmonizing
Afghan society and establishing an atmosphere of
tolerance and national reconciliation in the country will
not be easy. In Tajikistan, which has recently
undergone a dramatic period of civil conflict, we
understand this well. We express to the friendly people
of Afghanistan our unwavering support for the
restoration of lasting peace and the rebirth of their
country. President Emomali Rakhmonov has repeatedly
supported the efforts of the Interim Administration and
its head, Mr. Hamid Karzai. The Government of
Tajikistan is deeply interested in ensuring that the
situation in neighbouring Afghanistan is normalized as
soon as possible and that a lasting political settlement
is reached on the basis of national reconciliation.

Taking part in the expanding programmes of
humanitarian assistance to the Afghan people and
actively developing Tajik-Afghan cooperation in
various spheres, Tajikistan is making its contribution to
the strengthening of the peace process in that country.
In accordance with a joint project developed with
Russia, Afghanistan will receive electric energy from
Tajikistan in the very near future. Our specialists are
preparing for participation in the rebuilding and
restoration of roads that will connect the north of the
country with Kabul. There are also plans for a number
of projects in the economic, scientific and cultural
areas. Our cooperation is expanding in joint efforts of
the international community to eliminate international
terrorism, extremism and illicit drug trafficking.

We are convinced that only active interaction and
multilateral cooperation with Afghanistan, on a
bilateral and multilateral basis, increasing international
assistance to the Afghan people, will help bring about
the earliest possible rebirth of a peaceful, united,
neutral and prosperous Afghan society. The resurgence
of Afghan society, the restoration of peaceful life and
the opening of schools and cultural and health care
institutions for all Afghans, including women and
children, give us great hope. The consistent
implementation of the Bonn Agreement, including the
active work of the Special Independent Commission
for the Convening of the Emergency Loya Jirga, gives
Afghanistan a unique chance to open a new chapter in
its long history. It is extremely important, as the
Secretary-General emphasized, that the political
aspirations of individuals and groups be achieved
peacefully and constructively, and not undermine trust
in the process and its legitimacy. We believe that the
lessons of the inter-Tajik settlement, achieved under
the aegis of the United Nations, could be used at this
critical turning point for Afghan society.

We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to establish a United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. We in Tajikistan
believe that, under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Lakhdar Brahimi, and with the support of the world
community and the Afghans themselves, the Mission
will be able to carry out fully its lofty mandate.

The consistent and painstaking activities carried
out by Ambassador Brahimi in the difficult social,
political and humanitarian situation that developed in
Afghanistan, and his personal courage, optimism and
faith in the positive results of his peacekeeping mission
deserve the highest praise. The Government of
Tajikistan, which attaches great significance to the
forthcoming activities of the Mission, will give it every
type of support possible and is prepared to make its
own contribution to the Mission's efforts to help the

Afghan people in their implementation of the peace
process.

