Mr. Puri (India): In the interests of the efficient
use of time, I propose to deliver a condensed version of
my statement. The complete text will, however, be
circulated.

I thank you, Sir, for organizing this thematic
debate. With over 100,000 peacekeepers, an $8 billion
budget and expanded mandates, peacekeeping remains
at the heart of the activities of the United Nations.

India aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

India has been an active participant in
peacekeeping since the word itself was invented in
1956. We have, over the past five decades, contributed
more than 100,000 peacekeepers to 40 United Nations
operations. We continue to provide troops and
policemen to the most difficult operations that the
United Nations conducts. Let me put things in
perspective with one example. Even as I speak, more
than 5,000 Indian soldiers and policemen are deployed
in the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They are the
cutting edge in translating this Council's words into
deeds, and they do so in exceedingly challenging
circumstances. India is also one of the largest
contributors of air assets to United Nations operations.
We therefore bring to this table a unique combination
of commitment to peacekeeping and of knowledge and
experience of peacekeeping of which we are very
proud.

The world of peacekeeping today is very different
from what it was two decades ago. In 1986, one Under-
Secretary-General, an Assistant Secretary-General,
three D-2-level officers and three Professional officers,
with a budget of approximately $240 million, managed
about 10,000 peacekeepers. The number of
peacekeepers is now about 140,000; the budget for the
present year is $8 billion; and the Under-Secretary-
General and his staff have become the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the Department of
Field Support (DFS) and the Peacebuilding Support
Office, with 1,300 jobs being sought for peacekeeping
on the support account last year.

In his statement to the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations on 23 January, 2009,
Mr. Alain Le Roy highlighted a number of areas in
which peacekeeping faces problems. These include
sheer overstretch, a wide gap between supply and
demand for the numbers and types of personnel; and
the absence of critical enabling capacities, such as air
assets.

There is no scarcity of the personnel and
capacities of the type that the United Nations requires.
There are enough troops, enough policemen, enough
civilian experts, enough capacities and enough
helicopters available to the international community.
That is not the problem. The problem is that there is
reluctance on the part of Member States to make these
available to the United Nations.

A major issue is the nature of the Security
Council's mandates and the manner in which they are
generated. Related to this is the question of whether the
mandates have any correlation to the ability of the
Organization to deliver. Mandates are increasingly
robust and place peacekeepers, most of whom come
from Member States not represented in this Council, in
non-permissive environments. They are faced with
situations in which they are more frequently being
called upon to use force not just to defend but to
enforce mandates. Peacekeeping mandates have
become too broad and too all-encompassing. These
difficulties are compounded by the fact that robust
peacekeeping has not been properly defined.

We reiterate the Brahimi recommendation that
mandates be clear and achievable. We also reiterate
that this will not be possible without substantively
involving countries that contribute manpower and
resources to peacekeeping operations. Consultations
with and briefings for troop- and police-contributing
countries do take place more frequently, but they are
pro forma in nature and skirt substantive issues with
little or no scope for meaningful discussion. The most
recent change in the rules of engagement and concept
of operations in the case of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was communicated to the troop-contributing
countries after they had been notified by the Under-
Secretary-General during a consultation meeting.

It will be agreed that being informed is not the
same as being consulted. This exemplifies the manner
in which the spirit of resolution 1353 (2001) is being
systematically undermined and raises doubts about the
seriousness of the Security Council in addressing the
reasons behind the crisis.

India believes that the future of peacekeeping,
and at least a part of peacebuilding, lies in the
development of police and rule of law capacities in
United Nations missions. The development of these
capacities must be relevant to the situations in which
they are to be applied. The most relevant capacities are
present in Member States that have gone through
successful post-colonial nation-building exercises. The
experience that these nations have in building and
nurturing institutions, particularly those relating to the
development of robust security mechanisms that
operate in visible, open and democratic environments,
need to be taken into account as the DPKO develops its
capabilities in this area.

My delegation believes that mission support is
another area that requires sustained attention. As a
general principle we believe that DFS needs to model
itself on well-run, simple and efficient military
logistical operations.

We have taken note of the New Horizon report
process. We would like it be an exercise that takes a
clear, hard look at where DPKO and DFS require
focusing. We have engaged with DPKO on the study
and are looking forward to continuing this engagement
in a constructive manner during the process of
generating the report. It is not, however, our
impression that the product of this study will influence
the manner in which the fundamental issues I raised
earlier are being addressed.

In concluding, I reiterate India's commitment to
participating in the process of strengthening
peacekeeping in order to increase its relevance and
effectiveness. We will also, where we deem it
necessary and relevant, be willing to consider the
deployment of capacities that are required by
peacekeeping operations in the years to come.

