Mr. Burt (United Kingdom): I am delighted to be
the first Minister of the new British Government to
address the Security Council. It is a particular honour
that you are in the chair, Sir, as I do so, particularly on
a day when my Foreign Secretary has made a key
announcement in the House of Commons in relation to
non-proliferation, which is designed to assist all our
efforts to promote understanding through greater
transparency among nations. I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on Lebanon's membership of the
Council and pay tribute to your delegation's handling
of Lebanon's presidency this month.

I would also like to join in welcoming the
Secretary-General to the Council and to thank him for
his kind and welcoming introductory remarks. The new
British Government looks forward very much to
working closely with him.

We welcome the importance you attach,
Mr. President, to intercultural dialogue as an
instrument to prevent, manage and resolve conflict and
to build peace after conflict. We see all too often that
prejudice and misunderstanding can cause and
perpetuate conflict within and between societies.

In Afghanistan, it is clear that sustainable peace
requires a truly representative, transparent Afghan
political process that will give all Afghans a real stake
in that process. Next month's peace jirga is an
important opportunity to begin a process of dialogue
aimed at achieving an enduring national consensus for
a political settlement. We must all support this process
as a fundamental part of ensuring that Afghanistan
emerges after 30 years of conflict as a peaceful and
functioning State.

In the Middle East, the unresolved Israeli-
Palestinian issue has been a source of anger and
resentment for over 60 years. It is one of the biggest
obstacles to intercultural dialogue and understanding,
particularly among Muslims, Jews and Christians. We
will work for peace in the Middle East with a secure
and universally recognized Israel living alongside a
sovereign and viable Palestinian State.

The current process of proximity talks offers
hope for a solution. We welcome and support the
United States efforts. We call on the parties to continue
working to narrow the gaps between them and to take
the bold political decisions necessary to achieving a
lasting peace. The region must play its role, too, by
supporting dialogue and negotiation and taking steps to
build a greater sense of trust.

We applaud the range of international efforts
under way to promote intercultural dialogue. We
support the work of the Alliance of Civilizations in
promoting such dialogue as a means of preventing
conflict. I wish the Alliance well as it begins its annual
Forum in Brazil tomorrow. The Alliance is at its best
when engaged in projects that draw on the energy of
the media and civil society to promote dialogue and
understanding.

I would like to highlight three points. First, while
intercultural dialogue should acknowledge our
differences, it must also be built on universal human
values. The United Nations has led the way in
promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms
through the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and subsequent human rights treaties. These rights and
freedoms are universal, indivisible and interdependent.
Respect for those rights enriches and underpins our
common humanity.
5

Secondly, dialogue must mean exactly that. Your
moving opening address, Mr. President, made clear
your views on this. It requires a willingness to be
influenced as well as to influence. It must be based on
the recognition that diplomacy, politics and life are not
a zero-sum game. Reconciliation requires both an
acceptance of different views and approaches and the
recognition of shared values and common interests,
and - as you yourself said - not avoiding the
difficult things or ignoring contradictions. The United
Nations, with its unique legitimacy and global reach, is
well placed to support such dialogue.

Thirdly, we need an approach to intercultural
dialogue that builds understanding of cross-cultures
and helps us deal with diversity and difference in a
tolerant and respectful way. This cannot be done only
by politicians or by the diplomacy of the United
Nations. It must begin with open societies whose
citizens are able to engage positively with other
cultures, both in their own country and around the
world. The Secretary-General observed this in his
opening remarks as well, when he said that improved
technology and communications will ensure that those
we represent are better informed than ever before and
ever more keen to join with others in the dialogue we
are discussing today. This openness in communication,
and the involvement of those we represent, will both
inspire and challenge us in our roles on their behalf.

Thank you again, Mr. President, for organizing
today's debate. We must now ensure that its lessons are
reflected in the Council's ongoing Vital work in
preventing and resolving conflict. May intercultural
dialogue help all of us to live up to the highest ideals,
as set out in the United Nations Charter.

