Ms. Hailu (Ethiopia): Let me join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate
on the United Nations-African Union peace and security
cooperation. I also wish to express appreciation to all
the briefers for their presentations this morning.

Ethiopia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) has certainly evolved and
expanded over the years to become one of the most
important and strategic partnerships in the area of
peace and security. I believe there are two reasons that
shaped this important development.

First, the United Nations has come to recognize
that it needs the effective partnership with others
in addressing the enormous and complex peace and
security challenges that the world is facing in the twenty-
first century. Secondly, this need by the United Nations
for partnership has been complemented by Africa's
determination to take charge of matters related to peace
and security on the continent, which culminated with
the establishment of the African Union and its Peace
and Security Architecture. These developments were
indeed born out of the bitter experiences of the 1990s
and the utter failure of the international community
to come to Africa's rescue, especially during the
horrendous genocide in Rwanda.

Over the past decade and more, the African Union
and its various regional mechanisms have been much
more proactive in responding to crisis situations in the
continent. This ranges from the conduct of good offices'
functions through the appointment of special envoys
to prevent the escalation of conflicts, to the fielding
of mediation teams to achieve a political solution and
the deployment of peace support operations to stabilize
conflict situations. On the other hand, the United
Nations has been providing political backstopping,
financial and logistical support, and capacity-building
assistance to the African Union for the promotion and
maintenance of peace and security in Africa.

Accordingly, a division of labour has emerged
between the two organizations based on their respective
comparative advantages where the African Union and
its regional mechanisms act as first responders to
crisis situations in Africa, whereas the United Nations
provides multidimensional support and later takes
over in the peace consolidation phase. This dynamic
partnership has indeed been proven to be very effective.
As we have seen on a number of occasions, where there
is synergy and coherence between the United Nations
and the AU across the spectrum of peace operations,
there will be tangible impact on the ground.

Nevertheless, this partnership is not without its
challenges and there are indeed a number of strategic
and operational issues that need to be seriously
addressed. This can only be done if the partnership
is institutionalized taking into account the principle
of shared responsibility to ensure the necessary
predictability and flexibility in effectively responding
to crisis situations in Africa. It is indeed appropriate
and logical that this is done so since the African Union
and its regional mechanisms are operating on the basis
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

This is also what the peace operations review has
rightly recommended and the United Nations should
seize this opportunity to take important measures along
this direction. Of course, we are aware of the process
currently under way to develop a joint framework for
enhanced cooperation and partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union in the promotion
and maintenance of peace and security in Africa and
we look forward to the timely conclusion of these
important discussions.

The relationship between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council is
indeed central to the strategic partnership between the
two organizations. The three African members of the
Security Council are the linchpin in this regard. Time
and again, we have seen that the coordination of the
three African members is critical not only in terms of
advancing the African perspective, which demands
that a clear message is conveyed, but also in promoting
better coordination in and enhancement of relations
between the two Councils.

It is indeed encouraging to be able to take note of
the regular interaction between the two Councils. But,
undoubtedly, there is room for improvement in the way
these interactions take place so that they become more
effective in delivering the desired results. What the
challenges we are facing today require from the two
Councils is that they transcend forms and maintain a
frank and more substantive dialogue in order to ensure
convergence at the strategic level in dealing with
matters of peace and security in Africa.

In this context, consideration of the views and
concerns of the African Union will greatly enhance
the effectiveness of cooperation and ensure African
ownership and priority-setting on the issues of peace
and security affecting the continent. We therefore very
much hope that the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union will evolve
accordingly and that the Security Council will play a
meaningful role in this regard.

