Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
excellent briefings.

Cote d'Ivoire remains deeply concerned about
the resurgence and escalation of violence that is
undermining hopes for achieving peace and is
exacerbating the already dire humanitarian situation.
My delegation condemns in the strongest terms the
14 September attacks on Saudi Arabia's oil facilities,
which are likely to undermine regional security and
stability. The stalemate and risk of fragmentation
caused by the conflict, as well as the various theatres
of open fighting in Yemen, could have irreversible
consequences for the country and the entire region if
the peace process remains at an impasse.

Relaunching the political process through inclusive
dialogue, with the support of regional and international
actors, remains one of the major challenges to be met
in order to end the ongoing violence that is deepening
political, cultural and economic divisions in Yemen.

My delegation welcomes the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2019/9 on 29 August,
which encourages Special Envoy Griffiths to pursue
his efforts within the framework of the resumption of
comprehensive negotiations. The statement calls on all
parties to work to preserve the unity and stability of
Yemen and urges the warring parties to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.

My delegation also welcomes the initiatives
undertaken by various stakeholders to revive the political
process, including the meeting on 8 and 9 September of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee under the
auspices of the United Nations, the planned meeting
in Jeddah, and the joint declaration of 9 September
by regional actors, calling for constructive dialogue.
All of this forward momentum must be maintained
and strengthened at all costs to create the necessary
conditions to bring about peace in Yemen.

There remains an urgent need to scrupulously
respect and fully implement the Stockholm Agreement,
signed in December 2018, and the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement, concerning the redeployment of the
military forces at the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and
Ras Issa. Indeed, my delegation is of the opinion that
the control of ports is undoubtedly a major issue. We
also remain convinced that the establishment of local
security forces in these ports will reinvigorate the
political process.

Cote d'Ivoire therefore urges the parties to proceed
in redeploying port military forces under the auspices
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee and
to cooperate fully with the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) with
a View to ensuring the unhindered and expeditious
movement of its personnel and equipment needed for
humanitarian assistance.

My country would also like to stress the need
for the Security Council and other stakeholders to
engage in new initiatives to help the warring parties
speed up the process relating to the prisoner-exchange
mechanism and the implementation of the memorandum
of understanding on the City of Taiz, which would
facilitate the opening of humanitarian corridors. These
two initiatives are undeniably important components of
the peace process crucial for rebuilding trust between
the parties.

The humanitarian situation in Yemen remains
a source of major concern for Cote d'Ivoire. It is
imperative that all protagonists respect international
humanitarian law and human rights in order to create
the conditions for better access to humanitarian
assistance for populations in need. Indeed, after several
years of conflict, Yemen has been bled dry. According
to United Nations agencies, 24 million people find
themselves in a situation of humanitarian emergency,
10 million are food insecure and 3.3 million internally
displaced. My country therefore urges bilateral and
multilateral partners to respond to emergency appeals
so as to support the financing of humanitarian aid and
life-saving programmes.

Cote d'Ivoire remains convinced that there can be
no military solution to the crisis in Yemen and reiterates
its call for an inclusive political process incorporating,
in particular, the people of the south, women and
civil society. In conclusion, my country congratulates
Lieutenant General Guha on his appointment as Chair
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee and
Head of UNMHA and assures him of its full support.

