Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, on behalf of my delegation, I would like to
welcome Mr. Joachim Rficker, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. I wish him
success in his endeavour at this very important stage
for the future of Kosovo. We assure him of our full
cooperation. We also thank him for the comprehensive
report he has just presented to us on the activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and events in that province.

We would also like to thank Ms. Sanda Raskovic-
Ivic, President of the Coordination Centre of the
Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, for her
statement. We also welcome the presence at the
Council once again of Prime Minister Agim Ceku of
Kosovo.

It is encouraging to note the progress made in the
two processes that are currently taking place in
Kosovo. As we are aware, the process to determine
Kosovo's future status has enjoyed high-level active
participation from both sides. However, we must
acknowledge that the results have thus far been limited
as regards common ground between the delegations of
Serbia and Kosovo. As the report points out,
discussions in the context of that process have included
the political situation and underlying issues, such as
those pertaining to Kosovo territory north of the River
Ibar.

Tensions in the north nevertheless continue. We
deplore the incidents of Violence that have taken place
in recent weeks, the cessation of contact with the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government by some
municipalities and the organization of parallel security
structures. We regret that apprehension and mistrust
persist between Albanians and Serbs in Kosovo as
regards those and other issues. No political agreement
or anything else will be lasting in Kosovo without
building real trust between the two communities. We
believe that the participation of Kosovo Serbs in the
governance structures is key to increasing their
involvement in political life. We call upon Belgrade to
stop discouraging their participation.
In the other process, it is encouraging to know
that the ongoing political process has had a positive
influence on the willingness of the authorities of
Kosovo to meet the standards and to achieve results in
that regard, namely, the completion of 5 of the 13
priorities that have been established. That demonstrates
the commitment of Kosovo's leaders and its
Provisional Institutions to implement the objectives
established by the international community.

We take note of the efforts that have been made
to make it possible to revitalize the implementation
process. We encourage the Government of Kosovo to
work energetically on the key areas identified in the
report. Among others, those include strengthening
contacts with all communities, promoting
reconciliation and trust between communities, giving
the requisite attention to the security situation and the
rule of law, and bringing to justice all those responsible
for acts of violence. In other words, through those
steps, all communities should be reassured that they
will have a place in the future of a multi-ethnic
Kosovo, regardless of the final result of the process.

Argentina believes that there cannot be a
prosperous and peaceful future for Kosovo without full
respect for the diversity of the people living in Kosovo.
As the Contact Group has already affirmed, the result
of the process to determine the future status will have
to be acceptable to the majority of the people of
Kosovo. At the same time, however, it will also have to
respect and protect the rights of minorities. We urge the
parties to live up to the task and to their historic
responsibility during the talks on status. In doing so
they should show flexibility in their respective
positions, in the context of a true spirit of compromise.

Lastly, we urge the Provisional Institutions to
persevere with rigorous implementation of the
standards, so as to achieve the objective of establishing
the foundations for a multi-ethnic and democratic
society in Kosovo where all communities that so desire
can live in dignity and security.

