Ms. Lovin (Sweden): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden. I
should like to start by thanking Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and by recognizing
the important statements made today by the Prime
Ministers of Jamaica and Samoa, and by the Minister
of Finance of the Seychelles and other Ministers. I
should also like to commend New Zealand for drawing
the Security Council's attention to this important issue,
and to thank Foreign Minister Mc Cully for presiding
over today's open debate.

For far too long, we have assessed security in a too-
narrow sense. True security is found through fighting
the widening gap between rich and poor countries. True
security is found through fighting famine and social
ills. True security is found through fighting for the
protection of the environment. The responsibility of the
international community and of us as States Members
of the United Nations is to lead that fight. That is why
I decided to come here to be a part of this important
debate.
Small island developing States (SIDS) are
undeniably among the hardest hit by climate change,
and they face unique security challenges. Their very
existence is threatened not by tanks, missiles or troops
but rather by extreme weather events, marine pollution,
rising sea levels and ocean acidification. That was
clearly expressed in the landmark SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (Samoa) Pathway.

It was evident from the Arria Formula meeting on
climate change and security held last month that climate
change would inevitably affect access to land, food
and economic opportunities, which in turn can drive
conflict and forced migration. The Security Council
can, and should, play a role in that regard.

Confronting the peace and security challenges of
SIDS demands a global response. Allow me to outline
eight points that we as Nordic countries believe need to
be part of that response.

First, it is without doubt that the effects of global
warming are the single most important long-term
security challenge affecting SIDS. Hence we need
to do our utmost to halt and mitigate the effects of
climate change. The Nordic countries will remain
steadfast partners of SIDS in that fight. A legally
binding agreement at the climate conference in Paris in
December is a crucial step towards a safer world.

Second, we need to back up words with action.
That is why the Nordic countries have made significant
commitments to the new Green Climate Fund. We are
also among the largest donors to other multilateral and
bilateral climate actions.

Third, we need to understand that sustainable
development is not a choice but a necessity for security.
This is a top priority for the Nordic Governments, as
demonstrated by our prioritization of peace and security
aspects of the post-2015 agenda and our emphasizing of
the connection with other facets of development.

Fourth, in order to reduce reliance on imported fossil
fuels, we need to integrate climate change mitigation
policies, with a particular emphasis on renewable
energy, along with energy security and longer-term
development programmes. Nordic countries are top
supporters of the Sustainable Energy for All initiative,
and we have several bilateral energy programmes with
SIDS in place.

Fifth, we need to support capacity-building and
strengthen resilience to severe weather events, natural
disasters and conflict due to environmental problems.
A lot of work needs to be done to build resilient, quality
infrastructure and to plan for an effective emergency
response. The Sendai Framework should be a guiding
document in that regard.

Sixth, the illicit exploitation of natural resources,
including illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing,
constitutes yet another challenge. Capacity-building,
including capacity to ratify the Food and Agriculture
Organization Port State Measures Agreement, is
essential to safeguarding food security as well as
advancing a blue economy for long-term sustainable
development. The United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea remains the centrepiece framework for
the conservation and sustainable use of the ocean and
its resources.

Seventh, SIDS obviously face numerous other
security challenges. I should mention transnational
crime, including trafficking in arms, human trafficking,
piracy and illicit drug smuggling. Nordic countries have
been partners to SIDS for decades through capacity
building, including in developing legal frameworks.
The implementation of applicable conventions and
frameworks, including the Arms Trade Treaty and the
SAMOA Pathway, will be essential in order to support
and strengthen ongoing efforts.

Finally, an inclusive approach is needed. And civil
society, local authorities and the private sector must take
part in the dialogue. The full and equal participation
of women everywhere must be indisputable - no
sustainable peace and development can be achieved if
half of the population is excluded.

In conclusion, I am under no illusion that we can
find a comprehensive action plan today. But today's
open debate serves as a reminder that halting and
mitigating the adverse effects of global warming is
not simply an environmental issue; it is a security
issue. That must be borne in mind when approaching
December's crucial climate meeting. I can assure you,
Sir, that the Nordic countries will remain a close ally
of all SIDS in addressing the complex challenges they
are confronted by. We look forward to working together
with everyone towards resilient and safe SIDS.

