Ms. Clinton (United States of America): I
commend the Security Council, the Turkish leadership
and the Secretary-General for the important statement
that will be issued at the end of this Council meeting,
and for the emphasis placed on the centrality of
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. I think
we have heard today - and will hear from the rest of
our colleagues - how important it is to improve these
functions as both a humanitarian and a strategic
imperative. I am pleased that the statement itself
emphasizes reducing and resolving conflicts and also
providing better protection to civilians from violence,
including protecting women and children from sexual
violence. And I am very glad that it is clear-eyed about
the current limitations of the United Nations and that it
recognizes that all of us, as Member States, have a
responsibility to work together to improve this core
function.

I have seen the good that the United Nations has
accomplished all over the world, and I have been
privileged to meet many of the dedicated men and
women who work under the blue flag in troubled lands
very far from their homes: places like Liberia, where
United Nations forces have provided the space and
security that that war-torn country needed to begin
putting itself back together; Pakistan, where United
Nations aid workers are assisting people whose homes
and livelihoods have been washed away by the floods;
and, of course, Haiti, where United Nations
peacekeepers, led by Brazil, were immediately back on
the streets after the earthquake, despite having suffered
grievous losses themselves. Their presence has
provided much-needed order, stability and hope in so
many places, and we should never forget the sacrifices
and service of these soldiers, police officers, advisers
and aid workers who do the hard work and face the
danger far from this Chamber that we are in today.

Last year, President Obama met with the leaders
of top troop- and police-contributing countries to thank
them and discuss how to make United Nations
peacekeeping more effective. And I would like to take
this opportunity to reaffirm our appreciation for the
contributions of all of the nations that have made
financial commitments. We will do our best to work
together to improve every aspect of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

As the presidential statement says, these
undertakings have become increasingly complex. It is
no longer enough to just provide peacekeepers. That
must be accompanied by effective mediation,
peacemaking and peacebuilding. We are concerned
about the growing gap between multifaceted mission
requirements and the resources available to meet them.
Too often, despite their ambitious mandates, United
Nations missions lack key capacities. They do not have
enough helicopters; they do not have enough medic
units; they do not have enough police mentors or crisis
response tools. And they are often hampered by
inadequate efforts to improve governance and the rule
of law. Sending out these missions without the
resources and support they need undermines their
effectiveness and jeopardizes the safety of United
Nations personnel.

I also very much wish to associate myself with
the comments of the President of Uganda, concerning
the fact that we need to do more in cooperation with
regional forces and with countries themselves.
Ultimately, the countries we are trying to help stabilize
and the civilians we are trying to protect, pay the price
of our inadequate financing, organizing and executing
of these missions. So improvement begins with clear,
credible and achievable mandates for all United
Nations missions - and, of course, that starts right
here.

The United States also strongly supports
operational reforms that would enable United Nations
field missions to deploy more rapidly, with adequate
numbers of well-equipped and well-trained troops and
police, and with the quality of leadership and civilian
expertise they require. We also support management
reforms for improved efficiency, accountability and
transparency. The United States is expanding its efforts
to help other countries train and supply formed police
units that have the skills and experience to fulfil these
difficult missions. These police units provide a critical
bridge between short-term security operations and
long-term work on governance and the rule of law. And
there should be a special focus on boosting the number
of women police officers and peacekeepers, like the
Indian women I met who were serving so well in
Liberia.

The United States is also funding new United
Nations efforts to integrate the protection of civilians
into every facet of its missions, from strategic planning
to on-the-ground operations. It is heartbreaking when
we receive reports, either from the United Nations
itself or through the press, that civilians near where
United Nations troops are stationed continue to suffer
horrific attacks and violence. One place where we need
better coordination, and where it is absolutely urgent,
is the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), where
sexual and gender-based violence against civilians has
reached unimaginable proportions. Last year, after
visiting the DRC and meeting with women who were
brutally assaulted and raped, I chaired the Council's
adoption of resolution 1888 (2009), to combat sexual
violence in conflict zones. I regret to say we have not
made progress. Today I am announcing that the United
States will provide new funding to help implement that
important measure of resolution 1888 (2009), including
the establishment of a Special Representative's office
and the ramping up of its efforts to support justice and
accountability. We will also contribute to training and
protection to those who work for accountability on the
ground in the DRC, and to help the DRC develop and
implement its own justice mechanisms.

The United States is, as we have been from the
very beginning, committed to improving United
Nations operations - not just because we think it is
the right thing to do, and not just because the
humanitarian imperative is so strong in our own value
system - but because we actually think it is smart and
strategic as well. These missions can help contain and
resolve conflicts that would otherwise engulf nations
and regions. They can help prevent fragile States from
becoming failed States and sources of wider instability.
And they can help struggling countries start on the road
to becoming productive partners. I look around this
Chamber and I see representatives from countries that
have known war in the very recent past, that have been
torn apart, and still are, by conflict. They have
re-emerged, and they have sustained themselves,
against great odds; and they are now nations
contributing to solving their own and other problems.

So, Mr. President, I hope the discussion that you
have brought to the forefront by chairing this summit
here in the Security Council is not just another
meeting, but that we will follow through and do
everything we can to make one of the most important
missions of the United Nations - peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding - more effective. The
United States will do its part, but we must all do
everything we can so that we are supporting those
brave men and women wearing those wonderful-
looking blue berets - when we see them we are proud
of them - and not just sending them to do a mission
that from the very beginning is impossible.

