Mr. Mabilangan (Philippines): Mr. President, thank
you for the opportunity to participate in this meeting of the
Security Council.

The events in East Timor are, with good reason,
deeply troubling to many of us. The Philippine delegation
is greatly concerned with the eruption and continuation of
Violence in Dili and other towns in the territory, some of
which have been directed against United Nations properties
and personnel. We express our deepest sympathies to the
Victims and their families, and we particularly mourn the
loss of many lives.

We would also, at this time, pay a special tribute to all
the personnel and staff of the United Nations Mission in
East T imor (UNAMET) who courageously stood by their
commitment to the service of the international community.
We are glad to hear that they have reached safe refuge. We
also hope that their colleagues who chose to remain in East
Timor as well as those refugees inside the United Nations
compound will be kept from harm.

The internal political dynamics in East Timor have
always been complicated. It is a territory that, for decades,
has been torn within itself. The international community has
always known that the resolution of the East Timor
question would never be simple and easy, and this belief is
proving to be accurate. It is therefore important that the
process established under the 5 May 1999 Tripartite
Agreements be continued to help the people of East Timor
achieve their collective aspirations. This process, under the
solemn agreement of Indonesia and Portugal and the United
Nations, should not be derailed by the actions of some.

The consultative process on 30 August was the
culmination of years of effort to reach a just and fair
settlement of the East Timor question that would be
acceptable to the international community. An
overwhelming number of East Timorese participated in last
week's vote, which was also conducted peacefully and
impartially.

The generally positive conduct of the 30 August vote
would not have been possible without the earnest efforts of
the Indonesian Government to fulfil its commitments under
the 5 May Agreements. Let us also be reminded that the
Indonesian Government was instrumental in forging the
agreements that led to the consultation process. The
Philippine delegation believes that Indonesia, a close
neighbour and friend and a sister member of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN),
deserves this acknowledgement.

It is difficult to deny, however, that the recent
incidents of violence in the territory have tarnished the
accomplishments of the consultation process. It is
therefore important that the violent groups and individuals
that continue to sow terror and mayhem in the territory be
stopped immediately. Violent attacks against the people of
East Timor, foreign religious and other workers - some
of whom are Filipinos - members of the media, and the
United Nations presence in the territory cannot be allowed
to continue. If it continues unabated, violence in the
territory may further worsen the humanitarian situation
that has now become extremely precarious in certain areas
of East Timor.

Under the 5 May Agreements, the Indonesian
Government has sole responsibility for security in East
Timor until the Indonesian National Assembly has ratified
the results of the consultative process. We hope that the
Indonesian military will exert every effort and be able to
restore order in East Timor. They have asked for more
time to restore order, and we fully understand that. The
declaration by the Indonesian Government of a state of
emergency in the territory should be a step in the right
direction. The change in the command structure of the
military in East Timor would be another urgent
requirement for the restoration of peace and order in the
territory. Further determined action would be necessary to
restore and maintain order in East Timor.

It is important for the Philippines to see that the
people of East Timor be given a chance, with the full
support of the international community, to chart their
future after the completion of the process in the 5 May
Agreements. That is the same objective that the parties to
the Agreements intended to reach. The Philippines would
therefore be ready to provide assistance to achieve that
objective. We will continue, and expand, our participation
in UNAMET until the third phase of the East Timor
process. As indicated by the Secretary-General yesterday,
we would also respond positively if called upon to
participate as part of a United Nations international
peacekeeping force to restore order in East Timor, if such
international involvement was duly mandated by the
Security Council and welcomed by the Indonesian
Government.

My delegation urges the members of the Security
Council to consider appropriate actions on East Timor
which the United Nations might take in the next few
days,
 

based on discussions and consultations with concerned
parties. In the meantime, we call on all the parties to the 5
May Agreements to faithfully fulfil their obligations under
the Agreements so that the resolution of the East Timor
question will finally be achieved.

