Mr. Asim (Maldives): I wish to thank the
Government of Peru for convening today's open
debate, which is the second to be convened under
Peru's presidency this month. The focus on youth and
peace and security is most appropriate to complement
the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

My delegation welcomes the remarks made by
His Excellency Ne'stor Popolizio, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Peru, Ms. Jayathme Wickramanayake,
the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, and the
representatives of the Member States and civil society,
which have enriched today's insightful debate.

The youth bring with them an extraordinary level
of energy and passion that can be put to use for the
cause of peace, to enhance security and maintain
stability. There is a need to explore policy and
institutional reforms in order to engage youth more
productively in creating an environment for peace
to prevail. Discussions, such as the one taking place
today, serves as a useful platform to share experiences
and best practices and to enhance progress on the
implementation of resolution 2250 (2015).

We must recognize that in many countries, the
youth demographic is often wrongly stereotyped and
stigmatized as the culprit of instability. Consequently,
national policies and strategies are often formulated to
target youth as an issue to be addressed, overlooking
the potential they have to offer in providing innovative
solutions. In the Maldives, we believe that the goals
and aspirations of the youth are driven by a strong
desire for peace and security. It is often external
aggravating social and economic circumstances that
lead to their involvement in activities that may result
in the disruption of peace and security. Therefore, our
national policies aim to mitigate those circumstances
by ensuring economic inclusion, gender equality,
universal education and raising awareness to cater to
the needs of the youth.

As recognized in the independent progress study
on youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86),
pursuant to resolution 2250 (2015), we must ensure
that the rights of the youth demographic do not get
lost in the gap between the rights afforded to children
and the rights and political entitlements from which
they benefit as adults. That important transitional
period from children to adults must be catered for in
order to build societies that are resilient to conflict. In
that regard, the Maldives also advocates for inclusive
policies that recognize and accommodate the concerns
of the youth. Constructive and inclusive dialogue with
young people instil the idea of democratic societies and
resolution of conflict through peaceful means, while
carving the right path for future generations.

My delegation also wishes to highlight the
importance of partnerships to enhance the engagement
of youth through innovative means such as art, sports
and media, which have a wider outreach in targeting
this population demographic. The Government of the
Maldives has made significant investments to ensure
that young people are afforded the necessary social and
economic opportunities and to help to build cohesion
and unity among them. In that context, I wish to
highlight the crucial role that media, including social
media, has to play in shaping the minds and perceptions
of future generations. It is important to limit the spread
of misinformation and ensure that ideologies that
contribute to unity and social cohesion are propagated
among the youth. It is crucial to strike a balance in
guaranteeing freedom of speech, while ensuring that
incitements to violence and extremist ideologies are
not proliferated.

The Maldives has always perceived the youth as
partners for peace, rather than a cause of instability.
My delegation advocates for changing the perception of
youth in a similar fashion among countries in conflict
and where conflict may emerge. Young people have
a strong potential to contribute to the prevention of
conflict through building cohesion and resilience
within societies and their role must not be overlooked.
Catering to a youth-inclusive approach would require
significant investments, which will reap invaluable
benefits, by providing a stable, prosperous and peaceful
future for generations to come.
