Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to join my
colleagues in expressing my solidarity and sympathy
with those affected by the devastating force of the
hurricane in the United States and the typhoon in Asia.
They have our full support.

I would also like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
for her very informative briefing and to welcome the
presence among us of our colleagues the Permanent
Representatives of the Republic of Korea and Japan.

This meeting is an opportunity to prove the
Security Council's unity and strong will to uphold
the implementation of the United Nations sanctions
imposed on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Those measures will not be effective unless they are
being implemented honestly by all States.

The sanctions regime serves the sole purpose of
limitingpossible avenues forfinancing ofthe Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's illegal military activities.
As soon as a political solution regarding nuclear
disarmament and the ballistic-missile programme of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is achieved,
restrictive measures can be eased. But, in order to reach
such an agreement, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea has yet to take concrete steps that prove its
genuine will to denuclearize.
Poland is deeply concerned that Pyongyang has not
stopped its nuclear and ballistic missiles programmes
and continues to defy Security Council resolutions in an
increasingly sophisticated manner. That includes illicit
ship-to-ship transfers of petroleum products but also
attempted supplies of arms and other military equipment
to countries across the Middle East, continued abuse by
diplomats of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
of their status abroad, and other evasion practices.

We reiterate our position that, despite political and
legal difficulties, it is mandatory for all States without
exception to comply with obligations arising from the
Security Council resolutions.

Peace on the Korean peninsula can be achieved only
through dialogue. We welcomed the diplomatic process
related to the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula,
marked by historic summits in Panmunjom and
Singapore earlier this year. We look forward to the third
summit this year between the leaders of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea,
beginning tomorrow in Pyongyang. We hope that event
will help to reinvigorate and maintain dialogue on
the peninsula.

Poland expresses full support and gratitude to
Ambassador Karel van Oosterom as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006) and his team for their hard work.
We appreciate his efforts to ensure the greatest possible
transparency in the Committee's processes.

Poland firmly believes that work of the 1718
Committee is instrumental to the achievement of
comprehensive, verifiable and irreversible disarmament
on the Korean peninsula. We were therefore disappointed
that the midterm report of the Committee's Panel of
Experts has not yet been published. In recent weeks,
we have witnessed a dispute that is not only procedural,
regarding the validity of certain formulations in
the report. The sanctions regime imposed on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has crucial
meaning for regional and global peace and security, and
reports ofthe Panel of Experts play an important role in
implementation of the Security Council's resolutions.
We are gravely concerned by the fact that there were
attempts to actively interfere with the conclusions of
the midterm report after it had been submitted to the
Committee. To effectively implement the sanctions
regime, it is crucial to uphold the independence and
impartiality of the Panel of Experts. We also believe
that the credibility of the Panel's reports requires that,
once established, facts should not be negotiated. Each
and every country has the right to disagree with the
conclusions of the Panel, but that should not be to the
detriment of the Panel's independence.

Reports of that body, acting under auspices of the
United Nations, are perceived by a majority of States
as the leading source of impartial information on the
current status of the implementation of sanctions.
It is therefore important to avoid ambiguity in the
conclusions of the Panel's reports, as that may have
potentially devastating effects for the effective
implementation of sanctions.

Let me conclude by making a general remark
concerning procedures applicable in work of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.

Recent developments concerning the 1718
Committee prove that Chairs of sanctions committees
need to have more flexibility in their activities. The
current guidelines of the subsidiary bodies, which are
much more restrictive than the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, often do not leave
room for action by the Chair, even on procedural issues.
That situation can be easily used to obstruct the work of
the Committees.

