Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Mr. Martin Kobler and Ambassador Olof
Skoog for their briefings. I believe that they both
know that they have the full support of the delegation
of Uruguay.

A year and a half after the signing of the Libyan
Political Agreement, regrettably, there is still no visible
progress being made in the country's political transition.
The support received by the Government of National
Accord within the Libyan political system has been
negligible, which militates against the chances that it
will be able to swiftly stabilize the country and again
place it on the path towards normalcy. It is therefore
imperative that the new Government galvanize broad
support from the population in order to gain full
legitimacy. Otherwise, it will be very challenging for
it to eventually govern the country, or even most of its
territory. Meanwhile, violence and clashes continue to
spread. Dozens of militias on the ground hold the real
power in Libya, turning a profit from various economic
interests in an attempt to gain control ofthe oil industry
and the illegal migrant trade.

We are also concerned that the date for the
endorsement of the Political Agreement by the Tobruk-
based House of Representatives has been postponed. A
way to ensure that that occurs should be made in order
to remove uncertainty and instability. Efforts should
be intensified to allow for national reconciliation
that meets the demands and proposals of all parties
concerned.

In conclusion, we would like to voice our concern
about the frustrating situation faced by migrants who
use Libya as a transit country as they make their
way to Europe. We continue to bear witness every
day to tragic developments that result in hundreds of
deaths, including of women and children. Hundreds of
thousands of sub-Saharan migrants are now in Libya,
hoping to be able to cross the Mediterranean. They are
ill-treated and face gross human rights violations. We
reiterate that, as we seek solutions to that problem, we
must focus on the human rights ofmigrants and refugees.
Only political and institutional stability in Libya will
help to considerably reduce that phenomenon.

