The President (spoke in French): I should now
like to make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Mali.

First, I should like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Ibrahim Gambari, the Secretary-General's
Special Adviser on Africa, for his very useful update
on the situation in Angola.

Secondly, I should like to make a few brief
comments, on the understanding that my delegation
shares most of the views expressed this morning.

My first comment would be to recall that the
Angolan conflict has lasted for 26 years - more than a
quarter century. Despite the persistence of the conflict,
caused by UNITA, my delegation still pins great hopes
on the prospects for peace in Angola. We welcome the
commitment by all parties to the Lusaka Protocol,
which remains the only viable basis for a political
settlement that would make possible the return of peace
to Angola.

We urge UNITA without delay to start
discussions with the Angolan Government to
implement the relevant provisions of that Protocol and
those of the various Security Council resolutions and
declarations on the subject. We welcome the positive
gestures on the part of the Angolan Government and
encourage it to continue, in consultation with all
components of Angolan society - in particular civil
society, religious denominations and the United
Nations - to promote the peace process in Angola.

My second comment relates to the sanctions
imposed against UNITA. We believe that these
sanctions are appropriate, because they make a positive
contribution to reducing UNITA's military capacity.
That is why it is important that this question continue
to be accorded priority in the Council.

Thirdly, I believe that the Security Council should
continue to devote particular attention to the
humanitarian situation in Angola. We fully associate
ourselves with the appeal made to all parties to
facilitate the unimpeded delivery of aid to people in
conflict areas. We have taken note of the information
just provided by Ambassador Gambari on this question.

Fourthly, we associate ourselves also with the
appeal to the international community to support
efforts aimed at the economic recovery and the
democratization of Angolan society. Furthermore,
greater involvement on the part of the United Nations
is necessary in the process of weapons collection and
the reintegration of former combatants, since a
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme is be essential to any peace process.

Fifthly and lastly, Mali will continue to follow
very closely the situation in Angola, even after it
leaves the Council, out of solidarity with the fraternal
people of Angola, whose suffering should be eased,
and also to allow my friend and compatriot, Maitre
Alioune Blondin Beye, who was the architect of the
Lusaka Protocol, to rest in peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Ibrahim Gambari to
respond to the comments made and the questions
asked.

