Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Deputy
to the High Representative for his briefing.

I would like to start by also saluting Dr. Morad.
I thank him for his work, and I thank Ambassador
Haley for drawing our attention to his presence in this
Chamber today. I also thank all those members of the
United Nations, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and others who try so hard to help the people
of Syria.

We have heard very graphic accounts of what exactly
sarin is and how it attacks the central nervous system
and leads to convulsions, paralysis and asphyxiation. I
am sure that none of us will forget the footage we saw
of the agony of the men, women and children who were
poisoned by this nerve gas. As previous speakers have
said, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic concluded that sarin was used in
Khan Shaykhun, and the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism concluded that the Syrian
regime was responsible for the attack.

Khan Shaykhun was not the first time the regime
used chemical weapons. In 2013, after hundreds that
were killed with sarin in eastern Ghouta, Russia and the
Al-Assad regime promised the world that Syria would
abandon all of its chemical weapons. Resolution 2118
(2013) decided that Syria would destroy its chemical
weapons programme and join the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Last month, the Director-General briefed
the Council on Syria's progress in doing just that. The
Director-General noted that Syria had destroyed its
declared programme very quickly, but that questions
had arisen following inspections conducted by the
OPCW, and overtime those questions have increased
as inspectors have deployed to Syria more than a
dozen times.

Chemicals were found that should have been
declared, and yet Syria claimed not to know why. After
long, drawn-out discussions, they finally declared the
Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre, but there
were still 21 serious issues that remained unaddressed.
That means that after more than four years of work, the
OPCW is still unable to verify that Syria's declaration
is accurate, and as we have heard many times, gaps,
inconsistencies and discrepancies remain in Syria's
account of its declaration under the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Those are not trivial points of minor
detail; they are substantive, and the seriousness of the
outstanding concerns has increased over time.

My United States and Dutch colleagues have
eloquently drawn attention to the fact that there can be
no impunity, and we echo their call to that end. Last
November, Russia blocked the renewal of the mandate
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism and that leaves
us, as the Dutch Ambassador said, without a proper
mechanism to determine accountability. I echo what he
said about the way to explore all avenues in order to
try and find a way of establishing accountability and
responsibility for such weapons.

It is not just through actions in Syria, unfortunately,
that Russia's disdain for the international system
manifests itself. The poisoning in Salisbury of two
people with a military-grade nerve agent endangered
anyone who chanced to be in the vicinity. More than
130 people, including a police officer, were potentially
exposed to the agent. There has been no explanation
offered as to how a Russian nerve agent came to be used
in that manner. On 22 March, a Foreign Ministry official
in Moscow rejected the idea that Russia would accept
the OPCW independent conclusions in examining
material from the Salisbury attack, and today Russia
has called a meeting of the Executive Council of
OPCW in The Hague to pre-empt the findings of the
OPCW investigation.

There should be no more victims of chemical
weapons attacks, whether they take place in the war
zone of Syria or in an English country town. The rules-
based international order and its institutions are too
valuable to be put at risk in that way. It is our collective
duty to protect them and seek accountability for those
who choose to defy them. We fail the people of Syria,
the people of Salisbury and the world if we do not act.

Both my Dutch and American colleagues drew
attention to the 100 years that have elapsed since some
of the worst battles of the First World War. Allow me
to conclude with a quote from a poem from that War, "I
died in hell - (They called it Passchendaele)". It has a
new name now.

