Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General J ean-Pierre Lacroix,
Special Envoy Nicholas Haysom, Special Envoy Ismail
Wais and Ms. Grace John, for their informative and
thought-provoking briefings.

Poland welcomes the recent positive developments
in the peace process and the signing of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
South Sudan. We commend the regional efforts
that led to the Agreement, in particular the role of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
Ethiopia and the Sudan. Nevertheless we are cautiously
optimistic. We have seen South Sudanese parties sign
many agreements only to violate them later. We truly
believe this time all signatories will demonstrate real
commitment and determination to bring durable peace
and stability to South Sudan.

Unfortunately, despite those positive developments,
the Agreement seems yet to have an impact on the
situation of the people of South Sudan. The security,
humanitarian and economic situations remain dire.
Targeted attacks on civilians, including women and
children, continue. Serious human rights violations
and abuses and violations of humanitarian law persist,
and their perpetrators enjoy impunity. Millions of
South Sudanese are displaced, and more than half of
the population is suffering food insecurity. It all has
to come to an end. There is no doubt that the people
of South Sudan critically need stability and State
institutions that care for Citizens and provide basic
services. It is high time the political leaders of South
Sudan put aside their differences and put the people of
South Sudan first.

In that context, I would like to stress the importance
of political inclusiveness and ensuring women's and
young people's participation in political and peace
processes in South Sudan. It is our strong belief
that South Sudanese women can play a vital role in
peacebuilding and reconciliation efforts, as well as in
forging resilience.

I would like to express our appreciation to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for
its tireless efforts in extremely difficult circumstances.
We praise the Mission's role in the protection of
civilians and in ensuring an environment conducive for
humanitarian actors to deliver their assistance. We pay
tribute to its members who have paid the highest price
during their service in South Sudan.

We condemn in the strongest terms the attacks on
UNMISS forces and reiterate that such crimes must
not go unpunished. We also remind the Government of
South Sudan of all its obligations under the status-of-
forces agreement.

Let me conclude by thanking Special Envoy Haysom
for his hard work, tireless efforts and commitment
to supporting the peace process in South Sudan. We
congratulate him on his new appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
and wish him every success in his new endeavour.

