Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We should like to extend our gratitude to
Mr. Feltman for his detailed and comprehensive briefing.

Given present-day conditions, as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is morphing through
the changing situation on the ground, the Secretary-
General's strategic analysis is especially important. The
group's significant losses notwithstanding, members of
ISIL are managing to put up a military resistance in
Mosul and are holding their grip on Raqqa. The group
continues to spread its influence in various parts of
the world. Against this backdrop, we see an ongoing
reorganization of its structures and an adaptation to new
conditions in the conduct of hostilities. The leadership
of ISIL is curbing expenditures, funnelling money for
the procurement of weapons and making regional units
self-sufficient. ISIL continues to use the heinous and
inhumane tactic of terrorist attacks. Yesterday, in Iran,
tragedy struck once again. We extend our solidarity to
the people and the Government of Iran and other States
that have suffered at the hands of terrorists.

The Secretary-General's latest report (S/2017/467)
on resolution 2253 (2015) contains an overall conclusion
that terrorist revenue is gradually dwindling on the
whole. At first glance, it might appear that Security
Council mechanisms to combat terrorism financing are
finally beginning to function at full capacity. However,
such an assessment would be far too optimistic.
Unfortunately, not all States conscientiously uphold
their obligations in this sphere. Clearly, it is past time
to stiffen the Security Council's sanctions mechanisms
with a focus on the full financial and economic
asphyxiation of ISIL.

For the moment, the reduction or curbing of
revenue, as was repeatedly stressed by the Secretary-
General in the report, is chiefly attributable to
military losses incurred by terrorists, and yet the
sources of the expansion of ISIL's budget have not
significantly changed with time. Key sources - trade
in hydrocarbons and extortion from populations in the
territories held by the terrorists - remain. According
to the information at our disposal, ISIL's proceeds from
the sale of oil has dropped to between $12 million and
$20 million per month, which is nearly three times less
than what we saw in 2015. The achievement of such
results has been possible thanks to the effective actions
of the Russian Air Force during the counter-terrorism
campaign in Syria. According to recent independent
information, some 4,000 tankers have been destroyed,
which has put 206 oil- and gas-producing facilities out
of commission.

We have previously drawn the attention of the
sponsors of the report to the need to avoid selectivity
in assessing developments in the context of the struggle
against ISIL in Syria and Iraq. For reasons unknown,
the document fails to refer to the repeated liberation
of Palmyra, but highlights the fact that Manbij was
liberated, which happened way back in the summer of
2016. The report further fails to mention information
about civilian casualties during the operations of the
so-called coalition to liberate Mosul.

We are closely tracking new sources of financing for
ISIL and sharing the relevant information with partners
abroad and specialized organizations, particularly the
Financial Action Task Force. For example, recently ISIL
is increasingly resorting to human organ trafficking.
It is also participating in the transport of refugees to
Europe and engaging in kidnapping for ransom.

In the struggle against terrorism financing, it is
important to work in regional formats, including the
Eurasian Group on Combating Money-Laundering and
the Financing of Terrorism. We welcome the fact that
the role of this organization is stressed in the report.

Terrorists have mastered all the nuances of Internet
and social-network use for the recruitment of fighters
and for the financing oftheir operations. We concur with
the conclusions of the report, namely, that the recent
terrorist attacks in Europe and Russia were the result
of the large-scale proliferation of ISIL propaganda via
online platforms. In a number of cases, instructions for
carrying out terrorist attacks were delivered through
mobile applications that used encryption.

An important step in countering terrorist
propaganda was the adoption of resolution 2354
(2017), which set forth a comprehensive international
framework in this realm. We consider the framework
to be a solid foundation for further expansion of
the Council's mechanisms in countering terrorist
ideology, including by strengthening sanctions and law
enforcement measures.

Despite the rivalry among the pro-Al-Qaida
structures and the resistance of State bodies, ISIL
continues to penetrate deep into the African continent.
Recently, the level of the terrorist threat has risen in
South-East Asia, including as a result of the active
work of ISIL's propaganda centres. We agree with the
assessment of the ISIL threat in northern Afghanistan,
contained in the report. Despite the enduring impressive
international presence in the country, we believe it is
premature to refer to the allegedly weakened influence
of Afghan factions of ISIL. This is especially true in
the light of the recent tragic events in Kabul.

Evidently, the threat of the radicalization of the
population, the actions of lone-wolf fighters, the
creation of sleeper cells and full operational branches of
large terrorist organizations have affected every State.
It will be possible to stop the territorial spread of ISIL
is possible only ifwe establish a single counter-terrorist
front that defends our common values enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.

