Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I am happy to express to you my great pleasure,
and that of my country, at seeing your sisterly country,
Mr. President, presiding over the Security Council for
the month of February. I would also like to express
to your predecessor, the Permanent Representative
of Kazakhstan, as well as to his country, my
congratulations for their effective stewardship of the
Council last month. Allow me also to express my thanks
to the delegation of the United States for its efforts in
coordinating the work on resolution 2400 (2018), which
was just adopted unanimously by the Security Council,
on the annual extension of the provisions of resolution
1591 (2005). We would like to express our heartfelt
gratitude to all members of the Council for the time they
have made for me and the members of my delegation
in order to exchange points of view on the content of
the paragraphs of the resolution under discussion. We
welcome the fact that the Council resolution just adopted
has expressed the overall evaluation of the members of
the Council regarding the humanitarian, political and
security situation in Darfur in a manner that shows
the continuous improvement of the situation in there
and in all of its five states, including the Jabal Marra
area, where life is returning to normal as a result of
the joint efforts made by the Government of the Sudan,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and humanitarian partners.

The Jabal Marra area has witnessed many leaders
and elements from the rebellion movement of Abdul
Wahid Nour joining the path to peace - under the
leadership of Attayeb Bashar and others. We would
like to confirm here that the Government of the Sudan
is seriously seeking to enhance peace in Jabal Marra
and all of Darfur through dialogue and peaceful
negotiations. We welcome all of those from the armed
groups joining the peace procession in order to support
security, stability and reconstruction of the state.

Council resolution 1591 (2005) was adopted 12
years ago. Since then, we saw periods of calm and
periods of escalation, until 2011 where the parties to the
conflict resolved their differences through a peaceful
and negotiated settlement supervised by the United
Nations, the African Union, the League of Arab States
and peace partners. As indicated in reports issued by
UNAMID and reports of the Panel of Experts on the
Sudan established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005),
Darfur has witnessed continuous improvement year
after year to this day in 2018. As far as I know, there
is general recognition among the previous and current
membership regarding the continued improvement,
which has resulted in a move from a peacekeeping phase
to a phase of stability, development and peacebuilding
in Darfur. I do not think that anyone would disagree
with me today in saying that the Council resolutions
must ultimately be in line with the general assessment
of its membership and the different United Nations
mechanisms that conditions are improving to a point that
would allow for the gradual and phased implementation
of the UNAMID exit strategy.

Therefore, we thought that this resolution should
include a review of the sanctions regime imposed on
Darfur since 2005 and a provision on gradually - and
only gradually - ending the mandate of the Panel
of Experts in a manner that reflects the situation in
Darfur and the conclusions reached by the Council on
29 June 2017, in resolution 2363 (2017). Allow me to
recall what the former Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, Ambassador Volodymyr
Yelchenko, stated in the three-month report he
submitted to the Council on 27 July 2017:

"As I mentioned in my visit report, I believe that
all United Nations efforts in Darfur, be they
peacekeeping or sanctions, should ideally be
reviewed in parallel in a complementary manner to
reflect the current situation on the ground."

That was reconfirmed in his last statement before
the Security Council on 9 December 2017, on the
occasion of the expiration of his chairmanship of the
Sanctions Committee.

This is an important, fundamental and basic report,
which is the principal benchmark for the Council in
reviewing the sanctions that have been imposed since
2005 and have become obsolete. Moreover, in our view,
reviewing the sanctions with the purpose of ultimately
eliminating them, would deal with the fundamental
problem from which the United Nations suffers - the
multiplicity of mechanisms that have been established
to deal with one single matter in a conflicting and
duplicative manner. From our experience in the Sudan,
that practice is harmful, and we are fully aware of the
repercussions of such mechanisms.

The report of the Panel of Experts mentioned that
the remaining armed groups are now active outside
of Darfur, in Libya and in South Sudan, and that they
are funding themselves by acting as mercenaries,
trafficking in persons, taking hostages and levying
money by force. Those are the means that armed
groups use for funding. They have been recognized by
the Panel of Experts and must be condemned by the
Council. They must be identified as the abominable acts
that deserve the condemnation ofthe society of nations,
as violations of international conventions and General
Assembly resolutions. I would note here that these
armed groups employ practices that threaten peace
and security in the region and must be dealt with as a
regional threat, like other terrorist movements active in
the region. Moreover, these actions transcend national
borders, thus transforming an internal conflict into an
international one, and must be dealt with as such.

The Government of the Sudan is implementing its
plans in order to enhance the presence and the authority
of the Government in the areas that have been affected
by conflict. Through its various bodies, the Government
launched a campaign to collect weapons under the
supervision of the Vice-President. The campaign
was very successful and created an environment that
supported the enhancement of stability and security. It
owes it success to the efforts and Willpower of citizens
and the Government, in cooperation with UNAMID.

Moreover, the Government is making additional
efforts to enhance the police and judicial presence
throughout Darfur in order to deal with the effects of
the conflict. We hope that these efforts will advance
the political process and will ensure success with the
participation of all parties to the conflict, in an objective
manner and with no preconditions, in order to genuinely
seek to join the peace process in Darfur. 1 would also
like to draw the Council's attention to the need to not
allow certain individuals or factions to take hostage the
arrival at a final peace. A11 actors must be subject to
international law, which, in turn, must proscribe the
use of violence to achieve any political ends.

My country's delegation also hopes that the
Council will do its part in punishing those who obstruct
the achievement of peace in Darfur and prolong the
suffering of our people there. Abdul Wahid Nour, head
of the Sudan Liberation Army, to this very day continues
in his obstinacy and rejection of all calls for dialogue
and negotiation. He is hiding behind the support from
some individuals in a manner that goes against peace
and stability in my country and worldwide.

The Security Council, when imposing international
sanctions on a certain situation or country, relies
on resolutions that precede the imposition of such
sanctions. That is exactly what happened with Darfur.
Now the Security Council has decided that the situation
that has led to and prompted the adoption of several
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations has returned to normal, and therefore
decided to implement a phased exit strategy. Therefore,
the sanctions regime must not remain separate and
divided from what the Security Council decided with
regard to the situation in Darfur on 29 June 2017.

Moreover, members might know better than I that
the Security Council resorts to different measures to
deal with situations that are similar to the one in Darfur.
In some instances the Council does not establish a
sanctions panel at all, and in other situations it uses
only one expert. We therefore believe it is logical that
the Security Council would now act accordingly and
would no longer require the Panel of Experts, based
on the fact that the situation in Darfur has returned to
normal and to the state it was in before 2003, and based
on the Council's practices that I have just mentioned.

We would like to recall what we stated before the
Council in January, that the political discrimination
that some States are subjected to for strictly political
reasons must not be permitted. We hope that the
Security Council, with its great past achievements, will
fully take that into consideration.

In conclusion, the delegation of the Sudan
welcomes the Panel of Experts and its report. We
affirm our readiness to cooperate with the Panel and to
facilitate its work fully. The Government of the Sudan
has demonstrated its serious commitment over the
past year to full cooperation with the Panel of Experts
and to provide an appropriate environment leading
to its success and enabling it to collect and monitor
information from real sources on the ground, through
the Panel's repeated visits to the Sudan. We hope the
Panel of Experts will uphold its mandate and work
in a professional, impartial and transparent manner.
Furthermore, we hope that the Panel will rely on
information from trusted sources and avoid unreliable
ones, and that its reports will reflect the reality on the
ground in Darfur and support the continuation of the
peace process there.

The meeting rose at 9.50 a.m.
