The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Angola.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his briefing on the quarterly
report of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan
(S/2016/218). We commend Mr. Haysom and his team
for the remarkable achievements of the Mission, despite
the special circumstances under which they operate.

The present debate has been a good opportunity
for the Council to assess the political, security,
humanitarian and human rights, as well as regionally
and internationally related, developments after the
update ofDecember 2015 (see S/PV.7591). We commend
the efforts deployed by the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group on the Afghan Peace and Reconciliation
Process - comprising Afghanistan, China, Pakistan
and the United States - aimed at reinvigorating the
peace and national reconciliation process. The initiatives
undertaken by the Group underpin the possibility of
reaching a peaceful solution to the conflict through
dialogue among the Afghani Government, the Taliban
and other groups involved in the conflict. We encourage
the Group to continue supporting the Afghani national
peace and reconciliation process.

Over the most recent period of time, since the
debate held in December, the security situation has
remained unstable and characterized by Taliban attacks
in various regions of the country and an increase in
activity by terrorists, especially Al-Qaida and groups
affiliated with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
In fact, conflict-related violence has increased,
while the Afghan National Security Forces seeked to
contain insurgent activities resulting in more civilian
casualties. The recent killing by the Taliban in Kabul
of seven members of the press was a direct and totally
unacceptable attack on the freedom of expression. We
convey our condolences to the families and urge all
parties to the conflict to respect the recognized rights
of the press and the freedom of information.

Stability and long-term prosperity in Afghanistan
depends on national reconciliation based on peace, on
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and on regional cooperation based on mutual respect
and non-interference in the internal affairs of other
States. In that connection, we commend the efforts
deployed by the Afghani authorities in seeking an
active involvement with regional partners. A positive
step was the joint inauguration last December by
President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and Prime Minister
Sharif of Pakistan of the Heart of Asia fifth ministerial
conference in Islamabad, with the participation of
high-level representatives from the region. Its final
declaration focused on the fight against security
threats, the promotion of economic cooperation and the
strengthening of confidence-building measures, and
calling on the Taliban and opposition groups to engage
in peace talks with the Afghani Government were steps
in the right direction.

In its 2015 annual report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict in Afghanistan, UNAMA
cited more than 11,000 civilian casualties for the
year, representing the largest number it had recorded
since 2009, with most of the deaths attributed to
anti-Government forces. Children continue to find
themselves in an appalling predicament, accounting for
almost a third of all civilian deaths during the reporting
report. We condemn the indiscriminate killing of
civilians in the strongest terms, and urge all parties to
respect their obligations under international human-
right and humanitarian law and to prevent attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure. We hope that the
recommendations in the report will help to improve the
mechanisms for protecting civilians in armed conflicts.

We were pleased to note the statement of the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
effect that the country continues to make strides
in the protection of civilians and the promotion of
human rights, especially the rights of children, in
implementing the road map, preventing the recruitment
of child soldiers and complying with the Government's
pledge to empower women, ensure their enjoyment of
equal rights and encourage their participation in all
areas of life.

The report's comprehensive analysis of the situation
in Afghanistan in the area of drugs in 2015 highlights
a substantial reduction in poppy cultivation and opium
production, and sharp increases in drug seizures over
the past three years. That is a matter for rejoicing in
a country so heavily dependent on the drug economy,
and given the latter's role in funding insurgents
and terrorists.

The challenges facing Afghanistan are immense.
We share the view that the country's top priority is the
resumption of the peace and national reconciliation
process, so that it can overcome its political and
security crises and enable the Afghan people to achieve
peace and stability. It is crucial that the international
community maintain its engagement with Afghanistan
and its peace and development. In that regard, we
support the Secretary-General's request to extend
UNAMA's mandate for one year through resolution
2274 (2016), which we have done this morning.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.

