Mr. Locsin (Philippines): My delegation wishes
to thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict for
their proactive work in preventing and promoting,
monitoring and ensuring accountability with regard
to the grave Violations committed against children in
armed conflicts.

The 2016 report of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
(A/HRC/34/44) brings to light the tragic effects of
armed conflict on children, while highlighting the
good practices and headway made. The Philippines
is heartened to note the delisting of the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front group from the report after they
finally stopped the recruitment of children in armed
conflict. A total of 1,869 children identified by the
Front as associated with its armed wing were released
from combat duty in a process that culminated early
this year.

Despite existing pockets of conflict in the country,
including the recently ended Marawi siege, the State,
as responsible for the human rights situation in the
country, continues to prioritize the welfare of children
and to discourage insurgencies from using children as
warriors for a dubious and disgraceful advantage. In the
Philippines, children are regarded as zones ofpeace, in
accordance with the law on the special protection of
children against abuse, exploitation and discrimination.
That means that children must not be exposed to attack
by using them as combatants. They are entitled to
special respect and protection.

Of paramount importance is the protection of
children from any form of threat, assault, torture, or
other cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment. The
delivery of social services to children, regardless of
the situation they are in, must also be unhampered. No
military advantage can possibly be gained by leaving
them hurt, exposed and unattended. Education should
continue in war and peace. In line with that policy,
schools are also declared zones ofpeace. The Philippine
State, which enjoys the distinction of maintaining one
of the best public education systems in the developing
world, has urged all schools to adhere to the Department
of Education's basic curriculum and pedagogy, and,
while the State does not have the wherewithal to offer
classes in Marxism-Leninism, to reserve that subject
for home schooling if that is some people's desire.

The military has always been at the forefront of
protecting the welfare of children in armed conflict.
In February 2016, the Armed Forces issued a circular,
"Child protection in armed conflict situations",
which serves as a policy guide for the armed forces
in preventing the commission of grave violations of
children's rights. It sets the procedures for monitoring,
reporting, and responding to Violations committed
by State or non-State actors. More protective laws,
circulars and policy statements are in the works.
However, like those present here at today's meeting, we
prefer to measure success by results, rather than simply
by good intentions, with which the road to war is paved.
That is why accuracy and objectivity in reporting is
imperative. It can make or break the sincere desire to
continue the endeavour to protect children in conflict.

The Philippines will continue to help in the work of
the United Nations towards the protection of children
in armed conflict, and to support the publication of its
annual report in line with its adherence to the highest
standards of international law and the principles of
transparency and accountability.

In my meeting with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, her office expressed the
desire to maintain a continuous engagement with the
States Members of the United Nations on those issues.
I welcome that initiative because it addresses two
concerns that, in my Government's experience, pose a
challenge to achieving fair and balanced reporting on
the part of the Special Representative. First, it addresses
the brevity of time within which a Member State must
provide comments to a draft report; and secondly, the
lack of clarity and details regarding some cases cited
in reports, which make it difficult for the Governments
concerned to validate the claim, thereby making the
work not unlike boxing with shadows.

We have no need or desire to hide abuses. We want
and we have an army that fights to win conflicts, as
the Marawi siege demonstrated with distinction, and
do not want to create new conflicts by committing
abuses, especially against children. That is the dubious
distinction of insurgents. We are proud, and not
ashamed, of our army. I have personally observed the
care and caution shown by the army in avoiding civilian
casualties when I worked as a television journalist
covering the battlefield for ABS-CBN News. We do
not know, however, how insurgents regard the practices
that we all abhor.

It is my Government's hope that, in establishing and
nurturing a functioning relationship with the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Governments will be
able to facilitate the issuance of timely, accurate and
balanced reports, which will pave the way to stamping
out violence against children in the wars that Member
States, sadly, still wage to protect their people from
enemies and their countries from dismemberment.

