Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Resolution 2118 (2013), just adopted, is fully
in keeping with the Russian-American agreements
achieved in Geneva on 14 September. That was the
result of coordinated efforts by the Russian Federation
and the United States of America, backed by all the
members of the Security Council and the majority of
other States.

Pursuant to the resolution, the leading role in the
upcoming work will be played by the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), and
the United Nations will provide it with assistance. We
believe that the OPCW and United Nations experts will
act in a professional and impartial way in Syria, with
full respect for the sovereignty of that country.

Everything possible must be done to ensure that
the Syrian chemical arsenals are taken under control,
pursuant to the decision of the Executive Council of
the OPCW, in a timely and effective way that respects
all safety norms. We expect that the Secretary-General
and the Director-General of the OPCW will cooperate
closely and ensure due coordination pursuant to
resolution 2118 (2013), just adopted. We look forward
to the recommendations of the Secretary-General
regarding the organization of this work, including
issues related to ensuring the safety of international
personnel. Russia stands ready to participate in the
forthcoming operation in Syria in all its aspects.

An important precondition for the success of the
upcoming work is the readiness for real cooperation
Damascus has shown byjoining the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Syria has already begun implementation of
its commitments by providing the OPCW with a detailed
list of its chemical-arsenal holdings. We believe that
Damascus will continue to cooperate constructively
and in good faith with the international inspectors.

The responsibility for the implementation of that
resolution does not lie only with the Government of
Syria. Pursuant to the demands of the Security Council,
the international experts will also require cooperation
on the part of the Syrian opposition. In that respect,
the reports to be submitted for consideration by the
Security Council regarding the implementation of the
OPCW decision and resolution 2118 (2013) will have to
be objective and address the situation with respect to
all parties to the Syrian conflict. The resolution does
not fall under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations and does not allow for any automatic use of
coercive measures of enforcement.
It reaffirms the agreement that was reached at the
Russian-American meeting held in Geneva to the effect
that any violations of those requirements as well as the
use of chemical weapons by any party will be carefully
investigated by the Security Council, which will stand
ready to take action under Chapter VII of the Charter.
The actions taken will be commensurate with any
violations, which will have to be 100 per cent proved.

Particular responsibility lies with those who back
and sponsor the opposition; they have to ensure that
chemical weapons do not fall into the hands of extremists.
We draw attention to the fact that the resolution contains
requirements set by the Security Council that apply
to all countries, especially Syria's neighbours. They
must report to the Council any attempts by non-State
actors to obtain chemical weapons. It would be even
more unacceptable for them to support such attempts.
All similar cases will be immediately considered by
the Security Council with the objective of taking the
necessary measures.

We believe that the resolution will not only make
it possible to solve the problem of Syrian chemical
weapons but also will give us impetus in connection
with a decision on the creation in the Middle East of
a zone free of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery, in accordance with the decisions
taken by the international community.

What is of particular importance here is the fact
that the resolution sets out a framework for a political
and diplomatic settlement ofthe Syrian crisis. It adopts,
without any reservations, the Geneva communique
dated 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex) as a platform
for a settlement. It also backs the rapid convening on
this basis of an international conference.

In our assessment, one that is shared by the other
permanent members of the Security Council as well
as by the Secretary-General, that could take place as
early as the middle of November. We expect that the
increasingly diverse Syrian opposition forces will in
the end be able to state their readiness to participate
in the conference without any preconditions, as the
Government of Syria has done. We call upon the
sponsors of the opposition to bring the necessary
pressure to bear on them to do so. The Russian
Federation will actively and directly participate in the
implementation of the chemical-weapons disarmament
process and in preparations for Geneva II.

