Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We note with regret that the situation in the
Middle East and North Africa continues to be tense
and explosive. Over the past few years the situation in
the Israeli-Palestinian track has continually worsened.
Negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians have
been de facto frozen. After the completion in April
2014 - without any tangible results - ofa nine-month
round of Israeli-Palestinian contacts under the auspices
of the United States, the situation in the Middle East
process has become significantly worse, as evidenced
by regular clashes in the West Bank, outbreaks of
Violence from which peaceful Palestinian and Israeli
civilians suffer, and Violations of the ceasefire in Gaza.

We strongly and unconditionally condemn any
terrorist activities, which stoke an already tense
atmosphere in the region. We must put an end to violence.
We are very worried about unilateral actions by Israel
creating irreversible facts on the ground. The Israeli
Government, in spite of the unequivocal condemnation
of the international community, continues to build
settlements and expand them in the occupied territories,
expropriating land in the West Bank and destroying
Palestinian homes. All of those actions undermine the
prospects for a two-State solution, to which there is no
alternative, as recognized by participants to the conflict
and the international community, as a whole.

Russia, as a member of the Middle East Quartet
of international mediators, is trying to reanimate the
negotiations and re-establish a political horizon in
the peace process. We note the report of the Quartet,
published on 1 July, on the status of the peace process,
and see it as a consolidated form of a message from
the international community. We are convinced that
a good-faith implementation by the parties of the
recommendations contained in that report would
contribute to improving the situation and overcoming
mutual distrust.

One of the main obstacles to resuming the peace
process is the division within the Palestinian ranks.
In the future, we intend to continue our efforts to
reestablish Palestinian unity, based on the political
platform of the Palestine Liberation Organization and
the Arab Peace Initiative.

We are particularly concerned about the situation in
Gaza. The humanitarian situation there is very severe.
That means that Palestinians living in Gaza cannot look
forward to any sort of future, which contributes to their
radicalization. It plays into the hands of the extremists.
We share the views of the international community on
the need to put an end to the embargo imposed on Gaza
as soon as possible.

Next year will mark 50 years since the adoption
of resolution 242 (1967), one of the foundational
documents of the legal basis for the Middle East peace
process. We note with regret that, half a century later,
the root causes of that protracted and chronic conflict
have not been dealt with and that prospects for a peace
settlement are very dim. In the context of the conflicts
all over the Middle East, the situation could lead to the
worst possible consequences.

The continuous turmoil and upheaval that began six
years ago, and was hastily and naively called the "Arab
Spring", has created massive unresolved problems.
Yemen and Libya, which were often touted as models
of the democratization process, are still suffering from
bloodshed and power struggles. There is a grave situation
in Iraq, and the conflict in Syria has reached tragic
proportions. The senseless and shortsighted actions
of certain countries, characterized by interference in
internal affairs and attempts to change rogue regimes
in order to impose their recipes for democracy without
taking into account the historic, cultural and religious
specificities of Middle East States, as well as the direct

involvement of those States, have led to the emergence
of a large area of chaos and anarchy.

Of course, terrorists from Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, Jabhat al-Nusrah, Al-Qaida and affiliated
groups have taken advantage of that situation. Overall,
in a whole range of countries in the region, State
institutions have been destroyed and humanitarian
socioeconomic problems have become severe, which
has provoked an unprecedented wave of migration.
From the very beginning ofthe Syrian crisis, Russia has
consistently advocated its peaceful resolution, while
respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the country. We are convinced that there is no
alternative to a political solution, based on an inclusive
inter-Syrian dialogue, while at the same time ensuring
the cessation of hostilities, increasing humanitarian
access and continuing the fight against terrorism.
It is precisely that complex position that is enshrined
in the Geneva communique of30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex), in Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2254 (2015), and in the corresponding
decisions of the International Syria Support Group.
Thanks to the actions of the Russian Air Force, we
managed to prevent terrorists from seizing Damascus,
undermine the military and economic potential of the
terrorist groups, and liberate large swathes of territory.
In addition, we are providing assistance in establishing
dialogue between the Government of Syria and the
representatives of the internal and external Syrian
opposition with a View to finding a common Syrian
consensus on a political and diplomatic settlement of
the crisis.

The Russian Federation continues to make every
effort to de-escalate tensions and resolve the most acute
humanitarian problems in Syria, especially in Aleppo,
where military activities are ending and the withdrawal
of fighters and their families from the eastern part of
the city is continuing. At the same time, large-scale
humanitarian and medical assistance is being provided
to the Syrian population affected by the conflict. Over
the past few days, the main flow of Russian humanitarian
aid has been directed to Aleppo. We believe that the
most urgent task now is the comprehensive end of
military activity and the resumption of inter-Syrian
negotiations. Damascus has more than once confirmed
its readiness to take part in such negotiations.

In Iraq, the Violent confrontation and struggle
against Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
is continuing. After terrible losses and defeats, the
Iraqi forces have managed to regain control over the
strategically important cities of Ramadi and Fallujah.
On 17 October, with the assistance of the so-called
anti-ISIL coalition, the military operation to liberate
the main stronghold of terrorism in the country, Mosul,
began. As we understand, it is still premature to speak of
significant victories. Meanwhile, during the two-month
campaign, the humanitarian situation has seriously
deteriorated; the number ofinternally displaced persons
exceeds 90,000 and more than 700,000 are in need of
urgent assistance.

The situation in Yemen and Libya is also very
serious. According to international humanitarian
organizations, 82 per cent of the 27 million population
of Yemen require urgent humanitarian assistance, and
according to the United Nations Children's Fund, every
10 minutes one Yemeni child dies from hunger.
As a result of the disintegration of Government
structures and the de facto vacuum of power, Libya
has become a transit point for migrants seeking to
cross the sea into Europe and a breeding ground for
terrorism, cross-border crime, arms smuggling and
drug trafficking. Since the beginning of the year, more
than 328,000 illegal immigrants have reached Europe
by crossing the Mediterranean.

The situation in the Middle East and North Africa
and the spread of terrorist activities beyond that region
demonstrates, once again, that in today's world no
single State is immune from the threat of terrorism,
and no single State will be able to sit on the sidelines in
an oasis of security. On that basis, we believe that the
task of paramount importance is to join forces, based
on the principle of the indivisibility of security, so as
to combat terrorism and extremism and to form a truly
universal anti-terrorist front.

Russia is not trying to reap geopolitical dividends
from the geopolitical instability in the region, or to
assert its influence by reformatting the Middle East
region. We are in favour of decisive action to destroy
ISIL and other terrorist groups, wherever they are, and
we are for a speedy resolution to all crises through
political and diplomatic means, in strict accordance
with the principles of international law. We support
concrete and effective measures for improving the
humanitarian situation and the socioeconomic recovery
and revival of the region. Those urgent tasks can only
be tackled in the framework of active and effective
international cooperation.

