Mr. Mukerji (India): I take this opportunity
to congratulate the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
for organizing today's open debate on this issue of great
importance and urgency.

Children constitute nearly one third of humankind
and are our most valuable resource. Childhood is the
foundation for the physical, psychological, social and
intellectual development of any country.

Our commitments to the rights of the child are
continuously threatened by the perpetrators of armed
conflict. Children in many parts of the world are being
forced to bear arms and wage war alongside adults. In
affected areas and in new areas, schools continue to be
attacked, health care and education are on the brink
of complete breakdown and development is coming
to a standstill. That does not bode well for the proper
implementation of the post-2015 development agenda,
which we are going to adopt at the summit on the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations, in 2015.

India is deeply concerned that children are
becoming increasingly trapped in the vicious grip of
armed conflict, as both targets and victims of violence
and abuse. The primary responsibility for addressing
this issue lies with the Governments of Member States.
That is due to their obligations and responsibilities
under the relevant treaties and conventions they are
party to and to the duty that Governments have towards
their citizens. India acknowledges the integral role
of civil society in this framework and as invaluable
partners in our national and international efforts on
children's issues.

There is a reference in paragraphs 172 to 176 of the
Secretary- General's report (S/2014/339) to the impact of
left-wing extremist armed groups on children in India.
That is a very serious issue, which the Government of
India has addressed as a priority. India believes that
through a combination of development and security-
related interventions, the left-wing extremists problem
can be tackled. We do not underestimate the challenge,
but we are committed to redressing the situation through
a combination of law and robust policy initiatives. The
Indian National Commission for Protection of Child
Rights, set up in 2007, is one of the few commissions
of its kind in Asia. It ensures that actions taken in
India are in consonance with our Constitution and the
Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989.

If Governments of Member States need assistance
in strengthening their capacities and resources to
tackle this problem, all of us in the United Nations
must demonstrate our willingness and commitment
to rendering such assistance. India, which this
month marks the fiftieth anniversary of sharing our
development experience with our partner countries in
the developing world, reiterates our readiness to do so.

We note that among the recommendations
included in the report of Secretary General is a call
for independent access by the United Nations for the
purpose of monitoring and reporting on grave violations
against children, and facilitating contact between
the Organization and non-State armed groups for the
purpose of dialogue. We believe that the United Nations
should act only in cooperation with the Government of
the Member State concerned, especially now that we
have an empowered institution that we unanimously
agreed to establish at the sixtieth anniversary Summit
of the United Nations in 2005, which is the Human
Rights Council. In that context, we note that the Human
Rights Council has already completed its first round
of the Universal Periodic Review of all 193 States
Members of the United Nations.

With respect to the interface between the United
Nations and non-State actors, we would note that
non-State actors are not bound by any legal obligations
or commitments. Any proposed interface with them is
therefore open-ended. It would be more effective for
the Council to recommend the strict application of the
rule of law as deterrence to armed non-State groups,
especially for the investigation and prosecution of those
non-State actors that are inveigling children into armed
conflict or violating the fundamental human rights of
children in armed conflict with impunity.

We are dismayed that, despite the clearly spelled
out provisions of paragraph 16 of resolution 1379
(2001), the report of the Secretary-General selectively
includes issues that do not appear relevant to threats
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
That needlessly diverts the attention and resources
that are needed to address the core issue being debated
today. The selective inclusion in sub-section B of the
Secretary-General's report of only countries from the
developing world, in our View, is a dangerous approach.
The impact of violent extremism and of the recruitment
and radicalization of children, the use of children to
commit violent acts, as well as incidents of armed
attacks on schools, which are listed in that section,
cannot be confined only to the developing world.
They occur in developed countries too, and need to be
addressed in a global framework.

We have referred to resolution 1379 (2001), which
was adopted in 2001. Since then, we have established
the Peacebuilding Commission. Perhaps the Security
Council should review the provisions of that resolution
to provide a more direct role for peacebuilding activities
to include provisions for the protection of children.

An area where India has been at the forefront of
implementing the Council's decisions on the topic of
our debate today is through our participation in the
peacekeeping operations. Based on the experience
we have garnered as the largest contributor to such
operations, we must express concern at the lack
of resources to implement all the provisions of the
mandates. At the very basic level, we need to ensure
that more child-protection advisers are deployed in
those operations. On a broader level, we expect the
Council to take advantage of the two current parallel
review processes under way of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities. Both of them are directly under
the ambit ofthe Council. The objective should be to use
the provisions and resources of peacebuilding activities
in a more proactive and sustainable manner. That, we
believe, should apply especially to guaranteeing the safe
return of children impacted by armed conflict, and to
the sustainability of their demobilization, rehabilitation
and reintegration into society.

