Mr. Kobler (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to
express my thanks to the Argentine Republic, which
holds this month's presidency of the Security Council,
for convening this meeting on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition to
introducing the report of the Secretary-General,
I would also like to update the Council on the latest
developments in the country.
(spoke in English)

First, I am glad to brief the Council for the first
time with Special Envoy Said Djinnit. After working
together for only a few weeks, I already feel that we
are in sync, like a pair of rowers, pulling our oars in
perfect rhythm up the mighty Congo River. I feel sure
that together we will swiftly move ahead and avoid the
dangerous rapids.

Today, I will focus on three pressing issues: first,
the recent massacres in Beni; secondly, the voluntary
disarmament of the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda (FDLR); and thirdly, implementing
the human rights mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

In less than one month, between 21 September
and 18 October, we witnessed the extremes of hope
and despair in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On 21 September, in Goma, a concert organized by
Peace One Day brought 15,000 people together to
sing, dance and celebrate peace in their city. A highly
symbolic event, the concert showed just how far Goma
had come since its liberation from the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) 10 months before. And it raised hopes
that the seed of peace, sprouting in Goma, would spread
throughout the East.

However, two weeks later, the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF) reminded us just how fragile those hopes
can be. Between 2 and 17 October, in villages in and
around Beni, ADF combatants brutally massacred
over 80 civilians, mostly women and children. They
used machetes to mutilate the bodies of their victims
in order to instill fear and to warn the living not to
help Government forces eradicate them. The ADF has
been weakened over the past months through effective
operations of the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC), resulting in the
capture of their strongholds. Hostages have been
released. Tens of thousands of refugees and internally
displaced persons have returned to the Kamango region.
These lamentable attacks, however, demonstrate the
group's resilience and its capacity to use asymmetric
guerrilla and terrorist tactics against civilians. Under
pressure and on the run, they may be trying to draw
FARDC attention away by attacking population centres.
I have made several visits to Beni in the past weeks
and days. I have paid my respects to the victims, giving
what consolation I could to the grieving families and
communities in the face of dozens of coffins lined
up side by side. On 22 October last Wednesday, an
angry crowd of 2,000 tried to storm the MONUSCO
base in Beni. We owe it to the decisive action of our
peacekeepers from Jordan, Nepal and Tanzania, along
with the efforts of local authorities and the Congolese
army and police, that the situation did not spiral out of
control.

I am extremely grateful to the Special Envoy Said
Djinnnit and the Special Envoy of the African Union,
Ambassador Boubacar Diarra, for having accompanied
me last Thursday in a difficult visit to Beni to deliver
two strong joint messages. First, only action against
the ADF, not words, will restitute the confidence of
the population in the FARDC and MONUSCO. We
must establish a triangle of confidence between the
population, the FARDC and MONUSCO. In any war,
no victory is possible without the support of the local
population. Secondly, we strongly advocated for decisive
joint military - including combat - operations
between the FARDC and MONUSCO against the ADF
to bring an end to this scourge.

Next, let me turn our attention to the issue which has
most occupied the Mission over the past five months,
even possibly to the detriment of our focus on the ADF
threat - the FDLR voluntary disarmament process. I
regret to say that, despite much promise, the process is
at an impasse. All special envoys of the Great Lakes
region attended the mid-term ministerial conference in
Luanda last week. I must congratulate Angola on its
leadership of this Luanda process. I have no doubt that
Angola will continue to play a positive role as regional
peacemaker. I also applaud the high-level attention and
the dedication that the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region have given to this process. All
agreed that there had been no progress since 2 July.

We all share the same objective - to neutralize
the FLDR - and the same conviction that the path
of non-violence is the best option. We all agree, as
expressed in Luanda, that the FLDR has to voluntarily
disarm by 2 January 2015. And all are determined that,
after the expiry ofthis deadline, military action against
the FDLR will be inevitable against those among the
FDLR who do not voluntarily disarm. In this regard,
I truly appreciate the Council's press statement of
3 October (SC/11586), recalling that the FDLR is a
group under United Nations sanctions that continues
to violate human rights. The Council reiterated the
importance of the FDLR's swift neutralization. I thank
Council members for their support and unequivocal
instructions.

Taking this fight to the jungle will be long and
difficult. It will result in many casualties. I, for one, do
not want to see that, but it is up to the FDLR to prevent
this scenario. It has exactly two months and six days
left to disarm, unconditionally, and to go to Kisangani
transit camp, as envisaged by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, or leave the country,
either voluntarily via the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement process,
or to third countries. The credibility of the United
Nations, the Congolese Government and the region are
at stake here.

The region's credibility is also challenged by the
long-overdue repatriation of former M-23 combatants
frorn Uganda and Rwanda. I urge the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to expedite
the outstanding amnesty requests and to finalize the
road map for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former M-23 combatants. I will leave
it to Special Envoy Djinnit to further elaborate on the
M-23 reintegration process. The military defeat of the
M-23 will not be sustainable if Nairobi declarations are
not quickly implemented. MONUSCO stands ready to
facilitate the repatriation of M-23 ex-combatants.

I congratulate the Force Intervention Brigade,
supported by all MONUSCO forces, who fought
bravely and successfully alongside the FARDC to bring
an end to the M-23. I am more than confident that, ifthe
FDLR does not disarm before 2 January, the Brigade,
supported by all MONUSCO forces, will fight equally
bravely and successfully against it.

The third issue I bring before the Council today
relates to the Mission's work on human rights in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Justice,
accountability and respect for human rights are the
cornerstones upon which peace and stability are built.
For many years now, the Joint Human Rights Office
has helped to document grave human rights violations
against the Congolese people and to advocate for and
protect their rights. This work is not undertaken to
weaken or blame the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, it is undertaken to strengthen
good governance, one of the national commitments
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
Respect for human rights and good governance leads to
more stability, not to instability. We want to empower
the Government in its fight against impunity, and
to support its efforts, which have been notable, for
improved governance and long-term stability.

MONUSCO and its Joint Human Rights Office are
and must continue to be partners for the Government
in those efforts. We have had very good day-to-day
cooperation - most of it discreet - and notable
progress, especially with regard to the security
services. The human rights due diligence policy is a
good example of how our human rights work impacts
on the respect for human rights demonstrated by the
security forces.

However, public human rights reports are and will
remain an instrument of the human rights work of the
Mission. Over the past two weeks, we have issued
two such reports, jointly with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights: one on the human
rights violations committed by the M-23 during its
reign over parts of the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and the other on 15 October on the
Government's Operation Likofi against street gangs
in Kinshasa. The report documents the extrajudicial
killings of 9 persons and the enforced disappearance
of 32 others. In accordance with the strict methodology
of the Joint Human Rights Office, these figures are
conservative.

The Likofi report led to the Government's decision
to expel the head of the Joint Human Rights Office,
Mr. Scott Campbell, within 48 hours. I asked the
Government to reconsider this decision. I express my
absolute confidence in the professionalism of Scott
Campbell and that of his team, and I stand firmly
by the report they produced, for which I take full
responsibility.

I am equally concerned by recent threats against
other staff in the Joint Human Rights Office. It is
unacceptable for these dedicated individuals to be
intimidated or menaced for doing the work which is at
the core of the Council's mandate to us, in line with the
Secretary-General's "Rights Up Front" policy, as well
as the Charter of the United Nations. This work must
continue unimpeded. I am extremely grateful for the
support of the Secretary-General, as well as from the
members of the Council that have expressed solidarity
in urging the Government to revise its decision and to

take action to address threats against MONUSCO staff.
I would like to draw four conclusions.

First, respect for human rights leads to stability.
Secondly, it is those who commit human rights violations
and go unpunished who tarnish the image of the the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and weaken its
security institutions, not those who make them public.
Thirdly, our work is collaborative and constructive and
aims to strengthen the Government's moral authority.
Fourthly, I intend to offer to the Congolese Government
a regular high-level human rights dialogue. In that
dialogue, which may be discreet, all pending human
rights questions can be discussed and confidence can
be built. It will be of particular importance during the
forthcoming electoral period.

Allow me to touch briefly on a number of other
important issues. Just as our human rights work is
critical to our protection-of-civilians mandate, so too
is the approach of our military component. The Force
Commander and I agree that the protection of civilians
is more than a mandated task, it is our raison d'etre in
the the Democratic Republic of the Congo and a moral
imperative of the United Nations. We also agree that to
be effective, we need a new paradigm.

Presence alone is not enough. Presence without
action, in the face of violence, undermines our
credibility. Patrolling in hermetic armoured personnel
carriers is not enough: troops must get out of their
vehicles and interact directly with communities. Staying
in safe areas is not enough: the force must pursue the
danger where it lies. If necessary, they need to march
for days into the jungle, as the Force Commander has
done, to take the protection of civilians to the source.
We need action, not in action. We must be proactive,
not reactive. There must be mobile forces, not static
battalions. And we need feet, not wheels. I reiterate my
August messages to all contingents: when civilians are
at risk, they must act, not ask. We need protection of
civilians up front. I ask for the support of the Council.
I especially ask those United Nations States Members
that contribute troops to endorse and promote this
guidance.

The last point I wish to raise is the absolute urgency
to see the the Democratic Republic of the Congo - the
country geographically at the heart of Africa and a
nation with immense wealth and potential - become
also the economic heart of Africa. It has made
substantial progress over the past 10 years, particularly
in terms of macroeconomic stability, with a stable

currency and inflation under control at one 1 cent. But
its people remain among the poorest in the world, with
70 per cent under the poverty line and unemployment
among its youth estimated by the African Development
Bank at over 70 per cent. That has to change.

It is time for Congo's money abroad to come home
and for that money, and more, to be invested in the the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is time to move
from a war economy to a peace economy. It is time to
see illegal exploitation turned into legitimate trade.
It is time to move from excessive wealth for a few, to
sufficiency for all. I fully support Mr. Djinnit's focus
on stimulating private investment. I encourage the
Government to put the necessary legal protections in
place and to enforce them.

As always, I wish to conclude by acknowledging the
national and international staff of the United Nations
for their dedication and tireless efforts to improve the
lives of the people of the the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Today I especially wish to thank those
colleagues deployed in a very remote corner of Equateur
province where an outbreak of the Ebola virus once
again erupted - the seventh time since its discovery
in 1976 in the the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I recently visited the Ebola-infected area in Lokolia.
I witnessed the selflessness, courage and outstanding
efforts of Mr. Thapa Rabindra and his team. At great
personal risk and sacrifice, they have set up the Lokolia
camp, from which the sick can be treated in a safe,
controlled environment. They exemplify the values of
the United Nations, and I commend every single one of
them. I also congratulate the the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo on its swift and effective action, which has
limited the spread of this horrific disease. I am pleased
to report that there have been no new infections since
4 October, a hopeful sign that the worst may be over in
the the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Finally, please allow me to express my most
heartfelt congratulations to Caddy Adzuba, a colleague
from Radio Okapi in Bukavu, who last Friday received
the prestigious Prince of Asturias Award from the
King of Spain for her outstanding reporting on sexual
violence suffered by women in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is truly gratifying to work with such
committed and courageous colleagues as Caddy, and
to see that her efforts to bring attention to the issue of
sexual violance have met with international recognition
of the highest order.

(spoke in Spanish)

Allow me once again to thank the members of the
Council for their ongoing support, attention and interest
on critical issues for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is always a pleasure and an honour to be here,
and I think members for this opportunity.

