Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Madam President, for presiding over today's open
debate. I also thank Mr. Serry, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process Serry for his briefing.
China has listened attentively to the statements made
by the observer of Palestine representative of Israel.

The question of Palestine is at the core ofthe Middle
East question. Although the Middle East peace process
has witnessed more than 20 years of vicissitudes,
including major ups and downs, the general trend is
towards peace. At present, peace negotiations between
Palestine and Israel face critical choices that require
firm confidence in peace and patience and courage
from both parties.

First, there must be firm confidence in peace.
Middle East history has proven time and again that
an eye for an eye will only deepen hatred. Only by
transforming swords into ploughshares will peace be
achieved.

Since the resumption of Palestinian-Israeli peace
talks at the end of last July, the positions of both parties
have remained far apart and negotiations have been
difficult. However, progress towards peace is what the
people desire and represents an irreversible trend. A
negotiated settlement of disputes represents the right
direction towards the right goal. At this critical juncture,
both parties must mine strengthened confidence and
remain calm.

Secondly, there must be patience in the peace talks.
Efforts towards progress in the peace talks cannot
achieve results overnight. As long as both parties move
resolutely towards a negotiated settlement, results are
certain to come about. The principle of land for peace,
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and all of the agreements reached between
the parties constitute a realistic basis for peace between
Palestine and Israel and, furthermore, for reconciliation
between the Arab and Jewish nations. Both parties are
on the same peace track and should therefore work
together for the common good, by demonstrating the
patience and perseverance that will eventually lead
them to a land of peace.

Thirdly, there must be the courage necessary for
tough political decisions. The twists and turns in the
Middle East peace process represent an important
lesson, namely, that peace talks resemble a struggle
against the tide. One must push forward, or otherwise
risk being pushed backwards. Peace must be built; it
will not self-construct.

Peace talks require proactive efforts. Biding for
time is not an option. For Palestine, mutual recognition
of the other party's right to exist is an important
prerequisite. Mutual accommodation of the other
party's concerns is essential.

For Palestine and Israel, mutual recognition of the
other party's right to exist is an important prerequisite;
mutual accommodation of the other party's reasonable
concerns is essential. The key lies in the need to think
from the perspective of the other party.

In the current situation, the prompt release of
Palestinian prisoners, a halt to the construction
of Jewish settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, the lifting of the blockade against Gaza
and ending the violence against innocent civilians are
imperative to maintaining an atmosphere conducive to
the peace talks.

Meanwhile, internal reconciliation and improved
unity in Palestine will contribute to the goal of an
independent Palestinian State. Palestine and Israel
should become more proactive and positive in their
approach towards the peace talks and the peace process.

China has always attached importance to the question
of the Middle East and has made consistent efforts to
promote the peace process. One year ago, Chinese
President Xi Jinping provided a four-point proposal for
settling the question of Palestine. It emphasized that
peaceful coexistence between Palestine and Israel is
the right direction to take to settle the issues between
Palestine and Israel; peace talks represent the only
realistic path to peace; the principle of land-for-peace
is an important basis for promoting the Middle East
peace process; and international support constitutes an
important guarantee of progress in the peace talks.

That four-point proposal fully reflects the Chinese
Government's sincere will and practical effort in
promoting the Middle East peace process. China will
continue to promote the peace talks through various
channels and measures in view of strengthening its
contribution to peace in the Middle East.

The present situation in Syria remains volatile.
The people of Syria continue to suffer. The political
process is encountering difficulties. China is highly
concerned and remains of the view that war is not an
option - violence only begets hatred. The top priority
is for all Syrian parties to place the interests of the
nation and the country above everything else, end the
violence and hostilities as soon as possible, promote
an inclusive political transition and comprehensively
implement resolutions 2118 (2013) and 2139 (2014) in
order to achieve an early political settlement of the
question of Syria.

The international community should muster
strengthened confidence, persevere in the direction of
the political settlement and encourage all Syrian parties,
in the spirit of the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex), to start another round of negotiations as soon as
possible in order to achieve a settlement that suits the
specific situation of Syria and addresses the concerns of
all parties. On the question of Syria, China has always
pushed for peace talks, promoted a political settlement
and adopted a balanced approach in engaging both
parties to the conflict.

China attaches importance to the overall and long-
term interests of the people of Syria, seeks to maintain
peace and stability in the Middle East, and upholds the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic norms of international relations.
China is ready to continue its constructive role in
efforts to promote a political settlement of the question
of Syria.
