Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I join
others in welcoming the presence of the Secretary-
General at today's debate. We are grateful that he is
here at this discussion to present his intentions in
person.

I also welcome President Sejdiu and congratulate
him on the important progress that he and his
Government have made since Kosovo's declaration of
independence, especially in adopting priority
legislation on the protection of minorities and
enshrining it in Kosovo's new constitution, which came
into force just a few days ago. There are obviously
many challenges ahead for Kosovo, and the United
Kingdom stands ready to support and assist President
Sejdiu as part of an international effort towards
stability, democracy, multi-ethnicity and prosperity in
Kosovo and throughout the Balkans.

I would also like to extend a warm welcome to
President Tadic'. We understand the difficulty of this
issue for Serbia. Our common goal is stability in
Kosovo and the whole of the Balkans and to support
the European perspective of Serbia and Kosovo alike.
We are concerned only with dealing with the practical
realities and with creating a stable, multi-ethnic
Kosovo in which all communities can live in
democracy and peace.

I would like also to pay tribute to the work of the
United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK) since 1999. Kosovo has come a long way,
and UNMIK deserves substantial credit. We would
particularly like to thank and pay tribute to the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Joachim
Riicker, for his tireless and principled work in testing
circumstances, under criticism from certain Member
States and, at times, without the full support he might
have expected.

We take note of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2008/354), announcing his intent to reconfigure the
international civil presence in Kosovo. We recognize
that the Secretary-General has had to balance a number
of difficult questions since Kosovo's declaration of
independence. We agree with him on the practical
necessity of this reconfiguration in the light of the new
reality in Kosovo and to meet the new operational
requirements.

The proposed reconfiguration does not as far as
we, the United Kingdom, believe it should, but we
recognize that there is a range of views in the Council
that the Secretary-General has sought to accommodate.
And whatever the United Kingdom view - or the
views of other delegations on the Council - in the
absence of an agreed view of the Council, the exact
disposition of UNMIK in Kosovo is the Secretary-
General's decision to make, and we will respect the
decisions set out in his report.

In his statement, President Tadie asked for more
time for dialogue and to await a satisfactory agreement,
including with Belgrade. Sadly, we have heard this
before. During former President Ahtisaari's work in
fulfilling resolution 1244 (1999), the Government of
Serbia, under Prime Minister Kostunica, refused to
engage with him or cooperate. The Serbian
Government then demanded that nothing be agreed
without Belgrade's agreement.

Life has moved on, and while some in Serbia
have been left behind, we welcome the fact of the
outcome of the latest Serbian elections. The United
Nations, certainly, has to keep up with the practical
realities.
President Tadic' also said that paragraphs 5 and 19
of resolution 1244 (1999) make clear that only the
Security Council has the power to make changes to the
international presences in Kosovo. We agree that the
Security Council alone can change or revoke resolution
1244 (1999), which is why it remains in force. But
there is nothing in paragraphs 5 or 19 of that resolution
that defines the configuration of the international
presences. In any case, the configuration of the
international presences has evolved and changed
several times since resolution 1244 (1999) was
adopted, through decisions taken by the previous
Secretary-General.

Reconfiguration in Kosovo will allow the
relevant regional body, the European Union (EU), to
play a greater role, in accordance with the spirit of
resolution 1809 (2008), unanimously adopted by the
Council just two months ago. It would also free up the
United Nations to take on activity elsewhere.

It is now important for the Secretary-General to
provide clarity to the people of Kosovo and to
implement the United Nations configuration in order
for the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo and its police component to deploy over the
rest of the summer, avoiding any gaps in security.

NATO has also made clear its continued readiness
to contribute to the implementation of security
arrangements in Kosovo. Our thanks go to the Kosovo
Force for its work in ensuring peace and security there.

