The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.

I want to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his statement and for his report to the Security
Council (S/2012/376). I have listened attentively to the
statements made by Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos, Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Simonovie
and Mr. Philip Spoerri on behalf of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

Civilians suffer the most in war and bear the brunt of
its scourge. Innocent civilians caught in armed conflict,
especially women and children, must receive effective
protection. In recent years we have witnessed frequent
outbreaks of regional conflicts and turmoil, which pose
increasing challenges for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The practice of the Security Council of
assigning mandates on the protection of civilians has
triggered enormous controversies and prompted deep
reflection by the international community. I should like
to focus on the following four points.

First, all parties to the conflict must spare no
effort in protecting civilians. In the event of an armed
conflict, the primary responsibility to protect civilians
from violence and the scourge of war lies with national
Governments. At the same time, all parties involved
in conflict and other relevant domestic and foreign
actors are also in duty bound to abide by international
humanitarian law and other relevant provisions of
international law, and to fulfil their responsibilities
in the protection of civilians. The actions of one party
to the conflict in violation of international law should
under no circumstances constitute an excuse for any
other party to breach its obligations under such law.
The report of the Secretary-General makes reference to
the use of drones and other challenges in the protection
of civilians, all of which deserve our focused attention.

Secondly, in the process of fulfilling the duty of
protecting civilians, the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations must be upheld,
especially the principles of respect for national
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity as well as
that of non-interference in internal affairs. Operations
involving the protection of civilians must be authorized
by the Security Council and carried out in an orderly
manner under the auspices of the United Nations. No
party should arbitrarily interpret Security Council
resolutions; no actions overstepping Council mandates
should be allowed. The protection of civilians is
humanitarian in nature and should not be exploited to
serve political motives or objectives, including regime
change. The rigorous and effective monitoring of the
implementation of Security Council resolutions has
become an important task that must be accomplished
urgently.

Thirdly, the authorization of the use of force in
the protection of civilians must be approached with
extreme caution. China believes in the political and
peaceful resolution of disputes, as military intervention
often proves counterproductive. There are serious
shortcomings in such interventions, such as ill-defined
responsibilities, unclear authorizations and lack of ex
post facto accountability. Rather than resolving conflicts
and protecting lives, military intervention adds fuel to
the fire and exacerbates humanitarian crises.

Last but not least, the practice of selectivity and
double standards must be abandoned. Many Member
States have long been urging the Security Council to
uphold the principles of fairness and impartiality and
pay equal attention to all items on the Council's agenda
relating to the protection of civilians, including the
situations in the Gaza Strip, Somalia, Afghanistan and
Iraq. China endorses such views. Adopting a practice
of selectivity or double standards would only harm the
role and authority of the Security Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Before I give the floor to the representatives of
States that are non-members of the Council, I wish to
request that they limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out
its work expeditiously.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Liechtenstein.

