Mr. Corman (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
express our heartfelt condolences to the loved ones of
those who lost their lives in the devastating earthquake
that struck Haiti yesterday. At this moment of tragedy,
our hearts and prayers are with the people of Haiti and
the men and women serving under the United Nations
flag there. Turkey is among the countries that swiftly
embarked upon providing emergency relief assistance
to Haiti, and we will continue to do our utmost to
alleviate the suffering of the Haitian people.

I would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
taking the initiative to organize this important debate.
Indeed, as is called for in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, effective cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is of crucial significance in maintaining
international peace and security. I therefore very much
appreciate the opportunity to discuss this issue in the
Council, in dialogue with some of the most prominent
regional organizations.

In this context, I would like to extend a warm
welcome to the representatives of the organizations
who are with us today and to thank them for their very
valuable briefings and contributions. Their high-level
presence is testimony to our shared objectives and joint
commitment to advancing peace and security in every
part of the world.

I would, of course, be remiss ifI did not mention
the Secretary-General, whose dedication to enhancing
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations is most commendable. I
also thank him for organizing the retreat held earlier
this week, which, in a way, prepared the ground for
today's debate and provided important perspectives for
our discussion.

The issue at hand is not new to the Council's
agenda. In fact, there have been numerous Council
discussions on this particular item in the past few
years. However, today's debate is distinguished by its
broad representation of regional organizations. Indeed,
in less than two hours, we covered the entire globe
from various regional viewpoints, and benefited from
the insightful perspectives that could only come from
such a distinguished panel of regional bodies.

Beyond this, the decision this time to listen to our
counterparts before making our own remarks has
proved a very wise one. That is because the
organizations represented here today are those that deal
on a day-to-day basis with the problems of their
regions and make a real difference on the ground
through their active involvement. In other words, there
is a lot we have to learn from them while carrying out
our responsibilities in the Council. This is why their
views and recommendations, which are of a very
practical nature, provide an excellent basis for our
deliberations today and in the future.

This new order of speakers also allows me to be
very brief. Indeed, given the scope, breadth and quality
of the interventions made so far, I do not have to dwell
on the issue at length. Suffice it to say that we agree
with the thrust of each and every presentation made
today by the representatives of the regional
organizations. We welcome in particular their keen
interest in working with the United Nations and further
strengthening their cooperation with us.
The challenge for us now is to build on this
renewed commitment, explore new and practical
schemes of enhanced cooperation, and put in place the
mechanisms that will effectively reflect the spirit of
partnership that prevails in this Chamber today. If and
when we succeed in doing so, we will certainly have
created a win-win situation for both the United Nations
and our regional counterparts, and above all for global
peace and security.

After all, we have to accept that in today's
security environment, laden with multifaceted and
complex challenges, the United Nations is not capable
of dealing with all the problems threatening
international peace and security. Given the importance
of addressing conflicts at their core, we need strong
and effective partners at the regional level. That in turn
requires genuine collaboration with such organizations,
including regular consultations and exchanges of
experience and best practices, as well as assistance in
capacity-building when necessary.

This is particularly the case with peacekeeping
and peacebuilding endeavours, where the United
Nations is increasingly stretched. Indeed, any
contribution by regional organizations in this area is of
great importance, not only for the purposes of sharing
burdens but also to ensure regional ownership, which
often proves to be the best guarantee of sustaining
peace and stability. In this regard, we are particularly
grateful to such organizations as NATO, the European
Union and the African Union for their determined
efforts and exemplary commitment. We cannot
overemphasize the need to further enhance United
Nations cooperation with these organizations in the
area of peacekeeping and related activities.

That said, the scope of United Nations
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations goes far beyond peacekeeping. Indeed,
conflict prevention through early warning, political
mediation, cooperative interaction and confidence-
building is as important as peacekeeping, if not more
so. This is also where regional organizations, with their
innate understanding of the root causes of conflicts and
of the dynamics in play among different parties, are at
their best.

Here, I would like to pay special tribute to the
endeavours undertaken in these areas by all the invited
organizations from Turkey's immediate
neighbourhood, notably those of the League of Arab
States and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Of course, the Organization of
the Islamic Conference (OIC), whose membership
spans four different continents, plays a particularly
unique role in solidifying the foundations of global
peace and creating better understanding between
different cultures and religions. As was pointed out by
Secretary General Ihsanoglu, the OIC's active
involvement in many issues of common interest,
ranging from Iraq to Somalia and Afghanistan, and
from counter-terrorism to peacebuilding, makes that
organization an integral part of the solutions we are
collectively seeking in the United Nations.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the President for extending an invitation to the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building
Measures in Asia (CICA), whose Executive Director
was unfortunately unable to make it here today, due to
a scheduling conflict. That said, Turkey is the
upcoming chair of CICA, and in that capacity I assure
the Council of CICA's firm dedication to upholding
peace and security in Asia in cooperation with the
United Nations. CICA is something of a newcomer to
the family of regional organizations, but, given its
broad membership, which covers almost 90 per cent of
the continent, as well as its track record in building
confidence and cooperation among its members, it
holds great potential for advancing our common goals.

In conclusion, allow me to express Turkey's
sincere commitment to exerting every effort with a
view to further advancing cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.

Turkey is a full member of four of the
organizations invited today and enjoys very special
relations with the rest. As such, we will be pushing
from both ends to bring about truly effective
collaboration between the United Nations and these
organizations in pursuit of our common objectives and
principles. It is also in that spirit that we fully support
the draft presidential statement prepared by China.

