Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
Herzegovia; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

We wish to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this important open debate, for continuing
Australia's pioneering work on small arms and light
weapons in the Security Council in 2013 and for your
excellent concept note (S/2015/306, annex). We also
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
biennial report to the Security Council on small arms
and light weapons (S/2015/289), and in particular for
the 14 pertinent recommendations for consideration by
the Council.

We very much welcomed the adoption of resolution
2117 (2013). Small arms and light weapons are still
the most frequently used weapons in the majority of
recent armed conflicts. The consequences of the illicit
spread, widespread availability and trafficking in these
arms and ammunition remain a highly disturbing and
lasting problem, and thus a major challenge for the
international community. The many times the Security
Council has expressed its concerns over the threat to
peace and security arising from the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
and light weapons since 2013 illustrate the scope of this
challenge. It also reflects the conviction that a specific
focus on adequate control of small arms and light
weapons is required if we want to effectively tackle
conflict and post-conflict settings. We therefore strongly
support the Secretary-General's recommendation that
the wide-ranging impact of the illicit circulation and
the misuse of these weapons needs to be consistently
addressed by the Security Council when considering
geographic and thematic issues on its agenda. The
wide range of the humanitarian and socioeconomic
consequences of illicit Small arms and light weapons
and the serious threat that they pose to peace, safety,
security, stability and sustainable development at the
individual, local, national, regional and international
levels require a comprehensive and multidimensional
approach.

Resolution 2117 (2013) represented a major step
forward in international cooperation on the control of
these weapons by bringing together a wide range of
tools and actions for the Security Council, Member
States, United Nations entities and intergovernmental,
regional and subregional organizations to use in order
to prevent and combat the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of these weapons.

The European Union strategy to combat the illicit
accumulation and trafficking of these weapons and
their ammunition seeks to ensure that the EU's security
policy and its development policy are consistent, and
to fully exploit the means available to it at multilateral
and regional levels to develop a comprehensive and
coherent approach that harnesses all forms of leverage
at our disposal. It is based on the recognition that human
security and human development are interdependent
and cover preventive and reactive measures.

Many issues are of key concern to us - many have
been singled out by Lithuania's concept note and the
Secretary-General's report. I wouldjust like to mention
a few of them.

Among other things, we will continue to call for
the inclusion of ammunition as part of a comprehensive
approach to the control of small arms and light weapons.
Small arms and light weapons can be operated and
misused only if ammunition is available. Effective
controls therefore also need to include significant
efforts to regulate and control ammunition. The relevant
provisions of the United Nations Protocol against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trade in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition and the Arms
Trade Treaty are steps in the right direction, but further
measures are required by the international community
to deal with the issue of ammunition.

In order to effectively combat diversion and illicit
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, marking,
tracing and systematic and appropriate record-keeping
are essential. Weapons need to be marked upon
production; import and existing stocks should also
be marked. The secure and effective management of
stockpiles is also central to curb the illicit spread of
these weapons, including the destruction of surplus. The
European Union regularly offers assistance to improve
the physical security and stockpile management of these
weapons. Limited such infrastructure leaves countries
especially vulnerable to the diversion of these weapons
when these are stored in small armouries in remote
locations, including in volatile border regions, and
during transfer. New mobile and flexible technologies
may offer solutions to effectively secure these weapons
in instances when the risk of diversion is at the highest.
The European Union will support such initiatives on
the use of such new technologies in order to concretely
demonstrate their potential.

It may remain essential to fully integrate the gender
perspective into all efforts at preventing and combating
the risk of the misuse, diversion and illicit circulation
of these weapons, so that the gender aspects of armed
violence are adequately addressed. They also require
the full and active participation of men and women.

We firmly believe that the Arms Trade Treaty, when
effectively and widely implemented, will make a major
contribution to more responsible and more transparent

international arms transfers. We therefore warmly
welcome the signatures and ratifications deposited
from all regions so far and call on all States that have
not yet done so to become signatories and State parties
to the Treaty. All member States of the European
Union are signatories of the Treaty, and so far 26 of
the 28 member States have ratified it. The remaining
ratifications are expected shortly. The European Union
assists a number of third countries in strengthening
their arms-transfer controls system in line with the
requirements of the Treaty. The European Union also
remains committed to providing, upon request, further
assistance to countries that have identified their needs
in their national systems in keeping with the obligations
of the Arms Trade Treaty.

We support the view that it is necessary to
integrate small arms and light-weapons-related issues
into the planning and when drafting or updating the
mandates of United Nations operations. The European
Union Foreign Affairs Council has also underlined the
importance of including these issues in the planning of
future EU civilian and military Common Security and
Defence Policy missions.

The diversion of small arms and light weapons
remains a tremendous problem in many parts of the
world. Poor weapon-security and management, leading
to leakages of such weapons to the illicit market, is
another area of great concern to us. In that context,
we believe that the international community still lacks
vital monitoring and diagnostic capacity, so that, in
many cases, we do not have sufficient information to
formulate effective policies against the diversion, illicit
spread and trafficking in small arms and light weapons.
To provide such information, the European Union
is funding the iTRACE project, which is providing
verified, on-the-ground data on illicit trade routes of
diverted and trafficked conventional weapons and
their ammunition. The project combines an extensive
programme of field investigations in today's armed
conflicts, especially in Africa and the Middle East,
and documents identified illicit weapons in sight site
with a global, public access weapon-tracking database
on individual and diverted or trafficked weapons.
It seeks to provide new insights into the diversion
patterns. It is thus also very relevant for the work of
the Security Council sanctions groups and a number of
United Nations missions, and can make a contribution
to making the implementation of arms embargoes
more effective. The iTRACE project also specifically
aims to support the implementation of the Arms Trade
Treaty by assisting national export-control authorities
in detecting relevant diversion activities.

We also wish to echo the Secretary-General's
call that States should make full use of INTERPOL's
Illicit Arms Records and Tracing Management System
(iARMS), which provides a common global platform
for facilitating information exchange and investigative
cooperation. It is an integral part of the international
strategy and operational framework to combat the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and is funded by
the European Union. We welcome the fact that iARMS
is being used by law enforcement agencies in more and
more States, and that it has already recorded its first
operational success.
In conclusion, we are confident that the Security
Council will continue to pay special attention to small
arms and light weapons issues in its agenda, and call on
all States to do their utmost to contribute to the fight
against this scourge. We will continue to play our part
in this common endeavour.

