Ms. Nason (Ireland): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for having convened
today's debate. Like Indonesia, my country has a long
and proud tradition of peacekeeping. For any troop-
contributing country, keeping those we deploy to the
field safe will always be uppermost. Here I would like
to pay tribute to all United Nations peacekeepers who
have made the ultimate sacrifice on our behalf.

Safety matters not just to our peacekeepers on the
ground and to their Governments and loved ones, but
also to the wider support for peacekeeping missions
overall. That is why training and capacity-building
is so important and why Ireland's Defence Forces
are deeply and increasingly engaged in this area. It
is also why Ireland has so strongly supported the
Secretary-General's reform agenda for United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the shared Action for
Peacekeeping commitments. Training and capacity-
building are keystones of that agenda, and driving
implementation is clearly a shared responsibility.

As we see it, the increasingly complex nature of
conflicts inevitably brings greater risks to the safety
and security of our brave peacekeepers. Whether it is
ensuring that our peacekeepers are safer or that missions
are more effective, the delivery of quality training and
capacity-building is fundamental. Put simply, it is not
really possible to have one without the other.

I want to briefly highlight some of the ways in
which my country, Ireland, is working to help build
capacity and respond to specific training needs.

Last month Ireland was pleased to host troops from
our fellow troop contributors for a training course on the
protection of civilians. The protection of civilians is not
an abstract concept for us. Our experience in more than
60 years of unbroken participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations has taught the importance
of peacekeepers engaging with communities on

the ground, especially with women, children and
vulnerable groups.
We also want to ensure that our troops are
equipped to address issues of sexual and gender-based
violence. Ireland is providing customized training
for peacekeeping contingents on the appropriate
investigation of these issues.

As co-chair of the United Nations military
intelligence working group, Ireland is working to help
build a better intelligence picture of peacekeeping
environments, which can both help missions carry out
their mandates more effectively and also, importantly,
help to mitigate risks.

Ireland is currently also partnering with the United
Nations Mine Action Service to deliver two training
programmes that will equip personnel to deal with
explosive ordnance such as improvised explosive
devices and anti-personnel mines.

We see partnerships and sharing experiences
as key to identifying and, importantly, to bridging
capacity gaps. We want to ensure that the practical and
administrative aspects of deploying peacekeepers do
not act as a barrier to engagement. Ireland is working
to prepare a seminar on this very topic in Djibouti in
June. We must also work to maximize the opportunities
for collaboration and partnership with regional
organizations such as the African Union. In the context
of the European Union, Ireland has put forward a "food
for thought" paper, offering recommendations for
partner troop-contributing countries to work together
on deployment issues.

As we all know, the participation of women in
peacekeeping operations has a positive impact not just
on a mission itself but also on the local population our
peacekeepers serve. That is why Ireland works hard in
support of the Secretary-General's uniformed gender-
parity strategy as we move to meet our own targets
and increase the numbers of women peacekeepers at
every level. We wish to use this opportunity to urge
partners to nominate women to participate in Ireland's
predeployment training courses.

Safety in the field means that as troop contributors,
we, too, must hold our own peacekeepers to the highest
standards and stamp out any conduct that harms
the populations that we seek to protect. This we see
as fundamental to the credibility and legitimacy of
the Organization. The Prime Minister of Ireland,
An Taoiseach Leo Varadkar, is proud to be part of
the Secretary-General's Circle of Leadership on the
prevention of and response to sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations operations.
Peacekeeping is a part of Ireland's identity here at
the United Nations. As our Taoiseach said here at the
United Nations last year, we in Ireland are as proud of
the blue beret as we are ofthe harp or the shamrock (see S/PV.8382). In my country we have a Gaelic saying,
"Ar scath a cheile a mhaireann na daoine", which I
like to translate as: "We live in each other's shelter,
not in each other's shadow". This is the message that
Irish peacekeepers live every day in the field, whether
protecting civilian populations or helping to build
the capacity of our fellow troop contributors. It is the
philosophy we would respect and live out if lucky
enough to be elected to sit at this table for 2021-2022.

