Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Ambassador Patriota and Ambassador Skoog
for their briefings today and for all their hard work,
past, present and future, in chairing the Peacebuilding
Commission.

I would like to take this opportunity to talk not
about peacebuilding in theory but peacebuilding in
practice, and in particular I will draw some lessons
about peacebuilding from a country that has played
a prominent role in my own career, Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Nearly 20 years ago I served in the
British delegation to the Dayton peace talks and
later as British Ambassador to Bosnia from 2005
to 2008. I witnessed the progress made in building
and sustaining peace following years of bloodshed.
Bosnia still faces challenges - dysfunctional politics
and high unemployment, to name but two. But as we
prepare to commemorate the twentieth anniversary
of the Srebrenica genocide, we should also recognize
the considerable progress that the country has made
since 1995, and we can learn wider lessons from the
international community's experience there. I recognize
that every conflict is unique and solutions cannot be cut
and pasted from one context to another, but I believe
that as a Council we can draw four key lessons.

The first is that we need to do even more on conflict
prevention. In the Balkans the international community
failed to act early. We knew about some of the horrors
that were being committed, but lacked the political will
to take action. Today, we live in an age of immediately
accessible information. We should never claim that we
did not know a conflict was brewing. The challenge for
the Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
whole United Nations system is to find the political will
to act early. Early action can prevent enormous suffering.
It is also cost-effective. Our failure to prevent conflict
has contributed significantly to the $19.7 billion in
humanitarian needs and nearly 60 million refugees we
are now dealing with and has resulted in an $8.5 billion
peacekeeping budget.

No conflict-affected State has achieved any of
the Millennium Development Goals. As the British
economist Paul Collier has said, "War is development
in reverse". Given global trends, our ability to eradicate
poverty will be wholly dependent on our ability to
reduce Violent conflict. That is why Goal 16 of the
sustainable development goals is so critical.

The second lesson I took from Bosnia is the
primacy of a political process in building and
sustaining peace. The Dayton Peace Agreement is not
perfect, but it ended the war, which featured the worst
fighting in Europe since the Second World War, and it
gave the country a foundation on which to build. Just
as the recent peace operations review recommends,
our efforts on peacekeeping and peacebuilding must
all start and finish with a political process. For those
settlements to stick, they must be sustainable and
inclusive, with women's involvement throughout, and
they must be properly funded. In 2012, only 4 per cent
of all overseas development aid to fragile States was
spent on promoting inclusive politics. The majority is
spent on reconstruction and service delivery. We need
to recognize that peacebuilding and State-building are
not the same thing. The comparative advantage of the
United Nations lies in forging and sustaining political

deals to create the space for effective State-building,
and that should be the primary focus of any political or
peacekeeping mission.

The third lesson is the need for sustained attention
and patience from the international community in
building a lasting peace. Nearly 20 years on from
Dayton, the Council, the European Union, NATO and
many others continue to support Bosnia's transition
to a peaceful and prosperous State. Countries in the
region also have a constructive role to play. Too often,
however, our attention drifts. In 2011, Sierra Leone was
categorized as an aid orphan by the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development. International
aid fell away, and Sierra Leone was punished for its
success in reducing conflict. The spread of Ebola to
Sierra Leone last year showed how fragile peacebuilding
gains can be and how easily they are rolled back. So
we must learn that there are no shortcuts to building
durable, national institutions. It takes time. The World
Bank estimates that making meaningful improvements
to institutions takes between 10 and 17 years at a
minimum. Long-term, predictable support is crucial.

The United Kingdom is playing its part. We have
kept our promise to spend 0.7 per cent of our gross
national income on overseas aid, at least 30 per cent
of which will go to conflict-affected States. We are
the second-largest financial contributor to the United
Nations system, and we are the largest contributor to
the Peacebuilding Fund, having provided $82 million
since 2011.

My final reflection from Bosnia is that the
international community cannot want peace more than
the people themselves. Political elites must rise above
political, ethnic and religious divides and make tough
choices in order to consolidate peace and move forward.
Bosnia's leaders still grapple with that challenge, as do
the leaders of many of the countries on the Council's
agenda. But should they prove that they can overcome
their differences, the Council must be poised and ready
to give them its full support.

