Mr. Husain (Canada): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to address the Council. I thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/350), and I
commend the work that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is doing in an
increasingly hostile environment.

A copy of Canada's full statement has been
circulated among the members of the Security Council
and is available on our website. Given the time
constraints, I shall touch on only a few key points.

We are at a crossroads. Down one path a nation
emerges from generations of war and bloodshed and
steps forward into a future of freedom and prosperity.
Down the other, lie the games of the past, of regional
interests allied with the false promises of terrorists and
their tyranny, of a people suffocated by brutal warlords
and unscrupulous gangsters, of the tragic story of
lost generations. Corrosive actors are the culprits of
fragility, just as nation-builders are the pioneers for
prosperous societies.

Next month marks the one-year anniversary of the
Tokyo Conference, which saw a renewed commitment
by the international community, including Canada, to
Afghanistan's future. On 3 July, senior officials will
gather in Kabul to take stock of the progress that has
been made over the past year on those commitments.
Three are among the most essential.

First, the Government ofAfghanistan must focus on
the full implementation of the Law on the Elimination
of Violence against Women in its current form. Afghan
women and girls need and deserve the protecion that
the law is meant to provide. However, they will get that
only if the law is fully implemented by a willing and
capable justice sector, including police, prosecutors and

judges. Tracking the law's implementation was a key
commitment made by the Government of Afghanistan,
which will be measured on its fulfilment of that
commitment.

Secondly, it is essential that the Government of
Afghanistan demonstrate earnest commitment to a
robust electoral process. That includes progress in
meeting key deliverables, including the establishment
of a credible electoral dispute resolution mechanism and
legislation that allows for the appointment of qualified
individuals to that body and to the Independent Election
Commission. Candidate vetting, the preservation of
free and independent media and the participation of
civil society must be permitted to feature prominently
throughout the process.

Thirdly, Canada will be resolutely focused on
efforts made to improve financial accountability and
combat corruption.

(spoke in French)

Canada remains determined to support Afghanistan
throughout the transition period. However, we have
stated clearly that we must continue to see progress
towards greater transparency, accountability, good
governance and respect for human rights, especially
the rights of girls and women, freedom of religion and
conscience and freedom of experience.

We have also been equally clear that terrorism
networks from neighbouring States must be held
accountable, including thsoe who support them.

Reconciliation that fails to enshrine the
indispensable rights of women, advance constitutional
democracy and confront endemic corruption will not be
viewed as genuine reconciliation.

In the face of such adversity, national organizations
of young members of civil society are emerging and
growing more confident in their capacities. They are
helping to build the institutiuons that will guaranteed
Afghanistan's future. We must commit ourselves more
resolutely to supporting those institutions and their
ideals, rather than those who walk in their halls and
seek to subvert them for personal gain.

Along that path towards freedom and prosperity
in Afghanistan, Canada stands with those who seek to
build a better future.

