Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank you, Madam, for
organizing this important debate. I welcome the
participation of President Clinton, the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy, and thank him above all for
his commitment and efforts since he assumed his post
towards the return of peace and stability in Haiti.

I also welcome the presence of the Prime
Minister of Haiti, Mrs. Michele Duvivier Pierre-Louis,
and thank her for her important statement. I further
thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing.

With respect to the situation in Haiti, we note
first of all that significant progress has been made
since we considered the Secretary-General's previous
report in April (S/2009/129), although the country
continues to face some difficulties with regard in
particular to the functioning of institutions. The
country's achievements include the holding of
complementary senatorial elections on 19 April and
21 June, despite the regrettable incidents that marked
them. The low voter turnout at these elections, the first
since 2006, should prompt the Haitian political class to
work harder to win the trust of the population and,
through tolerance and dialogue, to establish the optimal
conditions for the organization of more credible
elections in the future. For the time being, we call on
them to accept the results published on 24 July so as to
allow for the unimpeded functioning of the legislature.

The regular and effective functioning of
institutions is necessary to consolidating peace and

stability. We are therefore concerned about the delays
in the implementation of the joint legislative agenda
agreed upon by the Government and Parliament in
2008. The report notes the slow pace and low rate of
adoption and ratification by Parliament of the laws and
conventions of that agenda. The budget law, for
example, was adopted only on 2 June, while the
2009-2010 budget has yet to be adopted. We therefore
hope that the process will be accelerated so as to
strengthen the country's legal and institutional
framework.

We congratulate the commissions responsible for
constitutional reform and security on their reports and,
above all, on the proposed reforms concerning the
electoral cycle, dual citizenship, the security
architecture and local authorities. We also encourage
the other commissions responsible for justice reform,
competitiveness and information technology to
continue their work so as to be able to submit their
respective reports as soon as possible.

We remain concerned by the threats to the
security situation in Haiti arising from the ongoing
unemployment, corruption, illicit trafficking in drugs
and small arms, and civil unrest. In light of the various
weaknesses afflicting the Haitian National Police, and
while thanking bilateral partners for their assistance in
strengthening police capacity, we urge the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to
continue to support the Government's initiative. As to
the judiciary, we welcome the efforts of the Haitian
authority, in cooperation with MINUSTAH and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to combat
corruption, crime and illicit trafficking.

The slow pace of progress in the field of human
rights, particularly economic, social and cultural rights,
is another source of concern to my delegation. The
majority of the Haitian people live under very
precarious conditions. We are therefore very grateful to
President Clinton for having embraced this issue and
for having devoted himself since then to mobilizing
funds and public and private investment with a view to
improve the living conditions of the population. In that
regard, while we welcome the outcome of the
conference of bilateral partners held in Washington last
April, during which significant contributions were
announced, we nevertheless regret the delays that have
occurred in the disbursement of those funds.
It is clear that the Haitian State still faces many
difficulties in ensuring security and in taking strong
measures for the recovery of its economy. The
Stabilization Mission therefore continues to serve as an
important lifesaver for the country. It should be
commended for its efforts on the ground and
encouraged to continue to provide assistance to the
Government in the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme and in the
preparations for the upcoming elections.

We commend the Special Envoy and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as all
of the MINUSTAH staff, for their efforts to contribute
to the consolidation of political stability and peace in
Haiti, which so desperately needs to focus on its
development. We would also like to take this
opportunity to thank troop-contributing countries for
their commitment to Haiti.

