Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The United
States is committed to assisting those displaced by
circumstances beyond their control. As such, we remain
the largest single donor of humanitarian assistance
worldwide. We are focused on providing assistance
as close to refugees' homes as possible to help them
until they can return home safely, voluntarily and with
dignity. However, humanitarian needs vastly outpace the
capacity of any single donor. We encourage other States,
as well as development actors and the private sector, to
increase humanitarian contributions worldwide.

As many colleagues have said, the Global Compact
on Refugees provides a basis for predictable response
and greater burden-sharing among Member States.
We support the Compact's primary objectives. We
encourage non-refugee hosting countries and countries
that do not provide humanitarian assistance to do
more. We support easing pressure on refugee-hosting
countries, including through third-country options,
and facilitating opportunities beyond traditional
resettlement. We also support efforts to improve
conditions in countries of origin to allow for safe and
voluntary returns.

We commend the tremendous efforts of the many
hosting countries. That includes countries that have
opened the doors to an unprecedented plight of millions
of vulnerable people from Venezuela and from Syria.
We note the admirable steps countries around the world
take to protect refugees. Ethiopia is expanding refugees'
access to work, education and other basic services.
Jordan has committed to allowing all children access to
public education. In Turkey, nearly 4 million refugees
have access to free health care, work and education.
Thailand has granted nationality to over 30,000 stateless
people, and Pakistan has started a national conversation
on offering citizenship to refugees born there.

We must avoid temptation to press prematurely
for returns of individuals to countries or regions that
they fled. Syria is one example where, as the High
Commissioner just told us, most refugees are not ready
to return. The conditions in many places ofreturn are not
safe. We are concerned about the reports of involuntary
returns in some contexts, and call upon States to act in
accordance with their obligations under international
law and to respect the principle of non-refoulement.
We encourage the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and its partners to redouble
efforts to monitor conditions of those who return to
their areas of origin, both refugees and internally
displaced persons. In that context, I would like to ask
the High Commissioner for his non-politicized View
of the current options for the Rukban camp residents,
and to what extent he believes that they have a safe,
voluntary and dignified option to return.

We encourage States to avoid actions that could
exacerbate displacement. Refugee returns are more
likely to be sustainable if basic safeguards, such as
legal rights, access to land, housing, social services
and economic inclusion, are in place. They decrease the
likelihood that refugees would need to seek safety across
international borders again. We wholly support the
High Commissioner's discussion on finding solutions
at the outset of a displacement crisis, addressing
the root causes and the drivers of displacement and
effectively managing movement due to multiple factors
or mixed migration flows. As Secretary Pompeo said,
the best way to help is to work to end conflicts that
drive displacement in the first place. Seeking to resolve
such conflicts is a core responsibility of the Council
and one we must fully embrace.

For over a year, we have sought to address the root
causes of the humanitarian crisis in Venezuela through
this body, to no avail. To suggest to Venezuela's
neighbours, which collectively host more than 3 million
refugees, that the situation does not threaten regional
security and stability is as erroneous now as it has
been since the crisis began. We will continue to sound
the alarm on the dire humanitarian situation of the
Venezuelan people, including in tomorrow's discussion.
I thank you again, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting to discuss the situation for millions
of displaced people around the world, who have the
same hopes and dreams for the future that we all have:
access to education for our children, basic rights and
responsibilities of democratic citizenship and, most
importantly, safety and security to live our lives. The
United States will continue to lead efforts to support
that future.

