Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): It is
getting very late, Mr. President, and I am afraid that
you will have to buy dinner for everybody. So, I shall
try to summarize my written statement, copies of
which will be circulated.

Let me first thank you, Sir, and the Government
of Austria for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General John Holmes for his
objective briefing today.

In the 10 years since the adoption of resolution
1265 (1999), the protection of civilians in armed
conflict has assumed a prominent place on the
Council's agenda. Incidents of violence and crimes
against civilian populations in wartime have allowed us
to identify measures to protect civilians in armed
conflict. Yet, the reality on the ground has not changed
as one might have expected given the affirmations and
relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council.

Despite the fact that there has been some progress
over the past decade, there have been many failures. A
large part of the reason for that distressing state of
affairs lies in the fundamental failure of some parties to
honour their obligations to protect civilians. The
number of casualties in armed conflict, including under
foreign occupation, has not declined, and no one can
doubt the suffering of the victims of armed conflict.

A vivid example of this is the situation is
Palestine, in particular the Gaza Strip, where for years
more than 1.5 million Palestinians have been deprived
of all their basic needs of life and humanitarian
assistance. Gaza has continued to be the largest prison
kept by the Israeli occupying authorities. There have
also been numerous reports of violations of
international humanitarian law and gross violations of
human rights during the military aggression by the
regime occupying Palestine. The killing of women and
children is among these violations and is well
documented in the Goldstone report (A/64/490, annex).
The same cruelty was applied by the Israeli regime
against civilians during its aggression against Lebanon
in 2006.

Based on the facts ascertained in all the
aforementioned cases, the conduct of the Israeli armed
forces, including deliberate killings and the causing of
great suffering to civilians, constitutes a grave breach
of international law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Those who commit such violations, be it
in Palestine, Lebanon or in any other part of the world,
should be held accountable for their crimes against
innocent civilians. Only guaranteed accountability for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and justice for victims will ensure that our efforts for
the protection of civilians are translated into
meaningful and practical action. Therefore, much
greater efforts are required to enhance compliance and,
for that matter, accountability.

We believe that there is no justification for the
Security Council's remaining silent and taking no
action vis-a-vis the perpetrators of war crimes in the
Israeli regime. The international community, as it
manifests itself in this Council, has not only the right
to take measures but the responsibility to act
accordingly. We are waiting to see the reaction of the
Security Council to the Goldstone report and the
crimes committed in Gaza.

On a separate note, I would like to refer to an
unpalatable yet brutal reality of the indiscriminate
targeting of civilians in Afghanistan during air strikes.
Afghan officials, including President Karzai, have
repeatedly criticized the high level of civilian
casualties in such bombings. This fact has also been
noted in resolution 64/10, adopted three days ago by
the General Assembly.

We hope that the international community will
take all the measures necessary for the protection of
civilians on the basis of respect for the lives of
innocent people. The Security Council shall understand
that this is extremely important to its credibility. If we
want our debate on the protection of civilians to be
meaningful and effective, we should have a balanced

and comprehensive approach, and determine its causes
and effects. We hope that these discussions will be
successful and that we will take the necessary
measures.

Since the representative of the Israeli regime
referred to the issue of the ship that was recently
hijacked by that regime during an apparent terrorist
action, I would like to bring to the Council's kind
attention the fact that this is yet another fabricated and
manipulated story concocted by that hypocritical entity,
and we categorically reject it. Bearing in mind
previous, similarly fake stories, we believe that it is
now clear to all that such manipulation and
fabrication - precisely at a time when several United
Nations bodies and a large majority of Member States
are busy with the consideration of the criminal acts of
the Israeli regime against the innocent civilian
population of Palestine, most importantly war crimes
and crimes against humanity - represent yet another
useless and desperate attempt to distract the attention
of the international community from the regime's
criminal acts.

