Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure to express our thanks and appreciation to
you, Mr. President, and all the members of the Council
for holding, under your wise and capable presidency,
this important meeting of the Security Council to
discuss the deteriorating situation in the Palestinian
territories. We would also like to extend our thanks to
your honourable predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, who
spared no effort to lead the work of the Council to
success last month.

This meeting of the Security Council is taking
place at a time of grave circumstances in the Middle
East and the seriously deteriorating situation that the
Palestinian people and the Palestinian Authority have
witnessed on a daily basis owing to continued Israeli
aggression. The Israeli decision in principle to expel
President Arafat, who was elected by the Palestinian
people, will have serious consequences on the situation
in the Palestinian territories. It will gravely impact on
all efforts to achieve a comprehensive and just peace in
the region, a peace for which we have called for a very
long time. If implemented, the decision to expel
President Arafat will seriously affect stability and will
be a setback to peace in the Middle East, for which the
Arab States have been seriously and sincerely working.
Mr. Arafat's expulsion would be a further act of
defiance against the international community.

We can only express our grave concern for the
deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories as a result of the Israeli Government's
insistence on its policy of assassination and of aborting
all peace efforts by imposing conditions not contained
in the peace process known as the road map.
Furthermore, Israel continues to construct its security
wall of separation on the pretext of ensuring its own
security, while the main objective of that wall really is
to gain control over more of the Palestinian territories.
Continuing to build the separation wall will gravely
harm peace efforts and confidence-building measures
between the parties as stipulated in the road map and
will even further suffocate the Palestinian people.

The ceasefire declared by the Palestinian factions
and by Israel represented a positive step towards an
atmosphere of peace and stability in the region.
However, Israel's persistence in its policy of
assassination has gravely harmed that ceasefire.
Therefore, we believe that the Israeli Government
should put an immediate end to its policies of
assassination, violence, assaulting cities and destroying
homes, and other measures that can only harm the road
map and the peace process as a whole. The
international community as represented by the Security
Council should demand that the Israeli Government
cease its attempts to abort the road map and assume its
international obligations for the realization of a just
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

In that context, we believe that the time has come
for the Security Council to dispatch an international
force to disengage the two sides, as another
contribution by the United Nations to the final
settlement of the peace process in the region.

In conclusion, we can only hope that our
deliberations will lead to tangible efforts that pave the
way for comprehensive peace in the region. However,
it should once again be reaffirmed that peace and
security in the Middle East can be achieved only
through the implementation of United Nations
resolutions, particularly Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), which call for
an end to Israeli occupation of all occupied Arab
territories, for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital and for
the return of all refugees and displaced persons to their
lands.

