Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Bolivian presidency
for taking the initiative to convene this meeting
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
My thanks also go to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs; Mr. Joao Vale
de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and Ambassador Cardi,
Permanent Representative of Italy and Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for their
respective briefings.

In having adopted the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action through the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015)
on 20 July 2015, the Security Council sealed the nuclear
agreement with Iran, which was the culmination of
12 Years of historic diplomatic efforts on the part of
the United States of America, the Russian Federation,
Germany, France, the United Kingdom, the People's
Republic of China, the European Union and the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

The third report (S/2017/515) of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), which we are considering today and has been
submitted pursuant to the provisions of annex B of the
resolution, comprehensively sets forth the terms linked
to the nuclear issue, ballistic missiles, travel bans and
assets freezes, as well as those relating to fostering the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

Concerning the provisions related to the nuclear
issue, the report clearly states that the Islamic
Republic of Iran continues to respect its commitments,
as underscored in the most recent reports of the
International Atomic Energy Agency on its verification
and monitoring activities in that country, as well as Iran's
follow-up of the implementation of its commitments
linked to the nuclear issue within the framework of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. Moreover, we
note with satisfaction that Iran will continue to permit
the International Atomic Energy Agency the use of
online enrichment measurement and electronic seals,
which communicate their status within nuclear sites to
Agency inspectors and facilitate automated collection
of Agency measurement recordings registered by
installed measurement devices.

With regard to the procurement channel, we
welcome the cooperation between the Security Council
and the Joint Commission, which was established
within the framework of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action, as has been exemplified by the various forms
of notification in connection with provisions, sales or
transfers concerning the Islamic Republic of Iran.

The interface thereby set up between the members
of the Security Council and the Joint Commission of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is functioning well,
thus ensuring visibility, inclusivity and transparency.
Furthermore, efforts by the Secretariat and the
Facilitator within the framework of the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), in particular concerning
practical information provided through the procurement
channel, deserve our full support and cooperation.

Accordingly, thanks to a wealth of information and
outreach, Member States have access to the information
necessary not only to properly fulfil their commitments,
but also to ensure follow-up on violations of resolution
2231 (2015), the procurement channel, confidentiality
and notifications, as well as issues of transparency and
the dissemination of information.

The launch of a ballistic missile by Iran on
27 January was the subject of a number of Security
Council meetings, within the "2231 format", without
our having been able reach an agreement as to whether
that action constituted a violation of the provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015). Nevertheless, the Senegalese
delegation calls on the various parties to show the
necessary restraint so as to diffuse tensions in the region.

In conclusion, I would like to note that the
Senegalese delegation believes that the biannual
report on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
is overall positive and would like to encourage the
Facilitator, as well as all stakeholders concerned by Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action and the States Members
of the United Nations, to persevere in that direction.

