Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for this opportunity to brief the
members of the Security Council on the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
(S/20lS/866), and to inform them of the latest political,
security and humanitarian developments in the country.

The past three months were marked by the holding
of a presidential election, which, as acknowledged by
all election observers, took place in a generally peaceful
atmosphere. I commend Prime Minister Soumeylou
Boubeye Maiga on his efforts to promote constructive
political dialogue throughout the process. I also
congratulate our colleague the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Mali, Mr. Annadif, whose
good offices played a crucial role in easing tensions.

The successful holding of the elections
demonstrated the political maturity of the Malian
people and the commitment of the political class to
the democratic process. In a particularly volatile
security environment, the successful organization of
the election also highlighted an important achievement
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali - the consensus reached among the signatories
to the Agreement, as reflected in the vital role played
by signatory armed groups in providing security at
several election sites in the north of the country. Such
consensus was undoubtedly the key factor that enabled
the election to be held according to the electoral
calendar and without major security incidents, despite
reports of unrest in the centre of the country.

At the same time, the holding of the elections
should have been underpinned by further progress
in the implementation of key institutional reforms,
including the operationalization of interim authorities,
constitutional reform, security sector reform and the
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration process.
In addition, the important role the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) was forced to play in providing
security at election sites has highlighted the low
level of operationalization of the various Operational
Coordination Mechanism units. Delays in implementing
the Agreement, along with certain crucial but stagnant
initiatives to strengthen political dialogue, such as the
charter for peace and national reconciliation, have also
resulted in a lack of national cohesion, underscored by
a fragmented political landscape. Differences in the
electoral law and electoral register have also increased
the number of opposition challenges to the results.

I remain convinced that ongoing discussions for a
possible postponement of the parliamentary elections
will create a climate of consensus for successful
constitutional review and electoral governance reforms.
The elections will serve as a new litmus test of the
cohesion of Mali's political class and society and as an
important step towards the consolidation of democratic
institutions. I therefore urge the Government and the
opposition to engage in constructive political dialogue,
based on inclusiveness and bearing national interests in
mind. I also encourage Malian political actors to take
the opportunity afforded by the presidential elections
to build a more representative Parliament by promoting
young people and women as candidates. In that regard,
I welcome the composition of the new Government,
which, in keeping with Malian law, is now more than
30 per cent female.

The pact for peace, as requested by the Security
Council in resolution 2423 (2018) and signed on
15 October by the Government and the United Nations at
the meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee,
is an essential tool to spur the efforts of the Malian
parties, supported by the international community, to
implement the Agreement and give new impetus to the
peace process by focusing on inclusiveness. The pact
does not replace the peace agreement. It underlines the
importance of implementing the main provisions of the
agreement, as stipulated in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the
resolution and in the road map adopted by the parties
on 22 March.

Progress on the implementation of the pact, as
well as on the key provisions of the agreement, will
be brought to the attention of the Security Council six
months after the inauguration of the President of the
Republic. If no progress has been made, those elements,
supported by the work of the independent observer,
will provide a solid basis for considering appropriate
measures, if necessary. In that regard, I welcome the
convening of the high-level meeting on Mali and the
Sahel on 26 September on the sidelines of the general
debate of the General Assembly here in New York,
which enabled us to reaffirm the key role played by
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
including in response to the challenges that have arisen
in the centre of the country. It was also an opportunity to
highlight the complementarity of the political response
in Mali, the support provided to the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), and the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.

At the same time, I was encouraged during my
visit to Mali by the willingness of all parties to the
agreement to accelerate its implementation. The
creation of a ministry that is specifically responsible
for the implementation of the Agreement, headed by
Mr. Lassine Bouare, is also a sign of the Government's
strong commitment to pursuing that goal.

I would like to express to the Security Council my
extreme concern about the security situation in Mali,
especially in the centre of the country - a region in
which, during the two rounds ofthe presidential election,
almost 80 per cent of the polling stations affected by
a lack of security were concentrated. The Secretary-
General notes in his latest report that that three-month
period was the deadliest since the establishment of
MINUSMA in 2013. Some 287 civilians were killed
in targeted attacks, including by improvised explosive
devices or mines and intercommunity clashes between
armed self-defence or violent extremist groups.

That situation continues to restrict the access of
humanitarian actors to those who are most vulnerable
and to limit the scope of action in terms of development
interventions. In addition to exacerbating the situation
with regard to humanitarian development in the
country, as well as human rights, it could perpetuate
a sense of frustration in the Malian population,
which is struggling to see the concrete benefits of
the agreement's implementation materialize. The
restoration and extension of State authority must,
therefore, be a priority in order to contribute to the
delivery of concrete and measurable peace dividends
on the ground.

In that regard, as requested by the Security
Council in resolution 2423 (2018), MINUSMA and the
United Nations country team have begun developing a
comprehensive strategic framework in support of the
Malian Government's comprehensive security plan for
the central regions. That framework will enable them
to coordinate their actions in support of governance,
peace and stabilization in order to improve their impact
on the ground in a comprehensive way.

(spoke in English)

Over the past few months, we have also been
witnessing an intensification in violent extremist
attacks in neighbouring Burkina Faso. Insecurity
is spreading fast, across and inside borders, with
consequences ranging from the forced displacement of
local communities to the erosion of State authority and
the sharply diminished delivery ofbasic social services.
That dire situation threatens not only the security of the
peoples of Mali and the Sahel, but international security
as a whole. We are all running against the clock.

In that context, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, for which
the Secretary-General continues to provide his steadfast
support, remains as relevant as ever. What is needed
is a regionally driven solution to address instability in
Mali and the region, which must be complemented by
initiatives aimed at improving governance, resilience
and development. Yet, if the Joint Force is to achieve
any positive results in its fight against terrorism and
transnational organized crime, it will require sustained
and appropriate support from its international partners.

Moreover, given the inter-operability and
complementarity of the Joint Force with MINUSMA,
it will be important to continue evaluating the impact
of the Mission over and against the progressive
operationalization of the Joint Force. That is an aspect
that will be reflected in the six-month progress report
requested by the Security Council to be submitted in
March 2019.

Before concluding my remarks, I wish to draw the
Council's attention to a more hopeful sign in the midst
of this challenging situation. We are indeed pleased to
report that the past months have shown a consistent and
marked decline in the number ofpeacekeepers killed or
injured, despite sustained attacks by violent extremist
groups. At this stage, while we should not attribute that
decline - at least not exclusively - to the impact of the
implementation of the recommendations of the report
of retired Lieutenant General Santos Cruz, entitled
Improving Security of United Nations Peacekeepers,
this is, of course, an encouraging trend. However,
we must, of course, remain cautious; we do not know
what tomorrow will bring. We will certainly continue
our efforts to change mindsets and improve training
and equipment, so that our peacekeepers can continue
to deliver the Mission's mandate in the best possible
conditions for their security and effectiveness.

