Mr. Shawabkah (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to express our gratitude and
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your initiative to
hold this important meeting, as well as for your wise
and able guidance of the deliberations of the Security
Council. I would also like to thank your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation.
My delegation would also like to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support, for their comprehensive briefings and
consultations with various States to inform them of the
latest developments pertaining to the preparation of the
New Horizon document.

Jordan associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the brotherly
delegation of Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The year 2009 marks two decades of Jordan's
participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, which began as a result of a royal decree.
Our participation, which continues to this day, has
made Jordan one of the top troop and police
contributors. The current scope of Jordan's partnership
in peacekeeping operations is a reflection of our
declared principled position with regard to the
Organization and its noble objectives in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

There has been a radical transformation in the
international security environment in the course of the
past two decades. That has resulted in significant
developments with regard to the nature of
peacekeeping operations, mission concepts and
planning and the mechanisms for mission management
and implementation. By necessity, those major
transformations require new ways for the international
community to respond effectively. Although recent
responses and initiatives in the area of peacekeeping,
whether within or outside the Security Council, have
been steps in the right direction, their success in
achieving the desired objectives continues to depend
primarily upon partnerships among the various parties
involved, in particular the Security Council, troop-
contributing countries, donor States and the Secretariat.

Today we have a new opportunity to promote the
relationship between the Council and troop-
contributing countries. Members of the Council have
contributed to developing that relationship by calling
for this meeting. That opportunity, which is long
overdue, provides a chance for the Council to expand
and deepen that relationship by involving troop-
contributing countries in upcoming initiatives and by
inviting them to participate in the meetings and
consultations to address peacekeeping concerns.

In that regard, it may be worthwhile to make use
of Japan's recent experience. Thankfully, that
delegation has helped to enhance interaction between
the Security Council and troop-contributing countries
by holding joint meetings in the context of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and by
following up on the results of those meetings and
informing States about them. That has had a positive
impact on relations between troop-contributing
countries and has prompted them to continue their
contacts with the Council.

The success of efforts to develop and support
United Nations peacekeeping operations requires
fostering confidence among the various regional
groups, on the one hand, and between the regional
groups and the Security Council, on the other. The
multiplication of initiatives may lead to fatigue among
States and groups if they are not involved therein and if
no real results are achieved. This may lead to
separation and hardening of positions due to a
weakening of tripartite cooperation and an absence of
communication channels between the main parties
responsible for peacekeeping operations. The role of
regional groups will be pivotal at such a moment,
particularly in the light of the momentum of initiatives
and the concurrent multiplicity of positions and
viewpoints.

All groups can combine all of these positions in
one framework that emphasizes collective interests and
at the same time ensure respect for the rights of all
States. Consequently, it may be appropriate to promote
confidence among the various parties by coordinating
diverse initiatives in a transparent manner and falling
back on the mandates and tasks of all peacekeeping
mechanisms. New initiatives must be presented to the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the General Assembly committees peacekeeping
mandates, while new contacts must be promoted with
regional groups.

Jordan's role in enhancing its relationship with
the Security Council is not confined to our interest in
taking every opportunity to present our viewpoint on
matters relating to peacekeeping operations. Our role
extends to activities carried out in the framework of the
Small Five's call for reform of the modus operandi of
the Security Council from various perspectives, most
important among which is the relationship between the
Council and troop-contributing countries. In this
connection, Jordan would like to emphasize the need
for the Group to continue to present its
recommendations to the Council and the larger
membership, which we hope will be seriously
discussed.

Jordan would also like to emphasize the
significance of practical procedures in enhancing the
relationship between the members of the Council and
troop-contributing countries. In particular, Jordan
stresses the need to foster the relationship between the
elements that plan United Nations peacekeeping
operations and determine their mandates and
administration, on the one hand, and those that
implement the mandates, on the other. Troop-
contributing countries must participate early and fully
in all aspects and stages of United Nations
peacekeeping operations so as to contribute their
expertise and experience, which can help the Council
to adopt appropriate and effective resolutions in due
course.

Jordan would also like to stress the need for the
effective and full implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1353 (2001) and the note by the President of
the Council dated 14 January 2002 (S/2002/56) in a
manner that will lead to the optimal use of these
mechanisms and deepen the relationship with troop-
contributing countries. Jordan is of the view that it is
necessary to hold consultations with troop-contributing

09-3860]
countries at every stage of peacekeeping operations,
including at their request and especially before the
Council renews the mandate of these operations.

In conclusion, permit me to express, on behalf of
the Government and people of Jordan, our gratitude
and to pay homage to the peacekeepers who fell as
martyrs while discharging their duties. Jordan has lost
22 such heroes in the cause of maintaining
international peace and security.

