Mr. Titov: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the situation in Darfur
as it considers the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2010/50) on this subject.

As the Council members are aware, the Sudan has
reached a critical juncture and will face enormous
challenges in the coming year. National elections are
scheduled to take place in less than two months, and
the referendum on the self-determination of Southern
Sudan is due to be held in less than one year. In this
context, the democratic transformation of the Sudan at
the national level requires the urgent resolution of key
issues in Darfur, including the representation of all
Darfurians in the electoral process, the negotiations
taking place in Doha, and the cessation of military
activities in the region.
The most urgent political issue in the Sudan -
including obviously Darfur - is the national elections
scheduled for April. While some of the trends affecting
Darfur have been positive, the overall situation remains
complicated and volatile. Equally positive are ongoing
consultations between the leaders of the North and the
South and the dialogue among various political forces
in both parts of the Sudan. The peaceful conduct of the
registration process in November and December 2009
was another encouraging development. The overall
figure of registered persons in Darfur alone totals
almost 70 per cent of the eligible population and is
impressive. However, based on data available from the
National Elections Commission, it seems that only
relatively small numbers of internally displaced
persons have registered.

Reports indicate that large numbers of displaced
persons loyal to Abdul Wahid boycotted the
registration process. Indeed, his movement appealed to
its supporters to do so. In addition, the National
Elections Commission was unable to establish
registration centres in some internally displaced
persons camps, such as in Kalma Camp in Southern
Darfur. In Northern Darfur, the National Elections
Commission reported 48,728 internally displaced
persons (IDPs) registered out of the total of 510,000
estimated by our colleagues in the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. In Southern
Darfur, it is reported that no IDPs in the camps were
registered for the elections out of an estimated total of
1,411,000. In Western Darfur, there were no specific
numbers provided by the National Elections
Commission on IDP registration for the estimated
747,000 IDPs, because the registration centres were
located outside of IDP camps.

As the Secretary-General stated in his recent
report on elections in the Sudan (8/2009/391), the
Government of National Unity must take concrete steps
to ensure free, fair and credible elections, and we
sincerely hope that it will do so. Among measures that
should have been put in place were those necessary to
ensure the meaningful participation of internally
displaced persons, refugees and other groups affected
by the conflict. As members will understand, that
would be particularly important since the IDP
communities represent those who have been directly
affected by the crisis in Darfur. After the elections, a
major challenge will be to ensure that the elected
officials will actually represent the interests of those
10-2364]
left out of the electoral process. In the context of the
Darfur Peace Agreement, it is therefore even more
important that the interests of all Darfurians be taken
into account in the negotiations and in the
implementation of any future peace agreement. That
peace agreement itself should have particular meaning
for all major groups in that war-torn region.

In addition, it is extremely important that the
laws necessary to promote freedom of speech and
assembly be put in place, since both are essential to
effective campaigning, first and foremost by the
Government. At the moment, these basic freedoms are
constrained under the 1997 emergency laws, which
have been lifted in all of the Sudan but continue to be
applied to all three Darfur states. It will also be
important that the National Security Law, which allows
security services to detain people without proper
justification or cause, be revised or suspended before
the elections begin on 11 April.

In accordance with its mandate, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) has supported the work of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan to provide technical
assistance to the Government of National Unity in
preparations for the elections. Nevertheless, the
organization and execution of elections is a Sudanese-
owned national process. The National Elections
Commission continues to face considerable technical
challenges, including the establishment of hundreds of
thousands of polling stations and the transportation of
large quantities of electoral materials to remote
locations. While UNAMID stands ready to assist in
addressing technical issues, the assistance given will
obviously be constrained by the resources available to
the Mission and also defined by the requests by the
National Elections Commission. As of now, as the
Security Council may be aware, the Commission has
requested only limited assistance from the United
Nations.

The mediation has continued to work actively
towards an inclusive negotiated settlement to the crisis
in Darfur through a three-track approach. First, Joint
Chief Mediator Bassole has worked with the
belligerent parties to facilitate the direct negotiation of
a peace agreement. Secondly, the mediation has
expanded the consultations to include Darfurian civil
society. Thirdly, it has worked towards the
improvement of Chad-Sudan relations.
10-23641

Thus far, formal talks between the parties have
not been possible, although informal discussions in
Doha are ongoing with representatives of the
Government of the Sudan, the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM), and the two coalitions known as the
Addis Ababa and Tripoli groups, which are acting with
the close support of the Governments of Libya and the
United States. The Addis and Tripoli groups have,
unfortunately, shown themselves to be unprepared for
substantive negotiations. While JEM. has been able to
articulate a more complete political platform than the
other movements, in the assessment of many on the
ground there remain questions about its readiness to
participate in negotiations.

The key message that Mr. Bassole has given to
the parties in Doha is that they must engage more
constructively and with greater flexibility. It is also of
critical importance that negotiations continue after the
elections, if no agreement is reached by April, so that
the enormous efforts of all stakeholders continue to
build towards a peace agreement.

Similarly, greater focus will be given to the
involvement of civil society in the peace process.
Ultimately, the success of the Darfur peace process will
depend on the extent to which it addresses the problem
of political and economic marginalization in Darfur.
UNAMID has been strongly supporting the mediation
to ensure that the views of the vibrant civil society in
Darfur are fully reflected in the Doha process.

The appointment by the Secretary-General and
African Union (AU) Chairperson Ping of the new Joint
Special Representative, Ibrahim Gambari, was intended
to give impetus to the establishment of sustained civil
society dialogue. Mr. Gambari will work closely with
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
Chairman, Mr. Mbeki, and with Mr. Bassole in helping
Darfurians to establish an inclusive and sustained civil
society dialogue that can ensure that the root causes of
the conflict are on the negotiating table and that the
agreement reflects the desires of the people. The
continuation of that dialogue will be essential in
supporting the implementation of the agreement with
the state and national Governments.

In that context, the establishment of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, led by
President Mbeki, was an important step that
demonstrates the commitment of the African Union to
resolve the conflict in Darfur. The Secretariat is
working with the African Union to ensure that the work
of the Joint Special Representative, the Chief Mediator,
the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Sudan, Mr. Haile Menkerios, and
President Mbeki is complementary and mutually
supportive.

In the meantime, the Secretary-General has
welcomed the resumption of high-level dialogue
between Chad and the Sudan and the signing, on
15 January, of the Accord on Normalization of
Relations. That agreement must serve as the basis for
increased security along the common border, which is a
key aspect of the Darfur Peace Agreement. The
decision of the Chadian authorities to expel -
according to their definition - Sudanese armed
opposition groups from Chadian territory was a
positive step, but there are still reports of cross-border
activities from both sides of the border.

It is also a positive development that President
Deby Itno met with President Al-Bashir in Khartoum
on 8 February. Some observers have even called it a
historic event. In any case, it offers a historic
opportunity for both parties to move forward. While
the full implications of the agreement reached during
that meeting are not yet clear to us - and have not
been communicated - it was an important step, in the
assessment of our colleagues on the ground, in the two
countries' efforts to improve relations and in the
settlement of the Darfur conflict. The agreement, as
reported, envisages the establishment in the coming
days of a special joint force allowing the two countries
to improve the situation at the border. In addition, the
Government of the Sudan publicly invited Darfur
insurgents operating from Chad to join the electoral
process.

As indicated in the Secretary-General's report
under the Council's consideration, the security
situation in Darfur continues to be marked by sporadic
fighting among rebel forces themselves and between
the Government of the Sudan and rebel movements. In
January, there was a spate of fighting between JEM. and
Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)-Minni Minnawi
fighters, as well as among various SLA groups in J ebel
Marra. During the reporting period, the Mission also
documented attacks by Government forces on a couple
of villages near Malha, in Northern Darfur, on
25 November 2009, and clashes between the
Government of the Sudan and JEM. forces in Silea, in
Western Darfur, in January. This week, after the killing
of a Government soldier, some Arab militias and police
were observed surrounding the Kass IDP camp, which
could portend further suffering for the population.

In the meantime, the Chadian opposition groups
relocated their base further west near Mellit, but their
actions continue to seriously affect the local
population. Also, carjackings and attacks on
international non-governmental organizations and
United Nations personnel continue, including in the
cities of Nyala and El Fasher. All those military
activities seriously undermine efforts to achieve a
political solution and continue to put civilian lives at
risk.

The Secretariat is also deeply concerned at the
intentional killing of five UNAMID peacekeepers
during the reporting period. We pay tribute to the five
soldiers from Rwanda who made the ultimate sacrifice.
The Secretary-General has condemned all such attacks
in the strongest possible terms. Going forward,
UNAMID will continue to take the necessary measures
to maximize the safety and security of its personnel,
while also establishing a robust and proactive presence
throughout Darfur in accordance with its mandate. In
that context, it is crucial that all stakeholders in Darfur
respect the freedom of movement of UNAMID
personnel.

As mentioned in the Secretary-General's report
covering the past three months, UNAMID documented
at least 21 instances in which its freedom of movement
was restricted, including six incidents involving
Government forces and nine involving SLA-Abdul
Wahid. I should stress that those restrictions have also
continued over the past two weeks. It is of particular
concern that many of the recent incidents in which
rebel movements have actually prevented UNAMID's
freedom of movement have included threats of physical
harm to UNAMID personnel, the brandishing of
weapons, the firing of shots into the air and the
confiscation of UNAMID equipment.

In a much more welcome development, on
13 December two UNAMID staff members who had
been held in Darfur for more than 100 days were
released from captivity. We will continue to operate
under the principle that the primary responsibility for
the safety and security of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel in Darfur lies with the
authorities. We were equally delighted to see that the
representative of the International Committee of the
10-23641
Red Cross in Darfur was also freed in good health this
week, after three weeks in captivity in the region.

Mr. Gambari's arrival comes at a time when
significant steps have been taken towards the full
deployment of the Mission, allowing the UNAMID
leadership to focus robustly on its core tasks of
protecting the population and facilitating humanitarian
activities. By the end of February, all but two of the 18
United Nations battalions and all but four force
enablers will have deployed. Currently, only six
formed police units remain outstanding, but many of
them are on track. It is an important development that
the Ethiopian tactical helicopter unit is expected to
deploy to Nyala in mid-February, which will provide a
much-needed key capability for the Mission.

UNAMID continues to provide a 24/7 presence in
most IDP camps and, so far, has increased to almost 30
the number of its long-range patrols. Community
policing activities have also contributed significantly
to the reduction of violent crime in many camps in
Darfur and nearby communities.

As the Sudan enters the final year of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, it is important that
the challenges facing Darfur be Viewed within a
national context as well. The conflicts in the Sudan,
which have a primarily internal dynamic, cannot be
10-23641

solved in piecemeal fashion or by addressing primarily
external factors. Core issues such as power- and
wealth-sharing require a comprehensive and visionary
approach that takes into account the interests of all
stakeholders throughout the Sudan, in particular of
those who have been marginalized by conflict itself for
too long.

While the challenges in Darfur remain enormous,
there is a hope and an opportunity that the coming year
will bring positive changes to the region. The
Secretary-General believes that the international
community will speak with one voice and urge all
members of the Security Council and all stakeholders
to work towards a positive democratic transformation
in the Sudan that includes a peaceful political
resolution to the conflict in Darfur.

