Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Exactly
one month ago, I came before members of the Security
Council and declared that it was a dark day for the world
because of the dangerous and irresponsible actions of
North Korea. Almost one week ago, I said that the days
of talking were over and that it was time to act. Today,
the full Security Council has come together to put the
North Korean dictator on notice, and this time, the
Council has matched its words and actions. Resolution
2371 (2017), which we have adopted today, is a strong,
united step towards holding North Korea accountable
for its behaviour.

Today, the Security Council increased the penalty
of North Korea's ballistic-missile activity to a whole
new level. North Korea's irresponsible and careless acts
have just proved to be quite costly to the regime. Today's
resolution is the single largest economic sanctions
package ever levelled against the North Korean regime.
The price which the North Korean leadership will pay
for its continued nuclear and missile development will
be the loss of one-third of its exports and hard currency.
This is the most stringent set of sanctions imposed
on any country in a generation. These sanctions will
cut deep, and in doing so will give the North Korean
leadership a taste of the deprivation it has chosen to
inflict on the North Korean people.

Nuclear and ballistic missile development is
expensive. The revenues which the North Korean
Government receives are not going towards feeding its
people. Instead, the North Korean regime is literally
starving its people and enslaving them in mines
and factories in order to fund these illegal nuclear
programmes. Even as famine looms on the horizon;
even as the regime continues to ask for international
assistance to cope with devastating floods and a possible
drought later this year, its displays of aggression take
precedence over its own people.

Even as we respond to the North Korean nuclear
threat, the United States will continue to stand up for the
human dignity and rights of the North Korean people. It
is the continued suffering of the North Korean people
that should remind the Security Council that, while
resolution 2371 (2017) is a significant step forward, it is
not nearly enough. The threat of an outlaw, nuclearized
North Korean dictatorship remains. The unimaginable
living conditions of so many of the North Korean people
are unchanged. The North Korean regime continues
to show that widespread violations of human rights
go hand in hand with threats to international peace
and security.

I thank each and every one of my colleagues who
worked so hard to bring this resolution to a vote. I
have previously pointed out that China has a critical
role to play on matters related to North Korea. I want
to personally thank the Chinese delegation for the
important contributions it made to the resolution.
While the Security Council has done good work, the
members of the Security Council - and all United
Nations Member States - must do more to increase
the pressure on North Korea. We must work together
to fully implement the sanctions we imposed today and
those imposed in past resolutions.

The step we take together today is an important one,
but we should not fool ourselves into thinking we have
solved the problem. We are not even close. The North
Korean threat has not left us. It is rapidly growing more
dangerous. We have seen two intercontinental ballistic
missiles fired in just the past month. Further action is
required. The United States is taking and will continue
to take prudent defensive measures to protect ourselves
and our allies. Our annual joint military exercises, for
instance, are transparent and defence-oriented. They
have been carried out regularly and openly for nearly
40 years. They will continue.

Our goal remains a stable Korean peninsula, at
peace and without nuclear weapons. We want only
security and prosperity for all nations, including North
Korea. Until then, this resolution and prior ones will
be implemented to the fullest to maximize pressure on
North Korea to change its ways. Today is a good day at
the United Nations. We will need many more such days
in order to peacefully resolve the crisis that has been
created by North Korea's dangerous and illegal actions.
As I have said before, time is short, but today we have
taken one step in the right direction.

I again thank my colleagues and their teams for
their action and support towards sending a strong
message to the North Korean regime.

