Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Peruvian presidency for taking the initiative
to convene this meeting one year after the adoption
of resolution 2419 (2018), which Peru initiated with
Sweden. I thank the Secretary-General's Envoy on
Youth, as well as Ms. Muganda and Ms. Ramyar, for
their briefings.

I wish to highlight the obstacles to youth
participation before exploring some ways that the
Security Council could support them in their work for
peace and security.

Young people and youth organizations have not
waited for us to become actors in international peace
and security. All over the world, they contribute to
innovative solutions, invest in new alternative spaces
and fight the status quo, as highlighted in the report of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
on the leading role of young people in preventing and
combating violent extremism. However, this immense
potential cannot be realized if young people are
displaced or forced to leave their countries because of
war, if they are indoctrinated by extremist groups, if
their schools and universities are attacked, if all forms
of freedom of expression are hindered or if they are
excluded from political, economic and social life. We
must allow young people to empower themselves in all
of these areas.

France has therefore made the empowerment of
young people a national priority and a main focus of
its diplomacy. As an example, the MediaSahel project,
led by the French Development Agency, has mobilized
a budget of €8.3 million to enable young people from
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger to counter fake news,
access reliable information and more actively and
calmly participate in public debate in their countries.

We are also supporting youth participation as part
of our presidency of the Group of Seven (G-7). One
month ago, hundreds of decision-makers under the age
of 30 gathered in Paris, under the high patronage of the
President of the Republic, to present recommendations
on fighting inequality. These recommendations will
be forwarded to the G-7 Heads of State, who will meet
from 24 to 26 August in Biarritz. Youth participation
will also be a priority of the forum that France is
co-organizing with Mexico and UN-Women in 2020 to
mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World
Conference on Women, held in Beijing in 1995.

The Council must more consistently support youth
action in building peace and security by strengthening
the operational framework of resolutions 2250 (2015)
and 2419 (2018), which it adopted. Discussions on the
youth, peace and security agenda, such as today's, are
important. The subject of youth must also be more
consistently included in our deliberations of the country-
specific situations on our agenda. In this regard, we
commend the participation in Security Council meetings
of young briefers, such as Kessy Ekomo-Soignet, of the
Central African Republic (see S/PV.8241), Inas Miloud,
of Libya (see S/PV.8514) and Nujeen Mustafa, a young
Syrian refugee (see S/PV.8556). These briefings should
become more frequent.

It is also essential that country-specific reports
incorporate the aspirations of youth and the
contribution of the United Nations to their being
included in the peace process. In this regard, I wish
to commend the youth strategy of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, as well as the efforts
of the UNDP, the United Nations Population Fund
and the Peacebuilding Commission, on developing
a comprehensive programme on youth, peace and
security and supporting youth coalitions and the youth,
peace and security road maps that will begin in 2020.

We look forward to the recommendations the
Secretary-General will make in his report on the
implementation of resolutions 2419 (2018) and 2250
(2015) between now and May 2020. In this regard, I wish
to commend the Secretary-General's extraordinary
advocacy for youth, as demonstrated by the recent
launch of "Youth 2030: The United Nations Strategy
on Youth", the organization of the World Conference
of Ministers Responsible for Youth and Youth Forum
Lisbon+21 and the Youth Climate Summit, scheduled for
September, which illustrate the efforts of the Secretary-
General to make youth a pillar of multilateralism.

In 1957, Albert Camus said in his acceptance
speech for the Nobel Prize in Literature,

"Every generation undoubtedly feels that it is
destined to remake the world. Mine knows, however,
that it will not do so. But perhaps its task is even
greater: to prevent the world from falling apart."

We will not be able to prevent the world from falling
apart without the full and effective participation of
current and future generations and without recognizing
them as indispensable partners in international peace
and security. To achieve that end, the Council can count
on the full commitment of France.

