We support the statement submitted by Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (annex 20). The effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) demand from us a dynamic, concerted and efficient response, based on complementarity, cooperation and solidarity. This pandemic is a challenge facing all of us, creating a crisis of several devastating effects not only on health but also on the economy, trade and our societies in general. COVID-19 does not respect borders or ideologies. Political differences must be put aside in this dramatic moment for humankind as the only alternative for the search for joint solutions. We reiterate our deep concern about the pandemic's impact on Middle East countries, and we call upon them to refrain from taking any action that might lead to a greater deterioration of stability and peace in the region. While Governments around the world tirelessly work to tackle the pandemic, Israel continues to occupy Palestinian territory, implement annexation policies, increase its illegal and colonizing practices and measures, including the construction and expansion of settlements on occupied Palestinian territory, and undertake punitive demolitions, the seizure of resources from Palestinian institutions, the forced displacement of hundreds of Palestinian civilians and the blockade of the Gaza Strip, thereby exacerbating the emergency situation that the public health system is facing as well as the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation of Palestine, particularly in East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip, and hindering the possibility for countering the spread of COVID-19. We regret the precarious situation of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East that has resulted from the withdrawal of United States financial support. We reject the annexation plans for the occupied West Bank, which, after long years of negotiation, is a threat to the future of the Palestinian State, in clear violation of international law and human rights. It is worrisome that no measures were taken during the most recent reporting period to end the Israeli military aggression and occupation of Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016). The Council has remained silent while Israel consolidates with impunity its policy of expanding illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory and now threatens to annex Palestinian territories in the Jordan Valley and other areas of the West Bank and East Jerusalem. In the light of recent events, we once again call on the Security Council to abide by the responsibility vested in it by the Charter of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security. The Council must demand that Israel immediately and completely end all its colonizing policies and practices and abstain from taking any unilateral action contrary to resolutions on the situation in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine, adopted by this organ, in particular resolution 2334 (2016). The systemic use of the United States veto to guarantee Israel's impunity for its actions must cease. The aggressive, unilateral and unjustified actions of the United States in the Middle East severely undermine the legitimate interests of the Arab and Islamic nations and are leading to a dangerous escalation in the region. We reiterate our rejection of the so-called deal of the century, drawn up by the current United States Government, which ignores the two-State solution that has been historically supported by the United Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and other international actors. The unilateral action of the United States Government in recognizing Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and establishing its diplomatic mission there shows disrespect for the city's historical status; that action and its decision to recognize Israel's sovereignty over the Syrian Golan constitute flagrant violations of the United Nations Charter, international law and the relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council. We demand once again that Israel totally and unconditionally withdraw from the Syrian Golan and from all occupied Arab territories. We reaffirm our unrestricted support for a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that will enable the Palestinian people to exercise their right to self-determination and establish an independent and sovereign State based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and which will guarantee the right of return for the refugees. We express our unwavering solidarity with the Government and the people of Palestine and our support for Palestine's entry into the United Nations as a full Member State. With respect to Iran, we ratify our full support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and we reject, with respect to Iran, the withdrawal of the United States from that agreement, its attempts to disregard the validity of resolution 2231 (2015), endorsing the Plan of Action, the reimposition of unilateral sanctions and the military threat made against the Islamic Republic of Iran. We reiterate our strongest condemnation of the United States sanctions imposed against Syria and the implementation of the Caesar Act, which are affecting the country's reconstruction after nine years of war and in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, in gross and flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter, international law and the human rights of the Syrian people. It is unacceptable that some countries have to suffer the imposition of arbitrary unilateral coercive measures, contrary to international law and the United Nations Charter. We demand the immediate end, without political conditions, of the illegal unilateral measures imposed on sovereign States that, in addition to their permanent impacts on the countries affected, hinder the fight again the pandemic. Against this complex backdrop, the United States has unveiled a foreign policy aimed at stirring up and promoting conflict, division, chauvinism and supremacist and racist positions. It is attacking multilateralism and unjustly undermining the role played by international organizations, in particular the World Health Organization. The behaviour of the United States threatens international peace and security, and its constant aggression against certain countries aggravates the situation. We support the urgent call of the Secretary-General to end the sickness of war and fight the disease that is ravaging our world, namely, the coronavirus pandemic. All forms of war, including unconventional warfare, must cease. In the light of the challenges I have just outlined, the defence of the right to peace remains a fundamental priority. It is the duty of all States, and particularly of members of the Security Council, to defend multilateralism and the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter, including respect for the sovereign equality of States and their political independence, territorial unity and integrity, and the peaceful resolution of conflicts and abstention from the use or threat of use of force in international relations.
