We wish to thank the French presidency of the Security Council, for convening this open debate; the Secretary-General, for his annual report (S/2020/525); the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter; the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore; and Mariam, for sharing her experience. Slovenia aligns itself with the statements presented by the European Union, and by Canada on behalf of Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and wishes to add some remarks in its national capacity. The year 2020 marks the anniversaries of two milestones in the normative framework for the protection of children affected by armed conflict: the twentieth anniversary of the agreement of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, and the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of Security Council resolution 1612 (2005), on children and armed conflict, which established the landmark monitoring and reporting mechanism. Nonetheless, the latest annual report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict reminds us that there is still a long way ahead of us. We are deeply concerned that in 2019 there were more than 25,000 grave violations committed against children in armed conflicts, an alarming increase of cases of denial of humanitarian access to children, continuous attacks on schools and hospitals and inconceivable prevalence of sexual violence against girls and boys. It is therefore of key importance to ensure unfailing respect for international humanitarian law and human rights law by all parties to conflicts around the world. For the protection of children and preventing grave violations against them, accountability and the fight against impunity should be strengthened. We call on all those States not yet having done so to consider ratifying the Optional Protocol and joining the Paris Principles and Commitments on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Safe School Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. We share the concerns that the coronavirus disease pandemic and its consequences exacerbate the plight of children affected by armed conflicts around the world, including by impeding activities to protect the children. In particular, the pandemic has worsened access to education, health care and clean drinking water. Education is one of the few signs of hope for children affected by armed conflicts. The Secretary-General's report also shows some promising developments in 2019, since fewer children were killed and maimed, recruited and used and abducted than the year before. More than 13,200 children were released or separated from armed forces or armed groups. This progress was possible due to continued efforts by the Special Representative and her Office, the Security Council and its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF, child protection advisers in field missions and all others in this network of protection, and we would like to commend them for their tireless work. Slovenia is not just a strong advocate of child protection in international forums, but also contributes to the efforts on the ground to lessen the burden of children affected by conflicts. In 2019 and 2020, Slovenia supported several projects for children from Ukraine, Palestine and Syria, as well as providing humanitarian aid to UNICEF for Yemeni children. In addition, projects aimed at empowering children to become actors for peace were conducted in more than 20 countries worldwide.
