The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the Netherlands.

It has been a pleasure to listen to the many
excellent statements that we have heard in the course
of this day. One reason must have been that several of
them started with compliments addressed to the Dutch
presidency. In order to save time, I did not
acknowledge those kind words as President. I should
now like to thank representatives for all of them.

Today's debate has demonstrated the relevance of
the issue of Security Council decision-making on
mission closure and mission transition and the interests
that Member States take in that issue. It has been a very
useful contribution to the overall exercise of improving
United Nations peace operations, the main part of
which consists, of course, of the Brahimi report and the
various discussions about that report. Clearly, today's
subject deserves a much more thorough study than the
Netherlands has been able to supply in its brief
discussion paper, which was, after all, intended only to
challenge minds and loosen tongues. I think the paper
has served it purpose, and now we must shift to a more
operational mode.

It is clear that an open meeting of the Security
Council does not lend itself to consultations on the
most effective follow-up of our debate. I will therefore
put the issue on the agenda of the Security Council in
consultations of the whole. Those delegations that are
not members of the Council but have concrete
suggestions regarding that follow-up, are welcome to
submit them to the Council President or, for that
matter, to any other Council member. Their ideas will
certainly be taken into account.

One recurring theme during today's debate was
the importance of ensuring a smooth transition from
the conflict phase to the post-conflict peace-building
phase. This requirement may seem self-evident, but in
many instances there appears to be a gap between those
two phases, which needs to be filled. A graphic
illustration of this phenomenon is the situation in
Guinea-Bissau, a country which finds itself at a very
fragile post-conflict stage. Later this month - 29
November, to be exact - the Dutch presidency has
scheduled an open briefing on Guinea-Bissau, which
will be chaired by the Minister for Development
Cooperation of the Netherlands. It will provide an
excellent opportunity to apply elements of today's
debate to the case of Guinea-Bissau. Later this week,
my delegation will send out a draft presidential
statement to members of the Council with an
explanatory note on the purpose of the meeting.

As I realize that after this long debate all of us are
secretly longing for an exit, I will now resume my
function as President of the Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.
