Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): My delegation will vote
in favour of the draft resolution (S/2007/390) before
the Council on the termination of the mandates of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Iraq. The current
disarmament situation in Iraq has improved compared
to the time when UNMOVIC was established. We
therefore believe that the continuation of the mandates
of UNMOVIC and the IAEA is no longer required. The
closing of the mandate constitutes a major step in
recognizing that a chapter in the history of Iraq has
been closed and reaffirms that the new Iraq is
committed to its disarmament and non-proliferation
obligations.

My delegation believes that the expertise and
experience gained during the many years of operation
of UNMOVIC are invaluable assets to the international
community. We hope they will not be lost and will
remain available to an independent and multilateral
verification system in the future. While we would have

liked to see a prior technical assessment of the
significance of the remaining unresolved disarmament
issues in Iraq before closure, we can understand the
difficulty of verifying all remaining issues. We hope
however, that the remaining unresolved disarmament
issues will finally be resolved and will not be beyond
reach. In that regard, we note the commitment of the
Government of Iraq as indicated in its constitution to
fulfil its obligations in the disarmament and non-
proliferation field. We hope it takes the necessary steps
to implement that obligation, including early accession
to the Chemical Weapons Convention. We are hopeful
that the implementation of Iraq's disarmament
commitment will contribute to the early establishment
of a zone free from weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery in the Middle East.

Iraq is now experiencing a major transformation.
Iraqis are embracing a new statehood based on
democracy, the rule of law and participatory
development. It is not always easy for the Iraqis to
proceed in this new direction, in particular when
security circumstances remain grim in the country. We
empathize with the Iraqis, who face many challenges
as they embark on that process. Hence, we believe that
the conclusion of the mandates of UNMOVIC and the
IAEA in Iraq will provide an opportunity for the Iraqis
to reallocate their resources in order to meet other
urgent needs and priorities of the country.

Finally, my delegation wishes to extend its
appreciation to UNMOVIC and the IAEA for their
dedicated professionalism and contributions in the
implementation of their mandates throughout the years
in Iraq.

