Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
reiterate the condolences of the League of Arab States
to the families of the victims of the earthquake in Haiti.
We also thank the President for this opportunity to take
part in this important meeting. I also thank Mr. Ould
Abdullah, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and Mr. Ramtane Lamamra for their briefings.
We reaffirm our solidarity with them.

Allow me also to take this opportunity to
welcome the new members of the Council. We wish
them every success.

The question of Somalia has become the main
challenge to peace and security in the Horn of Africa.
The deteriorating security and humanitarian crisis in
Somalia is one of the worst Africa has ever known.
That has been affirmed by the Secretary-General in a
number of reports. The ongoing conflict among the
various parties in Somalia and the international
community's failure to end it will further exacerbate
the situation in Somalia, with serious repercussions for
the countries of the region and for international peace
and security.

Seventeen years of international and regional
experience have shown us that the long-awaited
political solution to the Somali crisis must be based on
national consensus. That is at the heart of the solution.
The framework for these efforts has been determined
by the Djibouti process. The African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) can safeguard that framework, but
it needs all the support it can get. Dialogue among the
various parties to the conflict, none of which should be
marginalized or rejected, must be pursued on the basis
of the agreements reached over the past few years with
the support of international and regional organizations,
6
with the exception of those that have chosen the path
of violence.

The League of Arab States supports AMISOM
and firmly condemns any military operation against it.
The League of Arab States will continue to call on
Member States and all regional groups to take part in
AMISOM. and contribute to its full deployment. We
will continue to appeal to Member States to provide
financial and logistical support for that deployment.
The Security Council must renew its mandate in order
to protect the legitimate institutions of Somalia, while
taking all necessary measures to ensure support for the
Mission and its deployment.

The disastrous humanitarian situation is
deteriorating on a daily basis. A true humanitarian
disaster is unfolding in Somalia. We must meet this
challenge and provide international and regional
assistance immediately through closer cooperation
among the various international and regional
humanitarian agencies. These agencies must coordinate
the delivery of humanitarian assistance and ensure that
it arrives safely.

The worsening security situation on the ground in
Somalia is the cause of real disorder along the
coastline. Piracy along the Somali coastline has
increased, becoming a genuine threat to maritime
security and safety in that strategic zone. While
international efforts are under way to end piracy along
the coastline of Somalia, the situation in that country
requires the international community, and the Security
Council in particular, to take the steps necessary to
deal with the Somali crisis by addressing its most
profound causes and reasons. That means strengthening
Somali State institutions and helping the various
parties to set aside their differences in the interests of
peace and stability in that country.

