Mr. Kafeero (Uganda): At the outset, I would like
to convey Uganda's deep sympathy and condolences to
the Government and people of Pakistan following the
recent terrorist attacks.

I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
the delegation of Pakistan on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I also thank you
for organizing this important debate. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing this
morning.

Terrorism is a global threat to international peace
and security. This debate is an affirmation of the
significance ofthe Security Council and ofits important
contribution to the global efforts to counter that threat.
The indiscriminate and callous acts of terrorism around
the world are a reminder of the vulnerability of all
States.

On 11 July 2010, Uganda was the target ofa cowardly
attack by Al-Shabaab terrorists. That attack resulted in
the deaths of 78 innocent people and the injury of 200
others. Uganda continues to face threats from that group
and others, such as the Lord's Resistance Army and the
Allied Democratic Forces which, like Al-Shabaab, is
linked with Al-Qaida.

Uganda strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We reaffirm that all terrorist
acts are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation or of who commits them.

Uganda strongly supports the full implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy as an effective framework in the fight against
terrorism. Since 1998, the Government of Uganda has
adopted several measures at the national, regional and
international levels aimed at preventing and combating
both local and international terrorism.

At the international level, we continue to support
the full implementation of relevant United Nations
resolutions, conventions and international agreements
to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.

At the regional level, Uganda has strengthened
cooperation through frameworks such as the East
African Community, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the African Union.

At the national level, Uganda adopted an
anti-terrorism act in 2002 that established the legal
framework within which counter-terrorism efforts
are regulated. Uganda has also taken the necessary
measures to prevent its territory from being used for
cross-border terrorist acts. We have swiftly brought to
justice persons or entities participating in terrorist acts,
including prosecuting those involved in the July 2010
attacks in Kampala.

Uganda formulated and has been implementing
a strategy of public awareness and sensitization
through a police-led security education and training
programme since 2007. Tenets of the programme
include raising security awareness among the public to
enable them to appreciate, cooperate with and support
law enforcement agencies' efforts to ensure safety
and security in their neighbourhoods. We continue
to organize counter-terrorism dialogues with various
communities, including in schools, shopping malls and
faith-based organizations, whereby those communities
are given a platform to discuss issues of concern,
including terrorism. Our experience has shown that
such meetings are very important in ensuring good
community relations and acceptance by the public
that law enforcement measures are appropriate and
proportionate. Those counter terrorism efforts are
conducted under an inter-agency body, which is
important for the synergy of efforts, coordination,
creating team spirit and ensuring effective resource
mobilization and utilization.

We have seen increasing levels of sophistication in
terrorist networks through their ability to exploit the
benefits ofinformation and communication technology,
such as social media, and linkages with transnational
criminal networks to finance and promote their
activities. The strong links between terrorism and such
transnational organized crime as money laundering,
human trafficking and drug trafficking have become
a threat to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
some States.

Since terrorism and transnational criminal
activities thrive on the same vulnerabilities and utilize
similar actors, it is necessary for the United Nations
to support the implementation of counter-terrorism
measures that will sever the mutually reinforcing and
symbiotic relationships that exist or may emerge.

Our collective efforts should aim at denying
terrorists any safe haven, eradicating sources of terrorist
financing, reducing States' vulnerability and enhancing
States' preparedness and response capabilities.

Priority attention in the fight against terrorism
should be given to prevention. A comprehensive
approach to counter-terrorism should support
addressing fundamental vulnerabilities such as
economic deprivation and weak State structures, in
order to effectively deprive terrorists of safe havens and
recruiting grounds and, in turn, strengthen the ability
of States to effectively counter terrorist threats.

Our collective approach should also place emphasis
to building national and regional capacity and facilitating
cooperation among States. That requires an effective
system to be put in place to provide technical assistance
for capacity-building that is responsive to the needs
of States. In that regard, it is essential to put greater
emphasis on fostering better information-sharing,
operational planning and initiatives that strengthen
regional counter-terrorism capabilities and cooperation.

Closer cooperation between the United Nations
and such regional and subregional organizations
as the African Union, IGAD, the Southern African
Development Community and the Economic
Community of West African States in counter-terrorism
activities is crucial. Such cooperation is an essential and
a necessary approach towards more effective counter-
terrorism measures.

Finally, countering terrorism goes beyond the
individual abilities of any State. By working together,
we can counter and combat those threats. I would
like to reaffirm Uganda's resolve and support to
contribute constructively to international efforts in the
comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism.

