Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Ijoin my colleagues
in expressing our condolences and solidarity with you,
Madam President, your Mission, all our American
friends and the citizens of this great city of New York
for the losses of 9/11, and to all those countries that,
like my own, lost their own nationals in the attacks.
Speaking as someone who worked very closely with
the American and other Governments in the aftermath
of 9/11, I can say that I will never forget that day and
that we will never cease to stand alongside them in the
fight against terrorists and the unwavering campaign to
protect our societies and defend civilians.

The attacks of 9/11 came without warning out of the
clear blue sky. The horror of Syria has been unfolding
before us for more than six slow years. After 9/11,
Russia and Iran worked with us. We urge them to work
with us now to halt the attacks and protect the civilians
of Idlib. There have been many inflection points that
have come and gone on Syria. The Astana meeting, one
would like to think, was another inflection point that
would succeed. I think that it is very important that
we can have this discussion and this debate today. We
will soon hear from our Turkish colleague, whom we
welcome to the Council.

But I want to stay right at the start that we strongly
agree with President Erdogan. This morning, he wrote
in The Wall Street Journal that Al-Assad's solution to
countering terrorism is a false one. He said that the plan
to militarily attack Idlib will only create new hotbeds
of terrorism. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
was an outcome and not the cause of what is happening
in Syria.

We face a choice between an Al-Assad/Russia
military assault on Idlib in which, as many colleagues
have said today, thousands of civilians will die - we
have seen in eastern Aleppo and eastern Ghouta what
that looks like: the killing of children; attacks on
schools and hospitals, even those in deconflicted areas;
the barbaric use of chemical weapons - or allowing
Turkey and opposition groups the support, space and
time to separate out the terrorists and tackle them
themselves. Turkey has a plan for Idlib, and it involves
reaching an agreement with the Syrian opposition
whereby the regime would refrain from attacking them
while they combat terrorism. That is what we should
be discussing today, but I think it was absent from the
briefing we received from Russia just now.

We would like also to talk about how we can get
together, through Astana or another grouping that
works, to work out how the regime can work with the
opposition to bring security and stability back to Idlib. I
would like to know why the Council cannot spend time
discussing how to build on the work of Astana to that
end. This would not only provide a plan to rid the area
of extremists, but would also provide the beginnings of
a model for discussing a political process to resolve this
conflict, which has gone on too long.

Every speaker today has talked about the
importance of there being no alternative to a political
solution. Of course we agree with that, but the United
Nations Special Envoy has told us that progress on a
political solution is impossible if there is a military
assault on Idlib, so I would like to know from Russia
and Iran that they will heed those words, that they will
stop the military operations, and that they will come to
the Council and discuss with all of us, including Turkey,
how exactly we can build on Astana to engage seriously
in order to finally - six years after some of the worst
horrors we have seen in war since the Second World
War - bring that to an end and get a political process
under way in Syria. I will be grateful to hear from
Russia and Iran how exactly we can bring that about.

