Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of December. I would like to
commend Judge Theodor Meron, the new President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and, through him, the outgoing
President, Judge Patrick Robinson, as well as Judge
Khalida Rachid Khan, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), for their reports
on the completion strategies of their respective
Tribunals (see S/2011/716 and S/2011/73l). I also
thank the Prosecutors of the respective Tribunals,
Mr. Serge Brammertz and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow.

As the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda enters its final year, Rwanda reaffirms its
unwavering support for, and cooperation with, the
Tribunal and readiness to facilitate the trials of the
remaining cases by mid-2012, as outlined in the ICTR
report. Through the Rwanda Witness Protection
Service, we will continue to provide security and
access to witnesses from both sides and assist their
movement to and from Arusha. As usual, my
Government will also extend support to investigations
and make available all relevant documents.

The Government of Rwanda welcomes the
referral decision of 28 June delivered by the ICTR in
the case of J can-Bosco Uwinkindi, and expects that the
pending application for the referral of the Bernard
Munyagishari case will also be granted. Rwanda also
welcomes the 27 October ruling of the European Court
of Human Rights on the extradition of Silvere
Ahorugeze, who is accused of war crimes and genocide
and was arrested in Sweden. The Court conclusively
determined that the extradition would not violate the
relevant provisions of the European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms, in particular article 3, which prohibits
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and
article 6, which establishes the right to a fair trial.

That ruling will facilitate decisions by the ICTR
on referral applications and alleviate the burden of the
Tribunal in the final phase of its completion strategy.
In that regard, Rwanda calls upon all European Union
member States to arrest and/or extradite all genocide
fugitives and suspects living within their territory in
order to assist in the fight against impunity for the
most serious crimes. That is a prerequisite for any
reconciliation.

The ICTR tracking unit should be recognized for
its tremendous efforts, together with those of various
United Nations Member States, to arrest numerous
fugitives over the years. Rwanda will continue to urge
all Governments to cooperate with the Tribunal in
arresting the remaining fugitives, including one of the
masterminds and financiers of the genocide, Felicien
Kabuga, and in facilitating their transfer to Arusha or
Rwanda.

The ICTR has done a commendable job in the
fight against impunity and in ensuring accountability
for the most serious crimes. However, as the ad hoc
Tribunals are temporary and transitional, at some point
the transition must come to an end. Rwanda has
expressed concerns regarding the relevance of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, which it feels would unnecessarily prolong
the transition, rather than focus on empowering
national jurisdictions, particularly in countries that
suffered from those crimes. It is therefore imperative
that the term of the Residual Mechanism be strictly
limited and that strong emphasis be placed on
transferring cases to permanent and national
jurisdictions.

I conclude by again expressing my gratitude for
the opportunity to take part in this important
discussion, and reiterate my Government's continued
commitment to supporting and expediting the work of
the ICTR and the Residual Mechanism.

