Mr. Mochochoko (Lesotho): Madam President,
let me begin by commending you for your leadership
of the Council during the month of July. I welcome the
opportunity to address the Council as it considers yet
again the Secretary-General's report on Angola. We
join previous delegations in welcoming Minister
Malungo and in thanking Ambassador Gambari for his
introduction of the Secretary-General's report.

We are all aware of the situation that has
prevailed in Angola since 1998, when UNITA was
discharged from the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation, followed by the return to conflict and
the subsequent withdrawal of the United Nations
peacekeepers from the country. Over the years, the
international community and the Council have stood by
as the people of Angola endured untold suffering and
hardship, including serious human rights violations, the
conscription of child soldiers, and the murder and
maiming by landmines of civilians at the hands of
Jonas Savimbi and UNITA. Current estimates put the
death toll in Angola at close to 1 million. There are
over 2 million internally displaced persons, and
thousands of refugees have fled to neighbouring
countries.

The single motivating factor that has caused
Savimbi to continue the civil war in Angola and to
refuse to heed the Council's numerous resolutions is
greed for power and for the economic wealth of
Angola. While the people of this richly endowed
country have suffered economically and otherwise over
the years, Savimbi and UNITA have gained from the
continuation of the conflict, which they have fuelled by
exploiting Angola's natural resources.

One would have thus expected that following the
Council's adoption of resolution 1295 (2000) in April
and the introduction of tougher measures to restrict
UNITA's access to international markets for illegal
exports of diamonds and import of fuels and
ammunition, the situation in Angola would have
changed for the better. Unfortunately, the report before
us today does not contain much evidence of a change
for the better.

This calls for even more strenuous efforts by this
Council and the international community to strengthen
the monitoring mechanism for the implementation of
resolution 1295 (2000). It was thus a matter of concern
to witness some delays in the establishment of the
monitoring mechanism envisaged in resolution 1295
(2000), as these delays assured Savimbi of his
continued resource base. We accordingly applaud the
establishment of this mechanism, the effect of which
will be to further tighten the noose around Savimbi's
neck, forcing him to return to dialogue, peace and
reconciliation.

The people of Angola have been hungry for peace
and stability for a long time, but despite their calls for
the cessation of hostilities, and despite efforts by,
among others, the Secretary-General's Adviser for
Special Assignments in Africa, Under-Secretary
Ibrahim Gambari; the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim; and the Director of the Office of the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Ross
Mountain, violence and insecurity continue to prevail
in many parts of Angola, as a result of which the
humanitarian situation has deteriorated. Reports of
attacks on civilian vehicles, in particular on those of
relief agencies, resulting in deaths, injuries and the
destruction of property, have forced the World Food
Programme and other agencies to abandon distribution
of aid by land and to resort to airlifting all supplies,
which is considerably more expensive.

In this regard, we note that the response to the
United Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal has
so far been poor and that while contributions have been
made for food, very little funding has been received.
Unless the international community responds urgently
and generously by making funds available to pay for
the cost of airlifting supplies, it will not be possible to
avoid the imminent human catastrophe in Angola.

While there is no doubt that displacement and the
threat of landmines have kept farmers from producing
crops, thus exacerbating famine and intensifying the
humanitarian situation, other problems are structural in
nature and thus need to be resolved through reforms
and longer-term development programmes.

Now that the Government has regained control of
large parts of the country, prospects for the farming
community to revive the agricultural industry,
particularly the once-vibrant coffee industry, have been
enhanced. The Government of Angola thus needs to
take the necessary steps to mobilize financial resources
for the purchase of equipment and raw materials as
well as for the rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage
systems. Donor community support for revitalizing the
coffee industry in Angola will no doubt be a vital
catalyst for creating an economically sustainable
income for thousands of families in Angola, thus
bringing about much-needed change in this war-torn
country.

It should be a source of concern that health
conditions in Angola have dramatically deteriorated,
with a number of preventable diseases, such as polio,
bringing death and suffering to an ever-increasing
number of people. Efforts by the World Health
Organization (WHO) and De Beers to harness the
further spread of the polio epidemic will not bear much
fruit as long as war continues to force thousands of
people to leave the hinterland for sanctuary in already
overcrowded cities. Resettlement plans for thousands
of displaced people should be put in place at the same
time that the immunization campaign is intensified.

It should now be clear to all of us that for as long
as the war in Angola continues, the needs of the
Angolan people will continue to grow. Not only is the
Angolan economic infrastructure in turmoil as a result
of over 30 years of war, but the country has the highest
number of landmines and landmine victims. Human
rights abuses are rife, and so is poverty. We cannot but
share the View expressed by the Executive Director of
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Ms.
Carol Bellamy, that while crises in other parts of the
world have received an immediate and generous
response from both the public and the media, relatively
little attention has been paid to a similar crisis in
Angola, one of the many in Africa, where, as the report
shows, thousands of people continue to be displaced
from their homes, tortured and killed on a daily basis.

We can thus do no more than reiterate appeals for
international assistance to the Government of Angola
to help it address the serious humanitarian and
development crises facing that country and its people.

In conclusion, we wish to pay a well-deserved
tribute to Ambassador Fowler for ably chairing the
sanctions Committee and for his efforts in ensuring the
effectiveness of sanctions against UNITA. While we
are saddened by his departure, we wish him every
success as he embarks on what will no doubt be
another challenging journey in his career.

