Mr. De Venecia (Philippines): I would like to
thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
organizing this meeting on the important topic of
justice and the rule of law. My thanks also go to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report, issued
in August, on "The rule of law and transitional justice
in conflict and post-conflict societies" (S/2004/6l6).

Nations typically emerge from civil conflicts
traumatized by their collective memory of genocidal
crimes, horrendous abuses of human rights and
mindless social violence. It is often the case that very
few in those societies emerge untouched by the
humanitarian disasters set off by the collapse of
political order, the rule of law and the mechanisms of
justice. It therefore becomes extremely difficult to
reverse the collapse of the State and restore its
legitimate authority.
Well-meaning outsiders often assign the highest
priority to demobilizing irregular militias and
organizing new security forces to rebuild the peace and
punish the guilty. Historical experience suggests that
raising the issue of past crimes prematurely may only
induce warlords and gang bosses to resist, with force,
being called to account for their past actions, thus
breaking the fragile and tentative peace. Pushing
retributive justice too quickly can be both damaging
and destabilizing to the still-fragile post-conflict State.

Justice must certainly be a key element in any
process of national reconciliation in conflict and post-
conflict societies. We must emphasize this, even if we
recognize that retributive justice is not always feasible
at the beginning of the process, if only because the
transitional institutions are too weak to exact
retribution.

The Philippine delegation broadly supports the
recommendations contained in paragraphs 64 and 65 of
the Secretary-General's report. We are confident that
those recommendations will be carried out with both
wisdom and patience, and with the realization that
there are no quick fixes or one-size-fits-all formulas
for restoring the rule of law in post-conflict societies.
The Philippines supports United Nations involvement
in rebuilding post-conflict societies because we know
its sole objective is to build sustainable peace, a peace
that will endure even after foreign peacemakers have
left.

We must never forget, however, that the record of
successful State reconstruction thus far is very
insubstantial.

Let me thank a good number of United Nations
delegations for considering the Philippine proposal in
the General Assembly for an inter-faith dialogue in the
United Nations system to promote civilizational
reconciliation at the global level. Reconciliation
always comes easier in an atmosphere of spirituality
and faith.

I recall a statesman memorably saying that the
twenty-first century will be defined by a simple choice
that nations must make: whether to emphasize their
ethnic, ideological and religious differences or their
common humanity. Nations, however, can never make
the right choice as long as their peoples insist "Our
faith must reign supreme", since that claim can be
affirmed only by the negation of all other faiths. I
believe we must all learn to create space for alternative
faiths if we are to find an alternative to so much
violence and hatred and if we are to respond to the
crisis of values that so pervades today's planet.

During the last two years, we in the Philippines
have been strenuously promoting the need for global
inter-religious understanding, supporting a dialogue
among civilizations and cultures, specifically
Christian-Muslim dialogue at the regional levels. Such
dialogue should take place not only among political
leaders but also among religious leaders and leaders of
civil society to try to reduce the politico-religious and
ethnic tensions and conflicts that have bedevilled
regions and nations, societies and communities for
hundreds of years and that have now exploded onto the
scene in the first years of the twenty-first century.

I believe the religious sector has the moral
influence to help the Security Council's efforts,
particularly in conflicts with religious undertones.
Because of its moral authority, the religious sector is
well situated to deal with community-based issues,
such as justice and the rule of law. Not only does it
exemplify international society's respect for human
dignity and individual worth, but often enough the
religious sector is the only grouping in conflict and
post-conflict societies that continues to function
coherently enough to serve as the foundation for
rebuilding shattered communities. The religious sector
could and should become an effective tool in achieving
the international community's peace-building agenda.
To date the international community has not fully
tapped this sector's potential.

Last year, our delegation introduced a draft
resolution in the General Assembly proposing the
creation of an inter-religious council or a special
committee in the United Nations to help address the
problem of conflict resolution, reconciliation and the
achievement of justice and the rule of law. Indeed, we
think it would be a good idea for such a special
committee for inter-religious or inter-faith
understanding - mobilizing for the first time a crucial
but neglected sector, the inter-religious sector - to
engage religious leaders to work with political leaders
and leaders of Government and civil society to
contribute to peace and understanding and help resolve
difficult ethnic and politico-religious conflicts such as
those in Mindanao in my own country, in the Balkans,
in the Middle East, in North Africa, in South Asia and
South-East Asia and other areas of the world. We
believe that the creation of an inter-religious council or
a specific unit on inter-faith understanding in the
United Nations system is an idea whose time has come.

