Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like first of all to thank you, Mr.
President, for having convened this meeting.

We would also like to thank Mr. Michael Steiner,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for the valuable information that he has given
us. We reaffirm our support for him.

We welcome Mr. Nebojsa Covie, Deputy Prime
Minister of the Yugoslav constituent Republic of
Serbia, and thank him for his statement.

The Council's periodic consideration of the
question of Kosovo allows it to assess the development
of the situation on the ground and to take the necessary
measures, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).
At the most recent meeting of the Council on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), we were able to welcome the end of
the deadlock in the political situation in Kosovo. We
were encouraged by the information that Mr. Steiner
provided earlier with regard to the fact that the
Povratak Coalition has been accepted as a participant
in the Government. That is a clear sign that an
atmosphere of trust and a climate of peace and security
have been re-established.

My delegation welcomes the recent developments
on the ground. At the political level, the transformation
of the transitional departments into autonomous
provisional ministries is to be welcomed. We
encourage the authorities to pursue the implementation
of the short- and medium-term programmes that they
have set up.

My delegation welcomes the efforts made by the
various parties to establish a collegial Presidency of the
Assembly. We support the establishment, within the
Office of the Prime Minister, of a structure to deal with
issues of good governance, human rights, equal
opportunity and gender. Adequate assistance should be
given to that service to allow it to shoulder its
responsibilities.

We support the efforts under way to prepare for
municipal elections, which we hope will take place in
September 2002.

With regard to regional cooperation, my
delegation is encouraged by the ongoing cooperation
between the Belgrade authorities and UNMIK in the
implementation of the provisions of the Common
Document.

The participation of a member of the provisional
institutions of self-government at the most recent
meeting of the High-Ranking Working Group is clearly
an encouraging development.

The meeting that took place on 18 March in
Skopje between Mr. Steiner and Mr. Trajkovski, the
President of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, and the conclusions that they reached on
the various subjects discussed, as mentioned in
paragraph 46 of the report, are also promising.

My delegation renews its support for the three
priority areas set out in the report. Within the
framework of establishing economic bases, the efforts
under way should be encouraged. In our view, the
success of any programme depends on taking into
account the interests of all elements and all categories
in the province, as well as the objective of the
stabilization of the region.

With regard to the issue of security, it is worth
noting that the overall situation has improved.
Nevertheless, we condemn attacks against UNMIK and
encourage the continuation of cooperation between it
and KFOR.

We welcome the progressive transfer of UNMIK
police functions to the multi-ethnic Kosovo Police
Service.

Moreover, we appreciate the steps taken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General with
various parties to achieve a negotiated solution to the
various pending questions. In that regard, my
delegation encourages actions under way for the return
of refugees, the reintegration of displaced persons, the
transfer of prisoners, the search for solutions to the
plight of missing persons, the strengthening of multi-
ethnicity and the effective integration of minority
ethnic groups in the active life of Kosovo.

Finally, my delegation fully supports the relevant
observations made by the Secretary-General in his
report.

