Mr. Khan (Pakistan): Since this is the first time I
am taking the floor in the Security Council, I convey
my warm greetings to you, Sir, and the other Permanent
Representatives in the Council. I look forward to
working closely with all of you. It is a privilege for
Pakistan and for me to be part of this eminent body of
diplomats and statesmen, who focus all the time on the
pressing issues of peace and security.

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
debate. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his useful briefing.

We align ourselves with the two statements to
be delivered later by the Permanent Representatives
of Iran and Kazakhstan, respectively, on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.

The debate here today, along with the attention to
the issue of Palestine in the General Assembly, shows
that the discourse on Palestine is not completely frozen.
The Council itself, at its high-level meeting last month
(S/PV.6841), heard world leaders speak about the
compelling reasons to address the Palestinian issue. Yet
there has been no movement towards resumption of the
suspended peace process. In the meantime, the human
rights and humanitarian situation of Palestinians living
under occupation continues to deteriorate.

The Quartet's inability to meet on the sidelines of
the General Assembly has been seen as a setback. The
global consensus on the goal of the two-State solution
reflects the wisdom and maturity of the international
community. But that goal remains elusive and empty
without constant engagement and practical steps
towards its achievement. Pakistan supports the rights of
the Palestinian people and an independent Palestinian
State and favours the admission of Palestine as a full
member of the United Nations. In the interim, we
endorse the Palestinian Authority's initiative to achieve
non-member State observer status. We respect the
Authority's decision about the exact timing of that
initiative.

The Secretary-General's report pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 66/17 states that there has been little
progress in the past year. That is disappointing. He is of
the view that the current impasse in the peace process is
undermining the viability of a two-State solution. The
Secretary-General expresses his concern that "we are
increasingly moving away from a two-State solution
into a one-State reality" (S/2012/70], para.50). The
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People reached a similar conclusion in
its annual report (A/66/35), which stated that the status
quo may usher in a one-State reality with unpredictable
consequences. Nobody wants such a drift or such an
outcome. There is evidence that the illegal Israeli
settlement policy has remained the biggest roadblock to
the resumption of the Middle East peace process.

The United Nations country team in Gaza presents,
in its latestreport, an extremely bleak picture. The illegal
blockade of the territory and the collective punishment
being meted out to the population of Gaza must cease.
Recent intensification of the military bombardment of
the Gaza Strip threatens to destabilize the situation
further. The lack ofpolitical perspective for Palestinian
youth and the continuing settler attacks on Muslim and
Christian Holy sites are fuelling violence. The Security
Council must take note of that growing threat.

On a broader plane, the Security Council must
ensure and monitor implementation of resolution
1860 (2009) and its other resolutions on the subject. As
we have said before, the Secretariat should provide the
Council with a matrix of the implementation status of
the resolutions adopted by the Council on the question
of Palestine.

The State-building efforts of the Palestinian
Authority have been widely applauded. The Secretary-
General has said that the steps taken by Palestinian
Authority to build robust State institutions and
revive the economy have brought security and
economic improvements. The admission of Palestine
into UNESCO as a member last year is yet another
recognition of the success of those efforts.

Core issues and questions must be addressed for
a lasting peace. We call for a solution of the question
of Palestine in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Madrid terms of reference and the Quartet road map.
The resolution of the final status issues should lead to
the establishment of an independent and viable State
of Palestine on the basis of the pre-l967 borders, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. Pakistan has been a
consistent supporter of the Palestinian cause for more
than six decades. We support lasting peace for all in the
Middle East. Israel should withdraw from all occupied
lands, including those of Lebanon and the Syrian Golan.

Despite other important developments in the
region, the Palestinian issue must retain its primacy. It
should not be allowed to be eclipsed or sidelined. The
Secretary-General has said that peace and Palestinian
statehood are long overdue. To achieve those overriding
objectives, the following steps ought to be taken
with a high sense of urgency. First, the international
community, led by the Quartet, should re-engage and
refocus on the Palestinian issue. Secondly, direct and
meaningful negotiations should resume. Thirdly, the
cycle of violence should be stopped. Fourthly, efforts
should be intensified to stem and address the grave
humanitarian situations in Gaza, East Jerusalem and
the West Bank. Fifthly, the Security Council may
re-energize itself with a view to maintaining peace and
security in that sensitive region. Such a path starts with
monitoring the implementation of its own resolutions.
The crisis in Syria continues to be a matter of
serious concern to the international community and the
Council. An early, peaceful solution to the situation in
Syria, with full respect for its sovereignty and territorial
integrity, is in the best interests of the people of Syria
and of peace and stability in the region. We support
the efforts of the Secretary-General and Joint Special
Representative Lakhdar Brahimi. The first priority is
to bring about an immediate ceasefire and to create an
environment amenable to promoting diplomatic efforts.
We call on all sides in Syria and all external stakeholders
to extend their full and genuine cooperation to the
Special Representative. Violence should not spin out
of control. Conflict should not expand. And, above all,
diplomacy must prevail.

