Allow me first to express my delegation's gratitude for the initiative of the Government of the Dominican Republic to convene this video-teleconference on youth, peace and security. In addition, I would like to welcome the briefings submitted by the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres; the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake; the Project Coordinator of Youth Without Borders Organization for Development, Ms. Olla Al-Sakkaf; and the founder of the Young Adult Empowerment Initiative for South Sudan and Uganda, Mr. Gatwal Augustine Gatkuoth. From the very beginning, Argentina has embraced the Secretary-General's new emphasis on conflict prevention and the development of the concept of sustainable peace or peacekeeping, a narrative in which youth and women have a fundamental role to play. Our country recognizes that peace and security are interrelated and mutually reinforcing. We recognize the essential role of youth in conflict prevention and resolution, as well as their involvement as a key aspect of the sustainability, inclusiveness and success of peacekeeping and peace-building activities. Thus, we support the implementation of resolution 2250 (2015), which promotes, at the international level, young people as instruments of peace, dialogue, understanding and the fight against poverty, violence and intolerance. Indeed, Argentina considers that armed conflicts are highly detrimental to the education and work opportunities of young people, who are vulnerable and often exposed to dangerous situations that hinder their development and affect their schooling. An estimated 300,000 armed children and youth live in conflict zones. They are victims, forced to live in constant violation of their rights, being subjected to situations such as recruitment, mutilation, kidnapping, sexual violence, attacks on schools and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian aid. In addition to violating their most basic human rights, conflicts affect youth psychologically and socially, thus negatively impacting their development. They might lose access to education and other age-appropriate activities. They might have feelings of guilt or perceive violence as normal in the event that they have joined armed groups, voluntarily or forcibly, or have witnessed or committed acts of extreme violence. Furthermore, in many cases their suffering feelings of loss, uprooting, sexual violence or addiction to toxic substances has negative consequences on their mental health. Many young people in conflict contexts are involved in military service or war-based, illicit sub-economies. They are repeatedly forcibly recruited or, in other cases, are driven by cultural, social, economic and political pressures as the informal economy associated with conflict can sometimes offer them social and employment opportunities perceived as preferable to poverty and hunger. It is essential to pay greater attention to the root causes of conflict and the importance of finding solutions starting with national involvement, in which young people can play a significant role in conflict prevention and the maintenance of peace if they are assured of an inclusive environment through the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In its participation in the Economic, Social and Cultural Council, Argentina has pointed out that the Peacebuilding Commission acts as a consultative mechanism and a bridge between the Organization's peace and security efforts and its efforts in the areas of development, human rights and humanitarian assistance. In line with that vision, we believe that the Commission can, through its active role supporting the Security Council, highlight the contribution of young people to the design and evaluation of the mandates of peacekeeping operations, especially in its the peacebuilding phase. In that connection, Argentina supports UNICEF's request for urgent progress in efforts to protect children and youth affected by conflict through the development of legislation, policies and actions at the national level to protect all young people. Education is key to peace, security, development and the full enjoyment of human rights, and continued access to safe education helps protect young people from the dangers of armed conflict. Education is not only a human right but also an essential protection mechanism for youth affected by armed conflict, helping them to reach their full potential and contribute to building stronger communities. In turn, safeguarding the security of young people allows them to become relevant actors in the post-conflict peacebuilding, reconstruction and reintegration processes. Recognizing that young people constitute a large portion of civilians strongly affected by armed conflict and that the interruption of young people's access to education and economic opportunities has definite consequences for sustainable peace, Argentina led, together with Norway and Spain, the Safe Schools Declaration and the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict, adopted in Oslo in May 2015. The initiative aimed to raise global awareness of the seriousness of attacks against students, teachers, schools and universities and of the military use of schools and universities and to universalize the Declaration. In that connection, Argentina, Spain and Norway held the third International Conference on Safe Schools in 2019. Argentina believes that it is essential that young people, as the leaders of the future, increase their meaningful and inclusive participation for the consolidation of peace with transformative potential, rather than engage in violence. Young people certainly have an important role to play in shaping their own future and in building peace. They need to be involved in relief, recovery and reconstruction programmes and be a part of transition and national reconciliation processes. Governments and civil society, including in partnership with the private sector, must harness the energy, ideas and experiences of young people to create a new post-conflict society. Argentina reaffirms what was stated in the Ibero-American Pact for Youth with regard to encouraging the role of young people as promoters of a culture of peace through the creation of training programmes on the prevention of violence and conflict resolution. The outbreak of an unprecedented worldwide crisis owing to the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and its shattering consequences, just as the United Nations commemorates its seventy-fifth anniversary, represents a turning point at a time when the world is demanding a paradigm shift in multilateralism in order to achieve the future we want and the United Nations we need. This milestone in the history of the Organization gives us the opportunity to bring the United Nations closer to youth, to listen to their voices, aspirations and concerns and to actively engage them in global dialogues on working together towards an inclusive, people- oriented United Nations with a view to shaping a better future for all. At present, the younger generations face multifaceted and difficult challenges as the world fights relentlessly against COVID-19, and these challenges will be even harder in the aftermath of the pandemic, when its devastating effects will result in further lack of employment, training and education, violence and armed conflict, labour market transformation and impact of climate change. In that context, Argentina highlights the importance of "Youth 2030: The United Nations Strategy on Youth", which clearly identifies peacebuilding and resilience as priorities in the work of the United Nations system by and for youth. In that regard, resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security, adopted in 2015, marks a significant shift towards recognizing the role of young people as agents of peace. However, as the Secretary-General stresses in his latest report (S/2020/167), while progress on including young people in public life has been made, meaningful youth participation in the maintenance of peace and security remains a challenge. It is critical that the international community support young people in achieving their full potential as a positive driving force for building peaceful, sustainable and just societies. To address that challenge, all relevant stakeholders must work together to ensure channels for meaningful participation of young people in decision-making processes and foster inclusive institutions that fully represent and address their needs and expectations. In the face of the unprecedented spread of COVID-19, the rapid use of knowledge and information is of utmost importance when it comes to developing effective responses to the pandemic. In that respect, young people can play a key role in mitigating risks and engaging in community outreach during the crisis by, for instance, using technology, such as mobile applications and social media platforms, to spread awareness messages on protection and prevention measures in order to help break the chain of infection, spot cases of violence and abuse and provide peer support and help to victims. Moreover, it is important to highlight that young people are taking active, committed and leading roles in making their voices heard and in demanding a multilateral system that actively and meaningfully engages them. A new narrative is in the making - one that sees young people not only as beneficiaries but also as active agents in peacebuilding and conflict-prevention processes. They can also play a key role in working jointly with other main stakeholders by helping those facing different hardships as a result of long-standing conflicts, now intensified by the pandemic, and by actively engaging in peacebuilding dialogue to ensure that their rights and well-being are taken into account while building the foundations of sustainable peace. Argentina welcomes and strongly supports the global call for peace made by the Secretary-General on 23 March, in which he stressed the urgent need "to put armed conflict on lockdown and focus together on the true fight of our lives". In that regard, the effective implementation of ceasefires by parties to conflict will give us an opportunity to put the rights and well-being of young women and men at the centre of peacebuilding dialogues, fostering a humanitarian, development and peace approach to their reintegration into societies in order to carry out a process that is restorative, future-oriented and focused on their specific needs and build the foundations of sustainable peace. Finally, we would like to emphasize that the ideals and energy of young people, who are key agents of social change, economic development and technological innovation in their communities, constitute an essential potential to help prevent conflicts and participate in the shaping of lasting peace. That is why we consider it appropriate to continue dealing with this issue within the framework of the Security Council, as well as to continue to deepen our understanding of the interrelation between the role of young people and the maintenance and construction of peace and peacebuilding.
