Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, I too
wish to thank Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le Roy
and Valerie Amos for their reports and the very
relevant information that they provided the Council
today. I also wish to thank our colleague from Haiti for
his statement.

One year after the earthquake, our thoughts of
course go to the hundreds of thousands of Haitians who
perished and to the civilian and military men and
women of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) who lost their lives. We should
also be grateful to the United Nations staff on the
ground who, disregarding their own safety, worked to
save lives in the following hours and days.

It is obvious that humanitarian relief will
continue to be the main priority as long as the basic
needs of the Haitian population - be it access to
water, food, shelter, sanitation or health care - are not
ensured. Hurricane Tomas and cholera have
compounded the situation. Millions still depend on
humanitarian aid on a daily basis, even if,
encouragingly, some progress has been made, such as
the decrease in the number of internally displaced
persons, the reduction of the mortality rate and the
stabilization of the cholera outbreak. However, much
more needs to be done, and the international
community can do more, namely, at the structural
level.

The transparency and credibility of the electoral
process that will lead to the installation of a democratic
Administration are paramount. The paralysis that we
have seen during the past two months needs to be
quickly overcome. We commend the work carried out
by the Organization of the American States (OAS) and
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and its expert
mission on the presidential election of last November.
We hope that their findings will help to restore
credibility and the confidence of the Haitian people in
their political system.

In that sense, a free, fair and transparent second
round of the presidential election is essential. To
pursue that objective, effective international
observation of those elections is crucial, minimizing
the potential for irregularities and providing
meaningful support for that process. We thank the OAS
and CARICOM. for their valuable cooperation in the
next decisive phase of that process. MINUSTAH can
also play an important role, not only by providing
logistical support and ensuring safety throughout the
process, but also by promoting political dialogue.

The earthquake brought Haiti's woes to us under
a sharper light. Social and economic conditions in Haiti
were already very difficult prior to it. Respect for
human rights, the rule of law and the democratic
process were not entrenched. What we are currently
addressing is not only the turmoil created by the
cataclysm, but also the structural deficiencies and
imbalances that have existed for many years. That
aspect must be taken into account in designing our
response to political and social developments in the
country.

The hard road to recovery and sustainable
development requires stability, democratically
legitimized authorities and political leadership. We
must recognize that those conditions have never been
fully met. We are concerned about new elements that
may further increase the present instability in the
country, such as the return of Mr. Duvalier, even if he
is brought to justice.

Ensuring security in all its dimensions is an
essential requirement for the full recovery of Haiti. It
must be felt in urban and rural communities all over
the country. Furthermore, it is a prerequisite for
efficient distribution of aid. MINUSTAH's efforts in
that area are highly laudable, and we are well aware of
the immense challenges that it faces on a daily basis.

Regarding relief and recovery, Portugal stresses
the need to reinforce coordination among MINUSTAH,
United Nations agencies and programmes, national and
international non-governmental organizations and the
various donors. The ability to absorb the necessary
resources for reconstruction is a vital issue for Haiti
and for international donors. Our efforts in capacity-
building should aim at solving the present situation.

Finally, Portugal joins others in expressing
concern over the fragile and unstable situation in Haiti
and the continued plight of the population. While
giving our full support to MINUSTAH in fulfilling its
mandate, we also stress the importance of calling upon
the parties to abide by democratic rules, the
Constitution and the laws of Haiti and to allow
MINUSTAH and humanitarian workers full and
unhindered access to all people in need.

