Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal welcomes the convening of this
briefing, one year after the Security Council's adoption
of the historic resolution 2309 (2016) of 22 September
2016. It gives us an opportunity to deepen our thinking
on the possible solutions to counter the threats to
international peace and security that constitute the
growing number of terrorist attacks against civil
aviation. The special meeting on the same topic that
took place in July had already laid the groundwork for
our discussion today. That brings me to congratulate
Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), and our colleague
Ambassador Aboulatta, Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), for their excellent briefings.

It is encouraging to note, in particular in the light
of the outstanding briefing made by the Secretary
General of ICAO, that the basis of international
legislation for aviation security provided for in the
Chicago Convention of 7 December 1944 is subject
to regular updates by ICAO to adapt to the new
security context that is characterized by constantly
changing terrorist threats. The crucial role of ICAO in
developing international civil aviation safety standards
and in pursuing their effective implementation must
be strengthened by the joint efforts of Member States,
specialized agencies and the aeronautical industry,
because when the terrorist threat affects a sector as
sensitive as air transportation, it becomes elusive and
difficult to prevent. Therefore, constant vigilance and
monitoring, based on an awareness of each country and
region's own specific context and internal geopolitical
environment, become fundamental.

In that regard, in order to be effective, any
action taken to combat that phenomenon must be
complemented by a strengthening of regional and
international cooperation in the areas of information
sharing and border control, as well as technologies for
recording, security control and boarding.

Airport facilities such as terminals, cargo areas,
baggage handling areas, parking zones and areas for
take-off and landing are all targets and vulnerable
areas for terrorist attacks. Safeguarding those areas
is therefore a major challenge. Similarly, control
procedures for passengers and other users is another
equally sensitive domain where any failures could
provide terrorist groups with an opportunity to plan
and implement dangerous acts.

At the national, regional and international levels,
Senegal is specifically implementing the Global Civil
Aviation Security Plan and its road map, which the
Secretary General described. That is the case because
Senegal is a regional hub for both civil aviation
and counter-terrorism. My country serves as the
headquarters for aviation security in Africa, which has
led us to cooperate in airspace management, with a
jurisdiction covering an airspace of 16,005,000 square

kilometers - one and a half times that of Europe.
Senegal is also responsible for managing one of the
six African flight information regions - the South

Atlantic Coastal Region. My country also hosts the
headquarters for the African Commission for Civil
Aviation, a specialized agency of the African Union, as
well as the regional office of ICAO. The African Civil
Aviation Commission's mission is to promote civil
aviation and ensure that it is safe, secure, profitable and
sustainable and respects the environment in Africa. It
also implements the ICAO Integrated Air Transport
System and develops rules and regulations that are
aligned to conform with current international civil
aviation legislation.

In line with ICAO provisions, which affirm that
every State is responsible for ensuring the effective
implementation of all security measures aimed at
protecting aviation from unlawful interference, the
State of Senegal has been working for a number of years
on a major programme designed to strengthen civil
aviation security on its territory and in its airspace. The
policy enabled the National Assembly to adopt a new
civil aviation code through its enactment ofAct 2015-10
on 4 May 2015, and to establish aviation regulations as
a basis for the operational implementation of security
measures and procedures. At the national level, this
regulatory framework was considerably bolstered by
the implementation of the provisions of annex 17 to the
Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation
and the ICAO Universal Security Audit Programme.
Moreover, Senegal's adoption of aviation
regulation 9/2016, on advance passenger information,
has made it the second most advanced African country
on the issue. We have therefore created a platform for
exchanging and sharing sensitive information with
other States in order to be able to present a solid and
united front in dealing with the appearance of new
threats and attempts at illicit attacks that make use of
aircraft or airports. In that regard, and pursuant to its
2015/1969 decree of 21 September 2015, Senegal has
set up a system for monitoring civil aviation security
based on the ICAO provisions. It is being effectively
enforced and will ensure air transport security in our
territory by establishing national civil aviation security
programmes. In 2016, Senegal also adopted a national
maritime security strategy.

At the subregional level, the State of Senegal has
ratified the provisions of the West African Economic
and Monetary Union (WAEMU) relating to air
transport, including Regulation 10, on civil aviation
security, and Decision 11, on the implementation of
safety practices and procedures within the WAEMU
member States. Each member State reserves the right
to apply more stringent measures in order to respond to
specific demands arising from the results of a national
threat analysis.

West Africa and the Sahel are seeing an increase
in terrorist and cyberattacks, alongside an enormous
quantity of arms and ammunition in circulation,
including rocket-propelled grenades, which is a terrible
threat and a source of concern for the subregion.
Along with arms smuggling, it is also a threat to the
stability of the entire Sahel-Sahara region. If we are
to prevent Africa from becoming the soft underbelly
of air security, we should ensure the provision of
major, multidimensional technical assistance in terms
of training of human resources as well as equipment
and technology - as provided for in paragraph 7 of
resolution 2309 (2016) and as Secretary General Liu
called for this morning. In that regard, Senegal reiterates
its support for better cooperation among ICAO, the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, including its Executive
Directorate, whose human and financial resources
should be strengthened, as Mr. Aboulatta, the Chair of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, has rightly said.
In conclusion, at a time when Senegal will be
opening its state-of-the-art Blaise Diagne Airport in
a few months, my delegation would like to encourage
further consideration of resolution 2309 (2016), but
especially its implementation, in perfect harmony
with the other relevant Security Council resolutions on
combating terrorism.

