Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on convening this
open debate of the Security Council on the situation in
Kosovo. In the face of the great challenges ahead in
2003 and one year after the start of the gradual transfer
of executive and legislative authority to the Kosovars,
it seems highly appropriate that the Members of the
United Nations should be able to express their views on
the progress of the largest peace-building undertaking
in the history of the United Nations.

We are also grateful for the briefing given by
Mr. Michael Steiner, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, whose efforts we fully
appreciate. We also note with satisfaction the outcome
of the Security Council mission to Kosovo and
Belgrade that took place late last year.

As this is the first time that Chile is speaking on
this item in the Council, we wish to express our
support for the work of and results achieved by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), in which our country is honoured to
participate. We commend the personnel of UNMIK for
their efforts in fulfilling their mandate to equip
Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro, with an interim
administration under which its people can enjoy
substantial self-government.

That is why we regard resolution l244 (1999) as
a valid basis and instrument for achieving the three-
fold objective of its mandate: to administer Kosovo, to
create institutions and, lastly, to facilitate a political
process for determining the final status of Kosovo.
With regard to the latter, we, like preceding speakers,
endorse the standards before status approach and the
eight standards elaborated by Mr. Michael Steiner,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

With respect to the report of the Secretary-
General, we recognize the significant progress made in
2002, inter alia, in the transfer of executive and
legislative authority to the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government of Kosovo; the establishment of
municipal Governments; the administration of justice,
particularly the appointment of judges and prosecutors
from minority communities; the establishment of a
multi-ethnic civil service; and the extension of UNMIK
to Mitrovica. Special mention should be made of the
recent return of Kosovo Serb representatives to the
Kosovo Assembly. That is a good sign.

However, we remain concerned about the
situation of internally displaced persons and refugees.
We hope that favourable conditions will continue to be
created for their return in significant in numbers and in
a sustainable manner with a view to the creation of a
multi-ethnic and democratic society capable of
reintegrating all the people of Kosovo, without
exclusion.

We also note with alarm the incidents of violence,
both among Kosovo Albanians and towards Kosovo
Serbs. Every effort should be made to prevent an
increase in arson, grievous assault and organized crime.
The actions of extremists and terrorists must be
unanimously condemned.

We agree with the three challenges outlined by
Mr. Michael Steiner on 20 January. It is essential, first,
to strengthen the economy, particularly in the area of
unemployment; to combat organized crime; and, lastly,
to build a multi-ethnic society. We call upon the
Government of Kosovo to cooperate with UNMIK in
meeting these challenges.

With respect to the fight against organized crime,
no progress in that regard is possible without the
commitment of all actors to ensuring that the rule of
law prevails and to improving the administration of
justice for all, particularly for displaced persons and
refugees. Moreover, respect for the rule of law and a
strengthened judicial system are the best guarantee for
preventing violations of human rights in Kosovo. In
this context, it is vital for the parties fully to cooperate
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

With regard to the institutional aspect, we are
aware that 2003 has ushered in a new phase whose
main challenge will be to demonstrate the effectiveness
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government,
created to ensure the effective transfer of authority. A
decisive test will be the way in which Kosovo civil
servants discharge their functions when the number of
international civil servants present today in Kosovo has
been reduced by half.

In conclusion, we call upon the parties to
intensify the constructive dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina with a view to achieving real, tangible
results aimed at overcoming the serious challenges to
which I have referred and, above all, at ensuring that
all the inhabitants of Kosovo can live in their homeland
with dignity and free from danger.

