Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
our briefers for their very informative presentations.
In particular, I congratulate the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Swan, on beginning his
functions in Somalia and reaffirm France's full support.
I also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Patten, for
her Visit to Somalia and for her efforts, together with
all parties, to combat such Violence. Inviting Special
Representatives who are responsible for thematic issues
to briefings on specific conflict situations is a good
practice that we must continue.

At the outset, I underscore that we welcome the
cooperative attitude adopted by the Somali federal
authorities with the new Special Representative. We
hope that those good relations will be pursued and make
addressing all subjects possible, particularly those
related to respect for human rights and the rule of law.
We also hope that those good relations will be extended
to all United Nations entities, especially the sanctions
committee Panel of Experts. I will make three points.

First of all, with regard to the political situation in
Somalia, France remains concerned about the deadlock
in relations between the Somali Federal Government and
the federal member states, which poses a major obstacle
to carrying out the tasks crucial to achieving lasting
peace in Somalia. In particular, I would note, first, the
organization and holding of the 2020 or 2021 elections;
secondly the constitutional review process and the
needed agreement on power-sharing and the allocation
of revenues emanating from natural resources; thirdly,
the implementation of the security transition plan; and,
fourthly, the implementation of the national security
architecture and the integration of regional forces into
the Somali National Army. It is therefore urgent that
dialogue on those matters be resumed.

Furthermore, France is concerned about tensions
relating to the electoral process scheduled to begin
tomorrow in Jubaland, despite mediation attempts by
the Special Representative, the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
In that regard, we call on all parties to show a spirit
of compromise to reach an agreement on a single,
transparent and universally accepted electoral process.
We also call on all parties to refrain from Violence and
rely on dialogue to resolve their differences.

Secondly, concerning the security situation, France
remains concerned about the frequency of attacks by
Al-Shabaab, particularly in Mogadishu. In that context,
we welcome the operations carried out by the Somali
National Army with the support of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in Lower Shabelle,
which have enabled taking back key cities from
Al-Shabaab. We also encourage the Somali federal
authorities to intensify their force generation efforts
so that they can pursue those operations, as well as
accelerate the implementation of the security transition
plan to transfer security responsibilities from AMISOM
to the Somali security forces.

With regard to AMISOM, France remains
committed to meeting the deadlines set out in resolution
2472 (2019), adopted in May, including with regard to
the reduction of the troop ceiling by 1,000 military
personnel by 28 February 2020. While we believe
that the reconfiguration of AMISOM. must take place
gradually in the most stable areas of the country, we
deem it imperative that the decisions of the Security
Council be respected. That desire has also been
expressed by the Somalis. The transition plan they have
developed will allow them eventually to master their
own destiny.

Moreover, the European Union intends to continue
its support for AMISOM, given its important role in
ensuring the security of Somalia, through significant
financial support in the amount of €400 million for
the period from 2019 to 2020, as well as €20 million
destined for the Somali security forces. Nevertheless,
we continue to believe that that support must be part
of the frameworks involving the transition and mutual
commitments that each party must respect. All things
considered, the European Union cannot continue to
finance the bonuses of AMISOM. soldiers alone. The
Security Council must therefore send a clear message
to Somalia's other partners on the need to contribute to
funding AMISOM.

Thirdly, and lastly, concerning the humanitarian
situation, respect for human rights and the fight against
sexual violence continue to be areas of concern. We
are concerned about the humanitarian situation in
Somalia, which has worsened owing to the drought
facing the country. That situation attests once again
to the importance that we must continue to attach to
the impact of climate change in Somalia and the Horn
of Africa.

We are also deeply concerned about the persistence
of numerous human rights violations and acts sexual
Violence committed in Somalia. In that regard, we
stress the importance of cooperation among the various
Somali ministries to ensure that justice is done, that it
is accessible to all and that victims are provided with
assistance. We also call on all local and religious leaders
to commit themselves to ensuring that the sexual
offences bill is adopted and effectively implemented
throughout the country.

In conclusion, I reiterate that stabilization and the
return of lasting peace in Somalia for the benefit of all
Somalis remain a priority for France.

