Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We
are about to vote on a technical draft resolution
(S/2018/1025) to renew the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
for one month. It is indeed a technical need so as to
allow one of the members of the Security Council
to take the necessary steps in line with its domestic
legislation in order to vote on the draft resolution
that has been under discussion by the members of
the Council in recent weeks. The negotiations on the
essence of a new MINUSCA mandate have essentially
concluded. As penholder, and with a view to facilitating
consensus, we have sought tirelessly, in the framework
of expanded consultations, the most exacting balance
among the different positions voiced. I believe we have
achieved that balance.

That draft resolution, to which I will return at
the time of its adoption, includes several important
elements relating to MINUSCA and the support the
Mission will be able to provide to the authorities of the
Central African Republic in their efforts to promote
peace and reconciliation in the country. In that regard,
I would first point to maintaining MINUSCA's format
and robust mandate - clearly an essential point. I
would also refer to the political support that MINUSCA
will be able to extend to the African Union Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, as a unique framework for facilitating direct
and inclusive dialogue between the Government and
armed groups. There must be no ambiguity as to the
central place of that African Union Initiative, as our
draft resolution underscores. Lastly, I would refer to the
additional support that MINUSCA could provide to the
Central African authorities to extend State authority
throughout the country's territory - that being, as well
all know, the key to success.

We therefore hope that the draft resolution to renew
MINUSCA's mandate for a year can be put to a vote
quickly and that the Council will be able to extend it
its unanimous support, in the interest of the Central
African Republic and all Central Africans. That is the
only aim that guides France, as it should be for all the
other members of the Council.

