Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): Our last formal meeting on
Angola, in June, was characterized by hope and
encouragement. Our optimism was captured by the
representative of Angola when he remarked:

"After a long and difficult path, the Lusaka
Protocol has finally entered its final stage. Although
much still remains to be done, its positive effects are
now so clearly apparent that we feel confident about
the future." (S/PV.3795, p. 4)

 

It is with great disappointment, therefore, that my
delegation recalls the 3795th meeting of the Security
Council, at which it adopted resolution 1118 (1997), which
created the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA).

The reason behind MONUA was to sustain a level of
international presence and encouragement in order to
conclude the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and to
consolidate the gains that had been made in the peace
process. MONUA was also intended to play a vital role in
enhancing confidence and creating the atmosphere of trust
that is necessary to pave the way for the democratic
consolidation and economic rehabilitation of Angola. In any
case, the inauguration of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation in April 1997 had left us very
hopeful that the efforts of the international community were
bearing fruit. The creation of MONUA demonstrated the
commitment of the international community as well as its
optimism that it would see the successful conclusion of the
Angolan peace process.

It is against this background that the international
community had looked forward to reasonable progress in
the comprehensive implementation of the rehabilitation and
economic reconstruction of Angola. In this regard, the
extension of State administration, the formation of the
Angolan Armed Forces, the integration of UNITA
personnel into the National Police, the transformation of
UNITA into a political party, the complete demilitarization
of UNITA and the transformation of radio VORGAN into
a non-partisan station should have been completed by this
time.

It has now become abundantly clear that UNITA is not
willing to meet its obligations in the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol, which is the agreed framework for peace
in Angola. This is despite the many appeals by the Security
Council in its various pronouncements, in particular
resolution 1118 (1997) and the presidential statement of 23
July.

The current draft resolution demanding, inter alia, that
UNITA implement immediately its obligations under the
Lusaka Protocol and outlining the measures that will be put
in place if that does not happen is both timely and
appropriate. In voting in favour of the draft resolution,
Kenya, which has been associated with the peace process
in Angola since 1975, wishes to register its disappointment
at the current situation in Angola. My delegation believes
that the international community is running out of patience
and that the time has come to take measures against
UNITA for delaying the implementation of its obligations
under the peace process. UNITA should take into account
the enormous resources that the international community
has devoted to the peace process in Angola.

I should like to point out that in addition to the
many Angolan people who have been killed or maimed
during the conflict, some international personnel have also
lost their lives in their efforts to resolve that conflict.

In taking this decision today, we are hopeful that
UNITA will take the concern of the international
community seriously and abide by the provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol so that the measures outlined in the draft
resolution will not have to be taken.

Finally, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative in
Angola, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, the personnel of
MONUA and the troika countries for their continued
efforts to enhance the Angolan peace process.

