Ms. Power (United States of America): I wish to
thank all Council members that supported the holding
of this meeting in order to address a grave crisis. I
thank also Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, whom
we will miss, and assistant Secretary-General Gilmour
for their appropriately bleak briefings.

This is the third time that the Council is meeting
to discuss human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. We first took up the issue in 2014, on
the grounds that the widespread and systematic human
rights violations being committed by the North Korean
Government posed a threat to international peace and
security. Unfortunately for the people of North Korea,
the deplorable human rights situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea remains unchanged. As
the Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the
Democratic People's Republic ofKorea put it in its 2014
report, the situation still to this day "does not have any
parallel in the contemporary world".

As we have seen in other parts of the world, when
Governments flagrantly violate the human rights of their
own people, they almost always show similar disdain
for the international norms that help ensure our shared
security. We see the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea regime grow its illicit weapons programme
rather than growing its own children. According to the
World Health Organization, one in every four children
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea suffers
from stunted growth as a result of chronic malnutrition,
and yet, while children in North Korea go hungry, the
regime continues to channel the overwhelming majority
of its resources into building up a weapons programme
that the Council has repeatedly told it to stop.

Let me give another example of how these two
issues are linked. Last April, the United States hosted
a meeting at the United Nations at which defectors
shared their experiences. One of the speakers was Kim
Hye-sook, who had been sent to the Bukchang political
prison at the young age of 13, where all prisoners,
including children, were forced to work 16- to 20-hour
days in the coal mines. Many died in the camp, she said,
including her husband and brother. Some were literally
worked to death. The prison guards did not care.
Ms. Kim, who spent 14 of her 28 years on this Earth
in the camp, recalled that in the eyes of the guards the
victims were "not even worth one ton of coal".

Such harrowing conditions would be worthy
of condemnation in any circumstance, but they are
relevant to the discussion of international peace
and security because, as we all know, coal exports
account for one third of the total export revenue of
the Democratic People's Republic - revenue that,
according to resolutions adopted by this Council, is
supposed to go to helping the North Korean people.
However, that regime uses the revenue from working
its people to death in these coal mines to build more
nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles. This is one of
the many reasons why the sanctions resolution 2321
(2016), adopted by the Security Council last week, is
the first ever to state explicitly that the North Korean
Government must respect and ensure the welfare and
inherent dignity of people in its territory.

So in 2016, let us end the debate on whether the
human rights violations in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea constitute a threat to international
peace and security. This debate distracts us from
focusing on the catastrophic human rights situation in
the that country and what we can do to change it.

Today I would like to highlight one of the most
devastating consequences of the actions of the
Democratic People's Republic: the families that have
been torn apart by the regime's abuses. In October, I
traveled to the Republic of Korea and Japan, where
I had the chance to meet directly with some of the
affected families. The pain of separation was the
common thread that ran through every one of my
conversations. In South Korea I visited the Hanawon
Resettlement Center, which tries to prepare recently
arrived defectors from North Korea for their immersion
into a completely different world, as well a school in
Seoul for young defectors.
One young woman I met in Hanawon spoke of how
she had told no one - not even her parents - about
her intention to flee North Korea. Yet even though her
parents knew nothing of her plans, local officals went
on to blame them anyway, hounding the family until
they were forced to flee their home and go into hiding.
Another young defector in Seoul told me that her
widowed mother, who also knew nothing in advance of
her daughter's plans to flee, had been forced to move
seven times by North Korean officials as punishment
for what her daughter had done. She said her mother was
so afraid of being uprooted again that she had stopped
going outside unless she absolutely had to. Both of these
young women, like so many others I met, expressed
profound guilt - imagine that, guilt - for having
added to their families' already crushing hardships and
for leaving without saying goodbye.

Almost all asked that I not write down their names
for fear that speaking out would lead to even more
reprisals by the regime against their loved ones. In Japan,
I met with the mother and brother of one of the Japanese
citizens abducted by North Korean agents. Megumi
Yokota was just 13 years old when North Korean agents
abducted her in Japan's Niigata prefecture in 1977. Her
mother told me that nearly 40 years later, not a day goes
by when she does not feel the overwhelming pain of
being separated from her daughter: a pain made worse
by not knowing her daughter's fate.

As a mother myself, I cannot fathom the anguish
of having my daughter taken away and not being able
to find out what happened to her. It is every parent's
worst nightmare, and it is a nightmare being lived daily
by many families around the world. There are so many
families in Japan and the Republic of Korea who have
been forced to endure a similar nightmare as a result of
the actions of the Democratic People's Republic: they
wake up every day yearning to see a father or brother, a
mother or daughter to whom they may not have spoken
in years or even decades, and who, they worry, may be
suffering terribly inside North Korea. Many fear they
will never get to see them again. It is a pain that ripples
across generations and is felt to this day.

Immediately after this meeting today, the United
States will co-host an event on this issue, together with
the Republic of Korea, Japan and the United Kingdom,
in Conference Room 1, where we will have a chance to
hear directly from two people who are living through
this searing separation. I urge other Council members
to come and hear them speak.

Some may look at the severity of the North
Korea's oppression and the decades it has persisted
and conclude that there is little we can do to change it.
But that would be a mistake, for there is so much we
can do. We can continue to shine a light on the abuses
the regime commits, as we are doing here today. It is
crucial that we keep holding meetings in the Security
Council on the human rights situation in the North
Korea every year for as long as this human rights crisis
and its destabilizing effects persist.

We can continue to press for accountability for
the perpetrators and architects of those abuses. This is
what the United States did on 6 July, when we released
a report identifying 15 North Korean officials and 8
entities as responsible for or associated with human
rights abuses and censorship. Our message to those
officials and to all mid-level officers, including prison
camp managers and guards, interrogators and defector-
chasers, is clear. We are methodically documenting their
abuses, and their impunity will not last forever. When
the days comes that they are publicly held accountable,
we will be ready. In the meantime, we will continue to
collect evidence of their abuses and add names to the
growing list.

We can also seek sanctions for the individuals
and entities responsible for such abuses, as the United
States Department of the Treasury did in July by
adding 11 senior officials and 5 entities to the list of
nationals and blocked persons specially designated
by the United States. I would like to read the names
of those 11 individuals now. They are Kim Jong-un;
Choe Pu Il, Minister of People's Security; Ri Song
Chol, Councillor in the Ministry of People's Security;
Kang Song Nam, Bureau Director in the Ministry of
State Security; Cho Yo'n-chun, First Vice Director
of the Organization and Guidance Department; Kim
Kyong-Un, First Vice Director of the Organization
and Guidance Department; Kim Ki Nam, Director of
the Propaganda and Agitation Department; Ri Jae-il,
First Vice Director of the Propaganda and Agitation
Department; Choc Chang Pang, Bureau Director in
the Ministry of People's Security; Cho Il U of the
Reconnaissance General Bureau; and O Chong Kuk of
the Reconnaissance General Bureau.

The Security Council also has important role to
play, not just by continuing to hold meetings like this
one on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
but also by considering the recommendation by the
commission of inquiry that the situation in North
Korea be referred to the International Criminal Court.
We must also consider other appropriate options on
accountability, as Member States urged the Council to
do just a few weeks ago in a draft resolution on human
rights in North Korea that was adopted by consensus in
the Third Committee (A/C.3/71/L.23).

There is a great deal that individual Member States
can do as well, including providing support for the
United Nations Human Rights Office in Seoul, which
is methodically gathering evidence of North Korea's
human rights violations. Member States can also meet
their obligations under the Security Council sanctions
resolution, particularly the new restrictions on coal
exports, given what we know about the harrowing
conditions in the Government-run mines. Member
States can stop repatriating the people who managed to
escape North Korea, knowing the likelihood that those
who are returned will be sent to the gulags.

These are steps that we can take; they are within
our control. We could save so many lives simply by not
repatriating people who make it across an international
border, believing that they are finally going to be free
of those harrowing conditions. The people of North
Korea have so little power to change the nightmarish
conditions in which they live, and they risk so much by
trying. Do they speak up about not having enough to eat?
They go to the prison camps. Do they try to organize
neighbours or co-workers to change the dreadful living
or labour conditions? They go to the prison camps. Do
they flee for a better life and get caught? They go to the
prison camps.

Yet we, who risk so little by speaking up on
behalf of people who suffer so much, have so many
ways in which we can help change the situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Do we not owe
it to those people trapped in North Korea to at least try?
Would we not want others to do the same if we were in
their place?

