Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to welcome among us Mr. Vuk Jeremie,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Skender
Hyseni, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo. I wish
also to welcome Mr. Lamberto Zannier, the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and to
assure him of our full support. I take this opportunity
also to express Belgium's great appreciation for the
outstanding work of Mr. Zannier's predecessor,
Mr. Joachim Riicker, in circumstances that were often
difficult.

During the period covered in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/458), the
situation on the ground has changed considerably. Our
debate on 20 June (see S/PV.5917) provided an
opportunity to consider some aspects of the situation,
but I wish to stress a number of additional points.

First of all, as noted in the report of the
Secretary-General, the 15 June entry into force of the
Kosovo Constitution and the legislative work under
way in a variety of areas including decentralization and
the establishment of a ministry of foreign affairs have
created a profoundly new reality. In deciding to
reconfigure the United Nations presence to match that
new reality, the Secretary-General showed realism and
a sense of responsibility. As my delegation stressed last
month, it is important that the technical reconfiguration
take place without delay so that the European Union
Rule of Law Mission (EULEX Kosovo) can play its
proper role throughout Kosovo and to the benefit of all
Kosovo citizens.

The importance of the international presence on
the ground should not blind us to the significant
challenges that remain in Kosovo, which are clearly
described in the most recent report of the Secretary-
General. Maintaining stability and security on the
ground remains a very high priority. A safe and secure
environment is a precondition for the establishment of
the rule of law and democratic institutions in which all
of Kosovo's people, including members of minorities,
can participate: that is a second key objective. Finally,
security and the rule of law are also preconditions for
sustained economic development, which is a third
important priority. In that context, we welcome the

success of the donor conference held in Brussels on
11 July.

In all those areas, the primary responsibility rests
with the Kosovo authorities, who now have the tools to
attain those objectives. I take the opportunity of
Mr. Hyseni's presence to encourage the Kosovo
authorities to continue and, in particular, to intensify
their efforts in that regard. Much remains to be done,
as the Secretary-General's report indicates.

However, let us not forget that Belgrade also has
a role to play. Belgium continues to be concerned at the
creation of parallel institutions in Serb-dominated
areas. We are particularly disquieted by the intention to
create a Serb parliament in Kosovo. We encourage
Belgrade to promote a constructive policy of good-
neighbourliness towards Kosovo. It goes without
saying that a good working relationship is in the
interest of both countries and, it must be stressed, that
of the entire region. It is time to close a painful chapter
in the history of the Balkans and to begin to write a
new chapter - one oriented towards the future.

Four days ago, the new Serb Government, by
arresting Radovan Karadzic, demonstrated clearly and
unequivocally its will to make an active contribution to
that end. Belgium warmly congratulates the Serb
authorities on that important step and encourages them
to continue on that path by arresting the two remaining
fugitives, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic. By doing
so, Serbia would prove its full commitment to the
European values of justice and peace.

