Mr. Meek (United Kingdom): I wish to respond to
two particular points that the representative of Russia
made in connection with our earlier statement.

First, he made a reference to our comments on
Crimea, which, by the way, according to the United
Nations, is categorically not a part of Russia. He said
that Crimea was a stable peninsula. I would just repeat
the words of my country's Permanent Representative
in that connection: "grant access to enable a proper
assessment of the situation". That is all that we are
asking for. Surely, that should be acceptable if Crimea
is a stable peninsula.

Secondly, there was a gross misrepresentation of
my Permanent Representative's words. Our Russian
colleague said that we do not care who fired the shells.
What my Permanent Representative said was, "no
matter who fired the shells". As the Russian Permanent
Representative, who speaks excellent English, knows,
the meaning of that is not the same. We are not trying
to express indifference. Far from it, the way we raised
that point was intended to reinforce our view that
responsibility lies on all sides and that they should all
work together to try to deliver a solution.

That is what we expect from Russia. Ifthe Russians
are serious about finding a solution, no matter what
levels of support they are offering to the separatists,
they could do much more in order to help the rest of
us to understand what is really going on in eastern
Ukraine and Crimea. They could do that by agreeing to
consider the Ukrainian request for a policing mission
as well as how to enlarge and adequately equip the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe's
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, particularly
along the border.

Finally, turning to the draft press statement, I do not
believe that it is a constructive and particularly serious
effort. As the Russian Permanent Representative knows
full well, and as my American colleague has said, the
draft statement does not cover the full picture. Support
to separatists is not mentioned; Nadiya Savchenko is
not mentioned; the investigation into Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 is not mentioned; and Crimea is not
mentioned. We will be happy to engage on the draft,
but, as my American colleague said, press statements
are agreed by consensus.

