Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your initiative in presenting the presidential statement
that you just read (S/PRST/2010/16). We also express
our thanks to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/394) and his valuable statement. We appreciate
the comprehensive briefing by the Under-Secretary-
General for Legal Affairs. We welcome the Permanent
Representative of Somalia.

Lebanon supports the Djibouti peace process and
emphasizes the importance of a comprehensive
approach to the situation in Somalia that would address
not only the security situation but also economic
development and support for Somali institution-
building.

We express our concern regarding the acts of
violence carried out by rebels. We strongly denounce
the terrorist attack that took place yesterday. We call
for the prosecution of the perpetrators and express our
condolences to the victims. We denounce attacks
against humanitarian workers. We also denounce acts
of piracy and armed robbery, especially as they
represent a threat to international maritime activities
and international trade and are an obstacle to
humanitarian assistance.
We welcome the efforts of international
organizations and States that have deployed ships in
the regional waters of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden.
We hope that this increased international presence will
shed some light on the frequently reported illegal
fishing and the dumping of industrial waste in the sea
off Somali. We are also concerned at the continuous
development of ways in which pirates operate. This
requires a swift and robust response, as well as
effective, long-term solutions that I will mention later.

In this context has come the Russian initiative to
find legal solutions at the international or national level
to the issue of punishment for those who carry out
armed activities and robbery off the coast of Somalia.
International law does provide the legal framework
necessary for dealing with such acts, and it is therefore
important to do more at the national level.

After reviewing the report of the Secretary-
General, we call for the United Nations and donor
States to strengthen national abilities while remaining
open to the other options suggested by the Secretary-
General in the report. Here, we emphasize the role of
the Security Council in studying these options and
requesting the opinion of the Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia in this regard.

With respect to long-term solutions, we believe
that dealing with the root causes of piracy entails
dealing with the domestic situation in Somalia, because
the lack of security and stability in Somalia over the
past two decades, the economic degradation and the
difficulties in earning a living are the root causes of
piracy. Therefore, any successful approach will require
support for institution-building within the Government
of Somalia and its regular forces, especially the coast
guard, in order to extend the authority of the
Government and assist in providing a better life for the
people of Somalia.

In conclusion, we welcome the initiative of the
Secretary-General to appoint a special adviser on legal
affairs regarding piracy off the coast of Somalia.

