Mr. Baja (Philippines): Mr. President, I
commend your initiative of holding this open meeting
on Afghanistan. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jean
Arnault, for presenting the Secretary-General's report
(S/2005/525) and for his comprehensive briefing on the
preparations for the elections.

In less than four weeks, the Afghan people will
once again exercise their right of suffrage, this time to
vote in the crucial parliamentary and provincial council
elections. We are pleased that the electoral process,
apart from some funding problems, is on track. We are
hopeful that, with the lessons learned from last year's
presidential elections and with the full support of the
international community, particularly the donor
countries, the September elections will be successful
and will achieve the objectives of the political agenda
of the Bonn process.

My delegation welcomes the efforts being made
by the Government of President Karzai and the
international community towards the holding of the
parliamentary and local elections. Those elections will
be significantly more complicated than the historic
presidential elections of last year, and we are gratified
that the Afghan people, with the help of the
international community, are once more exhibiting
their resolve to determine their political future through
the process of democratic elections. It is important that
international donors respond urgently to the appeal of
the Secretary-General to fill the funding gap to ensure
that the preparations for the elections remain on track.
The successful conduct of the elections depends to a
large extent on the timely completion of the technical
process.

One vital element that will determine the
credibility and the integrity of the coming elections is
the security environment in which the elections are
conducted. As with last year's presidential elections,
the security environment should ensure that the people
are able to exercise their choice freely, without fear or
intimidation.

The recent successes with respect to some
elements of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme contribute positively to
improved security, such as the completion of the
disarmament of illegal armed groups, the safe removal
and cantonment of heavy weapons and progress in the
disbandment of illegal armed groups. However, recent
acts of violence, attributed to the increasing terrorist
activities of the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist
groups, are cause for concern, particularly as they
target election workers and civilians. Worse, not only
are those groups now better organized, armed and
funded, but they are now clearly aiming to destabilize
the Afghan political situation. The challenge is to cut
off the source of their funds.

Given that worsening security environment, we
urge that the planned expansion of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) be pursued urgently.
We join the Secretary-General's call for ISAF countries
to adopt common and robust rules of engagement to
enhance the Force's ability to respond to the more
difficult situations that it is expected to encounter as it
expands. We acknowledge the contribution of the
United States forces, ISAF and the NATO
peacekeeping operation in enhancing the security
environment.

My delegation also wishes to highlight the
Secretary-General's observation that "the completion
of the political transition is a vital step, but this alone
will not be sufficient for the establishment of lasting
peace in Afghanistan" (5/2005/525, para. 81).

It is indeed time for the international community
to start considering a new framework for engagement
with Afghanistan after the completion of the political
process. The institutional agenda of the Bonn
Agreement will now have to be pursued simultaneously
with the reconstruction process.

The development of effective government
institutions at the local and provincial levels will be
crucial to ensure that the vital economic recovery, as
well as humanitarian and social protection
programmes, including those of civil society and non-
governmental organizations, stream down to the
population throughout the country. Those institutions
will be vital in facing the challenges posed by the
counter-narcotics implementation plan, including
livelihood alternatives to poppy cultivation,
development and rehabilitation projects to deliver basic
services to the people, disaster-response mechanisms
and measures to address the needs of the more than 3
million refuges that have returned to Afghanistan.

Clearly, sustained international support is needed
in the coming post-electoral stage to achieve security,
full disarmament and justice and a competent civilian
administration in all provinces with a view to ensuring
the development of those institutions. My delegation
welcomes the clear identification by the Secretary-
General of the key principles for further enhancing
cooperation between the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community.

Finally, we wish to pay tribute once again to the
Afghan people for their unwavering determination, in
the face of great odds, to chart their political future. It
is important that the international community and the
Security Council enhance Afghanistan's ownership of
that political process.

