Mr. Kastberg: My full statement, as well as a
brief on our work, will be available to members. I will
therefore not go through the full, detailed statement.

Let me thank you, Mr. President, for inviting the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) to
participate in this meeting. I apologize on behalf of
Ms. Carol Bellamy, our Executive Director, who
happens, Sir, to be in your country today and who has
visited various parts of Iraq in the last four days. She
has sent us her observations, about which I will speak.

As many of my United Nations colleagues
present here have done, let me start by mentioning the
high priority we place upon the need for law and order
throughout Iraq. The ability of United Nations staff to
be able to reach those most in need is still severely
compromised by the development of a culture of
lawlessness and fear and its impact on children,
especially girls. We see this issue as overriding in its
impact. I will make some comments in that regard later
in my statement.

Under the overall coordination of the United
Nations, getting all children back in school as soon as
possible is a paramount priority for us. Eighty per cent
of Iraq's 8,500 primary school facilities have re-
opened. We have delivered hundreds of school-in-a-
box kits, as we call them. We are committed to
delivering enough kits to supply all 3.5 million
primary-school-age children with learning supplies by
September.

We must nevertheless be vigilant. In the south
and centre of the country school attendance rates
remain well below the already low pre-war average of
75 per cent. Many people are reluctant to send their
children, especially girls, to school through potentially
dangerous situations.

Another aspect that we would like to highlight
relates to the situation of women. Iraqi women lost a
lot of ground under the sanctions in terms of their
participation in social, economic and political life. A
reborn Iraq will be one in which Iraqi women must
drive the reconstruction process. It would be a great
disservice to Iraq if its women were to be kept in their
homes out of fear.

Restarting education empowers communities,
makes an immediate difference in the lives of children
and parents and builds a civil society. It is for that
reason that we would like to advocate for having
children return to school as quickly as possible.

Another high priority is to provide basic health
care for children and women, in which we collaborate
with our colleagues around this table - including with
the World Health Organization (WHO) and the
International Committee of the Red Cross - and with
many non-governmental organizations.

Last week, a rapid nutritional assessment carried
out by UNICEF local staff in Baghdad found that acute
malnutrition had nearly doubled, from 4 per cent one
year ago to almost 8 per cent today. We are not
surprised. Wasting in children is related not only to
how much they have to eat, but also to their bodies'
ability to retain what is eaten. When not properly
treated, diarrhoea leads to the loss of nutrients in the
body, to dehydration and, all too often, to death.
Doctors in Baghdad and in the north of the country told
Ms. Bellamy this week that some 90 per cent of the
children being brought to hospitals are now suffering
from this affliction.

We therefore currently need decent water and
sanitation throughout Iraq. We are involved in that
effort. We are currently providing 2 million litres of
water per day by tanker trucks to the south of the
country. We are establishing generating plants and
pumping equipment in many areas, as well as
supplying hospitals and other institutions with water.

We also need certain policy decisions to be taken.
If taken soon, such decisions could yield quick and
positive results. One example of that pertains to infant
feeding. Breast-milk substitutes, which were included
by the former Government of Iraq in the oil-for-food
basket, are actually killing children when mixed with
contaminated water. We believe that food supplies for
children must continue. However, we strongly urge that
breast-milk substitutes be dropped. They should be
available on the market and for doctors to prescribe as
needed, but they should not be promoted for inclusion
in the food basket. We are giving high priority to
working with our WHO and other partners to promote
breastfeeding as the optimal solution to protect the
health of children.

Also in the area of health, we have launched a
national campaign to prevent measles. We have also
begun to provide therapeutic feeding in various places,
which we believe is making a difference.

The worrying condition of Iraq's children
indicates that addressing child malnutrition in a
comprehensive manner that includes water and
sanitation requires particular attention in the recovery
effort.

The protection of civilians and the protection of
women against violence are also high on our agenda.
We seek to protect children from abuse and
exploitation, including sexual exploitation. We know
that many children have been brought into armed gangs
or have joined groups of street children and are using
drugs. As the Deputy Secretary-General mentioned, we
also know that children are being hurt and killed by
landmines. In Baghdad alone there are about 800
hazardous sites, the majority related to cluster bombs
and caches of dumped ammunition.

We are committed to supporting the
reconstruction effort by supporting efforts to protect
vulnerable children in Iraq in areas such as juvenile
justice, community rehabilitation and mine awareness
and removal, as well as in providing direct protection,
as is the case with the Palestinian children who have
been driven out of their homes who are being assisted
in the outskirts of Baghdad.

These are some of the priorities that we believe
are extremely important for Iraq's children: law and
order; a return to a positive learning environment; basic
water, sanitation, health services and nutrition care;
and the protection of vulnerable children. We are
already heavily engaged in that effort with committed
staff. We believe we can work with communities in
Iraq, in which the Iraqi people themselves form a cadre
of educated, well trained, competent and committed
people. We believe that Iraqis from all ethnic,
linguistic, political and geographical backgrounds can
be unified by making the well-being of children a
national priority.

So powerful is the pull of supporting and helping
children that, immediately after the war, when the
looting and burning of Baghdad was at its height,
UNICEF's national staff dug into their own pockets
and pulled together $95,000 to keep our office and
programme running. In fact, it was for only three days
that our office did not operate. Allow me to suggest, on
behalf of Ms. Bellamy, that the world follow their
example and commit to improving the immediate and
long-term future of Iraq by investing in its children.

