Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Chairmen of the Committees
with counter-terrorism mandates for their detailed
briefings. The effectiveness of the work of those
bodies will to a large extent determine progress in
strengthening the central coordinating role of the
United Nations and the Security Council in the field of
counter-terrorist cooperation.

Today, the world is facing an unprecedented upsurge
of terrorist activity. The main threat stems from the so-
called Islamic State. Despite its significant territorial,
human and financial losses, to a large extent achieved
through Russia's Aerospace Defence Forces, the group
misses no opportunity to sew terror and its pseudo-
ideology. Its attempts to gain a foothold in Libya,
Afghanistan, Yemen and other areas of instability are
clear evidence of that.

Recently, the Security Council carried out
significant work in strengthening the international
legal framework for countering the terrorist threat by
suppressing its fuelling and financing and improving
the work of the sanctions and monitoring mechanisms.
In that regard, resolution 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015)
were the most important steps. Today, the main problems
lie in their full-fledged good-faith implementation both
by States Members and within the framework of the
Organization as a whole. In that regard, States that
border conflict zones bear a special responsibility.

We have serious questions about the primary
analytical materials of the Secretary-General and
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Group of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities. The main problem
is that they contain insufficient assessments and are
not sufficiently concrete. Moreover, such an approach
is a necessary prerequisite to a deeper understanding
of the thrust of the problem, identifying problems with
the implementation of Security Council decisions, and
tailoring the work of the Council and its subsidiary
bodies in counter-terrorism efforts. There is no
shortage of such data, including from open sources. We
have also circulated to the Security Council a number
of documents that shed light on the main channels for
smuggled petroleum, artefacts and foreign terrorist
fighters, as well as weapons. As is quite clear from
those documents, the main routes cross Turkey and are
not suppressed by Ankara.

We expect that the Secretary-General's future
reports, including the May report on resolution 2253
(2015), and of the Monitoring Group will address
the shortcomings that have been pointed out. As the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
Mr. Sergey Lavrov, has repeatedly stated, this is no
time to bury our heads in the sand like an ostrich.
The international community must acknowledge the
facts. Only in that way we will overcome a common
enemy - the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

Referring to the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we would like to
state that we expect constructive cooperation with the
group of experts, each of which possesses the requisite
knowledge and expertise in terms of weapons of
mass destruction and export control. The Committee
continues its effective work helping countries to
implement the provisions of the resolution. The number
of States failing to submit relevant national reports is
falling. The Group of Experts is visiting specialized
international forums to inform the international
community on the specificities and tasks of this
non-proliferation mechanism.

We are not opposed to convening consultations with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
industry and business representatives, subject to
the understanding, however, that responsibility for
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) lies with States
and their administrative structures. In other words,
civil society is not an independent player in this field.
The main task for the subsidiary body of the Security
Council in 2016 is to conclude the comprehensive
review with a view to identifying existing bottlenecks
in the implementation of the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004).

In our view, the Committee itself requires
fine-tuning rather than radical change. We expect the
States members of the Security Council to approach
the final review with great care. Doing otherwise could
have unpredictable consequences. That also applies
to the creation of additional bureaucratic structures
to address the theme of resolution 1540 (2004). We
are quite skeptical in that regard, to put it frankly.
States can cooperate directly with the Committee,
as is directly stated in the text of the resolution. The
creation of additional formats that do not enjoy the
consensus support of Committee members could lead
to unnecessary duplication and even undermine the
work of that subsidiary body of the Security Council.

