Belgium welcomes the initiative of the Nigerien presidency of the Security Council to organize this open debate on the role of the International Organization of the Francophonie (OIF), as we celebrate its fiftieth anniversary this year. I also thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, the Secretary-General of the OIF and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia, in his capacity as Chair of the Ministerial Conference of la Francophonie, for their enlightening briefings. As highlighted by the briefers, as well as the General Assembly in its biennial resolution on this subject, cooperation between la Francophonie and the United Nations has been strengthened over the years. As a founding member of those two organizations, Belgium can only welcome that. Belgium has three main messages to bring to today's debate: multilateralism, Africa and cultural diversity. My country supports strong, effective and responsive multilateralism now more than ever. That is the common thread of our commitment in the Security Council. In the current climate of mistrust of multilateralism, further increased by the global health crisis, it is more important than ever to work together, strengthen our solidarity and find common solutions to the shared challenges we face. In that context, the OIF brings specific added value by participating in a renewed and inclusive multilateralism. The organization brings together as full members, associate members or observers nearly half the States Members of the United Nations from the five continents, a number of which are unfortunately countries in crisis or conflict. Those States all have French-speaking populations but with very different cultural backgrounds. Belgium is deeply committed to the notion of a French-speaking community. In that respect, I commend the Secretary- General of the OIF for her role as a peace mediator, and I welcome her efforts to further the organization's place on the international stage. The OIF's response and responsiveness to the coronavirus disease crisis have been exemplary, as was the establishment of a solidarity fund for African women, which demonstrates that solidarity is a core value of our Francophonie. In that context, Belgium supports the OIF as a regional organization that is committed to optimal cooperation with the United Nations. That also applies to the Security Council, where many countries in the French-speaking world, as well as thematic issues that are important to the OIF, are considered, such as the prevention of violence, conflict resolution, democratic transition, transitional justice and the role of women in that connection. My second point concerns Africa. More than half the States members of the OIF are African countries. The IOF again ensures, with its modest means, that it uses its multiplier effect, its institutional networks and its expertise to take action in a targeted manner. That was also the case on 25 August with the adoption of measures against Mali following the coup d'etat in order to restore constitutional order there. I am also thinking of the support of la Francophonie for its efforts, together with the Commonwealth and the African Union, for a national dialogue in Cameroon. It could therefore be appropriate to explore ways to further strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF - for example, by promoting joint actions, such as setting up joint field missions or missions involving special envoys of the two organizations. Finally, I would like to highlight the ongoing work of la Francophonie to mobilize the United Nations in promoting multilingualism and cultural diversity as a key element of multilateralism, both at Headquarters and in United Nations operations in the field. That is essential to building trust among between populations and United Nations staff, which is indispensable for the smooth running of peace operations. Belgium welcomes the concrete efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. We are committed to supporting them by assisting the Secretariat, in particular in translating training manuals into French for peacekeeping troops. We believe cultural and linguistic diversity to be at the heart of the nexus of security, development and human rights. The need to take better account of cultural and linguistic diversity is well reflected today in the Security Council's first meeting by video-teleconference in the six official languages since the beginning of the restrictive measures as a result of the pandemic. I am very grateful to the Secretariat, the Niger's presidency of the Security Council and all members of the Council for their efforts to that end.
