Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): On 25 May this year, five years will have elapsed
since this Council established the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia. Those years have
marked a historic era for the international administration of
justice. In that time, the Tribunal's administration has been
consolidated, its rules of procedure have been drafted and
a small but significant number of cases has been heard. The
Tribunal's work has been of surpassing importance for the
development of international humanitarian and human rights
law. The T ribunal's jurisprudence has become an
authoritative interpretation of international customary law
and promoted the progressive development of that law in
those areas where gaps or imprecisions remain.

We note with particular satisfaction the progress
made, both in practice and in the rules of procedure, with
regard to the protection of victims and witnesses as well
as the correct interpretation, characterization and
categorization of crimes against women and girls.

Moreover, my delegation believes that the very
existence of the Tribunal has given the requisite impetus
to the establishment of an international criminal court. In
this context, we cannot fail to reiterate Costa Rica's firm
commitment to the establishment of a permanent,
independent, impartial and effective international criminal
court at the Conference of Plenipotentiaries to be held in
Rome in June and July this year. We are firmly
convinced that solely through the creation of such a court
can the international community definitively and truly
reject and condemn the most serious crimes that offend
the world's conscience. In contrast with this future court,
the special tribunals created by the Security Council are
merely temporary and transitional palliatives with roles
confined to addressing emergency situations that pose real
threats to international peace and security.

As my delegation has repeatedly indicated, we
consider that justice is an indispensable element of peace.
We believe that there can be no reconciliation if the truth
is not brought to light and that a free and democratic
society cannot be built while the criminal perpetrators of
the most horrible atrocities go unpunished. We are
convinced that impunity is a threat to peace, since it
incites victims to revenge and strengthens the aggressors'
arrogance. That is why we believe that the existence of
this Tribunal is an indispensable element of the Balkan
peace process.

In this context, the lack of cooperation with the
Tribunal of some Governments, local authorities and
international entities, in violation of their international
obligations, is scandalous. The authorities of the
Republika Srpska, the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia must
comply with their international obligations. It is
indispensable that the authorities of these entities arrest
and extradite to the Tribunal the accused found on their
territories. These arrests can no longer be postponed. It is
also indispensable for these authorities to help in the
collection of evidence and to facilitate the participation of
witnesses.

 

These authorities must also bring to justice all the
possible perpetrators of crimes not being prosecuted by the
International Tribunal. We must not forget that the
International Tribunal's existence does not exempt them
from their primary obligation to administer justice and
punish those found guilty.
Another problem is the Tribunal's financial situation
and lack of personnel. There is no doubt that the Tribunal
requires greater resources and more staff of its own. The
United Nations financial authorities and our own
delegations in the Fifth Committee will have to make
greater efforts to guarantee the Tribunal the necessary
resources.

For all those reasons, Costa Rica cannot fail to
respond favourably to the request made to the Security
Council by the Tribunal, through its President, Judge
Gabrielle Kirk McDonald, that a third trial chamber be
established in order to try promptly all the accused now in
custody. A basic requirement of the proper administration
of justice is that it be speedy. In that connection, the
decision the Council will take today is intended simply to
guarantee full respect for the fundamental rights of the
accused. We have therefore joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution, and will vote in favour of it.

