Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): The work of the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), on the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction ,has never been as important to
the maintenance of international peace and security
as it is today. We have all witnessed the historic
turn of events in the second half of this year, mainly
resolution 2118 (2013), on the destruction of the Syrian
chemical stockpiles, and now the agreement reached
last Sunday by Iran and the Permanent Five countries
and Germany on the Iranian nuclear programme.
Rwanda congratulates all the stakeholders for those
achievements.

The contribution of the Sanctions Committee in all
of these and other positive developments is indelible.
Therefore, I would like to commend Ambassador Joon
Oh of the Republic of Korea, Ambassador Gary Francis
Quinlan of Australia and Ambassador Mohammed
Loulichki of Morocco for their efforts and activities
undertaken by their respective Committees under their
able leadership, as well as for the statements they made
today.

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
on Al-Qaida, we commend the transparent work of the
Ombudsperson and support the regular review of the
Al-Qaida Sanctions List as essential to maintaining
accuracy and reponding to the changing nature of
terrorism threats. Therefore, we remain interested in
getting more information on the interaction between
the Office of the Ombudsperson and the Committee, as
well as on the cases that are under investigation.

Rwanda remains strongly concerned with the
evolving threat posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates
across North Africa, the Sahel region and the Horn of
Africa. In that context we look forward to the special
meeting on the Sahel region to be held in December
and to the Committee's efforts to increase engagement
with States in the Sahel and the Magreb and to consider
ways to utilize the sanctions regime as an integral part
of their national and regional responses to the threat
of Al-Qaida. We believe that such initiatives by the
Committee will increase the ability of States to propose
listings and the capacity of monitoring teams to assist
countries in managing the listing process.

We should all remain resolute not to give room for
these terrorist groups to make entire regions of our
continent their stronghold. We therefore encourage
greater engagement between the Committee and
all States across the Sahel to utilize 1267 sanctions
regime in order to be even more responsive in terms
of anticipating the threat, adapting and updating the
regime to reflect challenges on the ground.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, Rwanda recognizes that
the proliferation ofweapons ofmass destruction remains
a global challenge to this day. It is firmly committed to
the non-proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery by non-State
actors. There is no doubt that the new developments in
Syria and now Iran regarding their chemical weapons
and nuclear programmes, respectively, may be a turn
of trends. This will require close follow-through by
the Committee, and we will be ready to support, where
necessary, any modifications to the sanctions regimes
to push forward the agenda of the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. However, we need to
remain vigilant and take seriously the observations and
warnings by countries of the region, which are the first
potential targets of these deadly weapons.

Rwanda looks forward to the African Union's
scheduled workshop for States Members of the United
Nations on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), to be held in Addis Ababa next month. We
are told Ambassador Oh Joon will attend as Chair of
the Committee for resolution 1540 (2004), along with
experts of the panel. We believe that the practice of
workshops on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), especially those organized for African States
must be pursued in order to assist the remaining
non-reporting African countries in the preparation of
their reports.

We are encouraged that more countries are
submitting their national reports, as Rwanda did, and
we call on all remaining countries to do so with the
support of the Committee, if required. We hope that
all countries will be on board by the tenth anniversary
of resolution 1540 (2004), in April next year. Rwanda
takes this opportunity to commend the efforts of the
1540 Committee in raising global awareness on that
resolution, in strengthening the capacity of States
to improve mechanisms for sharing best practices,
and in increasing efforts to address the issue of
proliferation-financing, including through the provision
of relevant technical assistance.

Much has been achieved by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in destroying or weakening terrorist
networks since the beginning of the war on terror.
However, given the current trend in global terror acts,
the war is not yet over. The terrorists are changing their
modus operandi and the recruitment nets are widely
set. The war on terror is complicated by continued arms
supplies by some States Members of the United Nations
to non-State actors. If we do not change the way we do
our business, we can expect a prolonged campaign. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the donor community should provide tangible
technical and financial support to States affected by
terrorists. That support should focus on youth, education,

job creation and development projects. In that regard,
Rwanda welcomes Mr. Tony Blair's briefing to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
on the role of education in fighting extremists.

With regard to the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), Rwanda welcomes the collaboration of the
United Nations and such specialized agencies as
the FATF in advancing the United Nations mandate
on combating terrorism. We therefore welcome
the strategies adopted by the two organs aimed at
streamlining and strengthening their cooperation in
fighting against the financing of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We also welcome the
FATF recommendations in support of countries in
their implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

In conclusion, it is encouraging that the three
Committees are closely cooperating on key thematic
areas of interest to all by coordinating project
implementation, regularly exchanging information
on best practices, and improving collaboration with
regional and subregional organizations. We encourage
them to strengthen such cooperation, particularly
by implementing the specific recommendations
Ambassador Oh Joon presented in the joint statement
of the Chairs of the three Committees. We once again
commend the Committees' efforts in enhancing the
visibility of the United Nations counter-terrorism
activities, the fight against weapons of mass destruction,
and cooperation with global and regional organizations
aimed at making this world a safer and better place.

