Mr. Vento (Italy): I wish to begin, Mr. President,
by thanking you for convening this open forum, which
gives United Nations Member States that are not on the
Security Council the opportunity to express their views
on one of the most sensitive issues of the day: the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait. As I take the floor
in this Chamber for the first time this month, I would
like also to express the satisfaction of my delegation at
seeing you, Sir, at the helm of the Council.

The representative of Sweden has already make a
statement on behalf of the European Union. Italy fully
endorses it, and would like only to add a few remarks.
It is Italy's strong hope that in the not-too-distant
future the United Nations will be able to certify that the
conditions are right for a full resumption of relations
between Iraq and the international community. To that
end, we must promote the establishment of a climate of
trust through the adoption of measures inspired, first of
all, by respect for all the pertinent United Nations
resolutions and by equitable and constructive
initiatives. We also consider that the territorial integrity
and national sovereignty of every State in the region
deserve the respect of all members of the international
community.

In order for normal relations between Iraq and the
international community to be re-established and for
sanctions to be lifted, it is essential that the Iraqi
Government show a spirit of full cooperation, first of
all by welcoming the inspectors from the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission and allowing them to do theirjob.

Of the many aspects of the complex issue we are
dealing with today, the humanitarian question is
undoubtedly the largest and the most pressing. It is of
the utmost urgency that there be a return to an
appropriate dialogue on the fate of prisoners of war and
of those missing in action, as well as on property that
had been removed. In that connection, the foundations
for the promising development of such a dialogue
would be laid with immediate conciliatory gestures by
the Iraqi Government.

At the same time, one cannot but feel the greatest
compassion for the innocent civilian population of Iraq,
where health conditions, especially those of women
and children, remain critical and cry out for a prompt
and appropriate response by the international
community. Emergency measures are needed to stem
the tide of epidemic, reverse the exponential increase
in infant mortality and halt the outbreak of serious
illnesses such as leukaemia and cancer related to the
environmental degradation that has accompanied the
now-10-year-old sanctions regime. It is therefore a
matter of top priority that Iraq's medical and hospital
structures be rehabilitated and that basic health and
hygiene conditions be improved.

To achieve a lasting amelioration of social
conditions, the basic economic infrastructure must be
revitalized. Measures must be devised to stimulate the
supply of commodities and services and to facilitate
economic cooperation, including investment in civilian
sectors, starting with the water supply, sewage, energy,
fuel and transportation. At the same time there should
be a gradual resumption of commercial flights to Iraq,
with appropriate guarantees and controls.

Of course, to make an improved sanctions regime
function more effectively, all Member States must be
determined to give the United Nations their fullest
cooperation. Concurrently, the adoption of more
transparent and effective authorization procedures
would prevent rearmament without prejudicing trade,
would liberalize the flow of civilian goods and services
to Iraq, and would help redress the current imbalances.

In that context, the interests of neighbouring
countries have to be taken fully into account; their
agreement is needed for any future arrangement. That
is requested both as a matter of fairness and for the
sake of regional stability.

Ten years is a long time in both human and
foreign relations. It is in everyone's best interest to
reach a satisfactory and final settlement of the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait. A few months ago, we had a
glimpse of hope when talks were resumed between the
Secretary-General and the Government of Iraq. We still
trust that the Secretary-General can provide an ideal
channel of dialogue to improve the present sorry state
of affairs and to help Iraq abide by the relevant United
Nations resolutions, finally taking its full place once
again in the community of nations.

