Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to extend its gratitude to you,
Sir, for the convening of this open meeting. We would
also like to extend our thanks to the delegation of
Malaysia, Chairman of the Coordinating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned Movement, for requesting this meeting,
given the need to hear the opinion of the international
community, in a spirit of transparency and collective
responsibility, on a serious problem and on the threat of
aggression against a member State of the Movement.

My statement will concentrate on replying to
some of the questions that are being pondered by the
representatives of many States, particularly after the
confusion of facts and falsehoods and untrue
allegations propagated by the United States and the
United Kingdom with respect to Iraq's compliance and
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

First, has Iraq complied, and is Iraq complying
with the relevant Security Council resolutions on
disarmament? Iraq cooperated with the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) during a period of
eight years. Hence, 95 per cent of the disarmament
tasks were fulfilled, between 1991 and 1994. That was
confirmed by Mr. Ekeus. Cooperation continued until
1998, which led former inspector Mr. Scott Ritter, a
United States citizen and the senior inspector at the
time, to admit that Iraq no longer possessed weapons of
mass destruction. Today, following the return of the
inspectors - who were withdrawn from Iraq in 1998
by Mr. Butler, upon the orders of the United States of
America - Mr. Blix, in his briefing of 7 March 2003,
stated that Iraq is proactively cooperating, and he
referred in detail to the scope and nature of that
cooperation.

Secondly, do the inspectors encounter any
problems in reaching the sites to be inspected? Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei answered that Iraq opened all doors
and sites to inspectors, that there were no obstacles,
that the inspections currently under way are serious,
effective and immediate and that inspectors can reach
any site they wish to inspect with ease and without any
notable problems.

Thirdly, have the inspectors found weapons of
mass destruction? The replies of Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei confirmed that inspection activities have not
found any weapons of mass destruction or programmes
to produce such weapons. They confirmed that Iraq
declared recently its missile programme unilaterally
and that Iraq, under the supervision of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC), is destroying Al Samoud 2
missiles, which UNMOVIC deemed to be proscribed.

Fourthly, were the United States and the United
Kingdom able to demonstrate the existence of
proscribed weapons or programmes through the
intelligence data and documents presented by them? A
negative response to that question was given by Mr.
Blix and ElBaradei. In fact, one of the documents
presented, alleging an attempt by Iraq to import
uranium from an African country, proved to be a
forgery. Furthermore, the latest intelligence report
submitted by Britain was originally a thesis by a
student of Iraqi origin written in 1990. That
intelligence report essentially contained previously
published information plagiarized by British
intelligence services and was replete with errors of
language and syntax, according to the student's
statement.
The allegations presented by Mr. Powell on 5
February 2003 were refuted by the facts in the
possession of the inspectors, following four months of
reinforced inspections in Iraq. Therefore, none of the
allegations - none of the so-called facts put forward
by Mr. Powell - have proved to be true.

Fifthly, are there any shortcomings in the work of
inspectors and their scientific and technical capacity to
discover any proscribed weapons or programmes? The
inspectors have at their disposal the latest advanced
equipment, including laboratory testing equipment of
soil, water and air, remote sensors that detect materials
in deep ground, vibration detectors and aerial
surveillance aircraft. Iraq has not interfered in the work
of inspectors from any technical aspect whatever.

Sixthly, was not resolution 1441 (2002) an
initiative of the United States and United Kingdom to
reinforce the inspection regime and an attempt to rule
out implementing resolution 1284 (1999)? Iraq's
acceptance of resolution 1441 (2002) and its precise
implementation of all provisions contained in it had
prevented the United States and the United Kingdom
from using it as a pretext to declare war on Iraq.
Having lost such an opportunity, they started to raise
doubts concerning the inspections and the inspectors
and their capabilities. They then sought other new
pretexts such as terrorism, regime change, Iraq's threat
to its neighbours, American interests and the need to
disarm Iraq of its so-called weapons of mass
destruction by force. This means waging war, which is
the main objection of this game.

Seventh, does the document submitted by
UNMOVIC to the Security Council at its last meeting
(S/2003/232), which takes up unresolved disarmament
issues, mean that weapons of mass destruction do exist
in Iraq? Mr. Blix replied to this question by saying the
document on remaining disarmament issues does not
provide any evidence that Iraq has proscribed weapons
or programmes. Rather, the document contains a list of
questions, the answers to which will enable UNMOVIC
to verify the prior destruction of these weapons in 1991
in order to reach a so-called material balance.
UNMOVIC, as well as its predecessor, the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM), have spoken
repeatedly on this matter.

Bear in mind that Iraq did request UNMOVIC for
some time, even before the adoption of resolution 1441
(2002), to present such a document. It would be
important for Iraq to View the main tasks required of it
in order to implement them as soon as possible and to
study such questions and answer them.

Eighth, the so-called new evidence put forward
by the United States and the United Kingdom during
the past two days that alleges that Iraq is in material
breach of Security Council resolutions no doubt
reflects, I believe, the quandary faced by the United
States administration in proving its previous
allegations. These allegations have become a subject of
ridicule. The issue is no more than that of a small
experimental primitive pilotless aircraft without any
prototype for production whatever. Inspection teams
have viewed the aircraft, its specifications, and their
details. They ascertained those technical specifications,
especially regarding fuel tank and engine capacity;
they were tested within the range of the airport. This is
a radio-controlled aircraft, which is controlled by and
remains within the sight range of its ground controller.
It does not go beyond eight kilometres. Therefore, it is
not a weapon of mass destruction or a delivery method
that surpasses the range set forward in Security Council
resolutions.

Is this truly a material breach of Security Council
resolutions, and particularly resolution 1441 (2002)?
We leave it to you to ascertain the truth of such
allegations. They show the bankruptcy of the attempts
of the United States administration to convince the
international community that such allegations are true.
The issue, ultimately, is in the hands of UNMOVIC. It
is up to UNMOVIC to reach its conclusions.

I would like to conclude my statement by making
two points. The first is that Iraq is aware that since it
first began dealing with this matter, the United States
and the United Kingdom will put in doubt any result
reached, because their goal is not disarmament, which
has in effect been achieved. They very well know this,
as will soon be established by UNMOVIC and the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Rather, their
objective is to lay their hands on our oil, control the
region and redraw its borders in order to ensure the
continuation of vital interests for the United States for
a long period to come. This is a new direct colonization
of the region.

My second and last point is that Iraq has taken the
strategic decision to rid itself of weapons of mass
destruction. Had this decision not been the right one, it
would not have cooperated with UNMOVIC. Today,
Iraq, before the Council, reiterates its readiness to
cooperate in a fruitful and constructive manner so that
it will be determined that weapons of mass destruction
no longer exist in Iraq and that sanctions imposed on it
would be lifted. We will convincingly answer the
questions of anyone who has any doubts about Iraq's
cooperation. We shall answer the false allegations that
are used to justify war against us. Iraq reaffirms that
peaceful means, dialogue and cooperation are the
quickest and best means to resolve the current crisis.

My delegation, through the Council, calls upon
the international community to prevent a catastrophe
that has now become imminent. We call upon the
Security Council and the Secretary-General to shoulder
their responsibilities, in accordance with the provisions
of the Charter, to thwart any aggression against Iraq.

