Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Let me begin by saying
how pleased we are to see an African country, Burkina
Faso, presiding over the work of the Security Council.
My country endorses the statement made on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement on the item on today's
agenda.

Venezuela appreciates and endorses all the efforts
that Burkina Faso can make during its presidency of
the Security Council to contribute to the resolution of
the armed conflicts Africa faces and to bolster the
initiatives of the African Union towards building peace
and reconciliation among the countries of the
continent. We believe that Burkina Faso will contribute
to preventing some members of the Security Council
from adopting decisions that are remote from
international law and that would prevent dialogue and
reconciliation in Africa.

We have been invited to an open Security Council
debate on drug trafficking in Africa as a threat to
international security. Three fundamental points need
to be highlighted. First, under the United Nations
Charter drug trafficking is not within the purview of
the Security Council. Secondly, this is an issue that,
given its scope, must be addressed in an inclusive
manner, not through a self-interested and a priori
reductionist approach imposed by one, two, three, four
or five countries among the international community.
Thirdly, the Security Council has demonstrated that it
does not wish to or cannot carry out its own functions.
For this reason, it should not claim new functions that
are outside its competence. An illustration of the
Council's ineptitude in dealing with issues relevant to
the international community is its complete disregard
for the resolutions adopted with regard to Palestine,
which are binding on Israel.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela shares the
common interest in and will to fight this scourge in the
framework of international cooperation and in fullest
respect for the sovereignty of countries and for human
rights, in particular the principles of due process,
proportionality and the presumption of innocence,
among others. Venezuela believes that the world drug
problem should continue to be addressed in the
framework of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and its subsidiary body, the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, in accordance with the
current practice and existing commitments on this
subject.

In this regard, we would recall that as recently as
in March of this year, at the fifty-second session of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, Member States
adopted the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem.
At that session, States affirmed that the world drug
problem is a threat to the public security of our States
and the well-being of all humankind, since it
undermines sustainable development, political stability
and democratic institutions.

Major commitments were undertaken in context
of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action with
regard to reducing the demand for and supply of drugs,
in particular in the areas of controlling precursors and
amphetamine-type stimulants. There was also an
agreement on international cooperation to eradicate
illicit crops used to produce narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, and to develop alternative
crops, counter money-laundering and provide mutual
legal assistance.

In that context, current and future challenges
were identified and studied, as were new trends in the
world drug problem and possible improvements of the
current assessment system. Mention was made of the
need to strengthen international cooperation in drug
control on the basis of the principle of common and
shared responsibilities. We believe that this is how this
issue should be dealt with and not, for example,
through the use of foreign military bases on the
territory of a given country. The challenges in the fight
against drug trafficking identified by the specialized
bodies of the United Nations must be addressed.

We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime to provide financial and
technical support to African countries with the aim of
supporting and developing their national capacities to
respond to drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime. The Government of Venezuela shares the
concern of African countries over the negative impact
that illicit drug trafficking could have on the stability
of their countries.

That is why Venezuela promotes South-South
cooperation and major initiatives with African
countries to combat drug trafficking. In this regard, at
the Second Africa-South America Summit of Heads of
State, held in Isla Margarita, Venezuela, on 26 and
27 September 2009, our heads of State reaffirmed their
commitment to promoting initiatives, proposals and
activities to combat this phenomenon at the bi-regional
and bilateral levels.

In addition, during the 19th Meeting of Heads of
National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies, tasked with
countering the illicit traffic in drugs in Latin America
and the Caribbean, also held in Isla Margarita from
28 September to 2 October 2009, major agreements
were reached on promoting bilateral cooperation in the
fight against drugs, in particular in West African
countries.

An instructive and encouraging debate is taking
place in several multilateral forums on the fight against
drug trafficking. In all of those instances, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has provided
concrete proof of its solidarity and cooperation with
African countries, in particular those of West Africa, by
signing many bilateral agreements on combating the
world drug problem.

We trust that the consideration of this topic at this
meeting of the Security Council will not set a
precedent or legitimize any action the Security Council
might contemplate on this issue.

