Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Let me, for my part, thank Ambassador
Ne'stor Osorio for the presentation of the twentieth
quarterly report of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and
commend him on how he has steered the work of the
Committee over which he presides. We also commend
the midterm report prepared by the Panel of Experts
and submitted to the Committee in accordance with
paragraph 2 of resolution 1984 (2011). We support the
work of the Panel of Experts in support of the 1737
Committee in implementation of resolution 1929
(2010). We urge members of the 1737 Committee to
continue their negotiations on the report in order to
have it placed on the website.

My delegation would like to reiterate that Gabon
is committed to the international non-proliferation
regime, of which the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and its three pillars continue
to be the cornerstone. Our commitment to the relevant
Security Council resolutions and their implementation
is unambiguous.

My delegation would again like to express its
deep concern with regard to the reports, including the
latest report of the Board of Governors of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
(S/2011/695, annex), which sets forth violations by
Iran of the non-proliferation regime and the sanctions
adopted by the Security Council. Iran must therefore
cooperate with the IAEA and meet a number, if not all,
of its commitments, such as the implementation of the
provisions of its Additional Protocol, the suspension of
its activities relating to heavy water, and the showing
of respect for the concerns of the International Atomic
Energy Agency with regard to the potential
militarization of the Iranian nuclear programme.

The Council has called on Iran a number of times
to fully meet its obligations under the NPT in order to
rebuild international trust and provide assurances to the
international community with respect to the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
The fact that Iran is continuing with its work with
respect to ballistic missiles and related activities is also
of concern for my country. The Iranian authorities must
therefore return to the negotiating table without
conditions.

Finally, I would like once to again to express our
full appreciation for the work done by the 1737
Committee and renew our full support for it.

