Mr. Salloukh (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, Mr. President, I would like to thank you, as well
as your friendly country, for your sustained efforts and
for clear, unequivocal position on the need for an
immediate and comprehensive ceasefire following
Israeli aggression against Gaza. We would also like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his tireless
efforts and resolve.

We have come to speak to the Council on behalf
of the thousands of civilian casualties who have fallen
in Gaza - on behalf of the children, women and other
innocent Palestinians, who continue to fall on an
ongoing basis under Israeli bombings. I speak on
behalf of the inhabitants of Gaza, who for decades now
have lived under blockade, occupation and a policy of
collective punishment.

We have come to say that every minute this
continues, it claims an additional innocent victim and
increases the number of orphans, widows and disabled
persons. As a result, the legal, political and above all
moral duty and responsibility of the Council require it
to adopt immediately and without further delay a clear
and binding resolution calling for an immediate and
complete ceasefire, the lifting of the unjust air, land
and sea blockade imposed by Israel on Gaza, and the
opening of all crossing points.

We must not lose sight of the fact that the Israeli
aggression hardly begin on 27 December 2008. In fact,
it has been going on for decades through occupation,
oppression, suffocating blockade, the closure of
crossing points, limitations imposed on the daily
routines and subsistence of Palestinians, denying them
the right to a decent life. Gaza remains under
occupation and, as the Council knows, occupation is
the most abject form of aggression. The siege persists,
and the blockade is another form of aggression.

This blind violence and these systematic crimes
by Israel are not aimed at a specific faction of the
Palestinian people, as is claimed by Israel. Israel seeks
first and foremost to undermine hope in the hearts of
the Palestinian people for a decent and safe life that
would allow them to fully recover their legitimate
rights through the option of peace and international
legitimacy. The dangers of Israel's aggression are not
confined to its direct actions because they also
contribute to the exacerbation of bitterness and hatred
by undermining all hope for a future and a better day
tomorrow.

Because they jeopardize the peace process,
usurping force and the killing of civilians cannot
achieve security. Quite the contrary, a true and lasting
peace can only be the fruit of a credible political
process that engenders hope for a better future for
people. Consequently, it is vital that we achieve an
immediate, permanent and unconditional ceasefire with
the immediate withdrawal of Israel to pre-27 December
2008 Israeli positions; end the blockade and reopen
crossing points; and normalize life by authorizing
without delay access for humanitarian convoys to those
in need. We must ensure that the Palestinian people are
not once again targeted by Israeli aggression, because
regardless of Israeli's claims, the Palestinian people are
unarmed when compared to the behemoth of the Israeli
army.

We must also note Israel's responsibility, as the
occupying Power, for practices that are at odds with
international law and particularly international
humanitarian law, which require us to provide
appropriate protection for the Palestinian people. We
hope that the Council will not repeat the errors 2006,
when it acted late in putting an end to the Israeli killing
of the people of Lebanon. That is why we truly hope
that the Council will be able to take up the challenge,
that it will not disappoint unarmed civilians and that it
will be up to the task of upholding its responsibilities
to all humankind. In fact, this is a trial which we must
all undergo successfully. May we all live up to that
responsibility, because we would not wish to burden
our conscience with more massacres, such as that
perpetrated by Israel today by targeting the UNRWA
school in J abaliya.

