Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to extend our
warmest welcome to Your Excellency Karel De Gucht,
Foreign Minister of Belgium, as President of the
Council, and to acknowledge Belgium's initiative to
convene an open debate to examine the sensitive issue
of the interrelationship between natural resources and
conflict.

The social and economic consequences of
extreme events related to access to and disputes over
natural resources may arguably have an impact on
international security. Cases abound throughout history
in which access to and exploitation of natural resources
were at the root of armed disputes. Yet perhaps a much
higher number of cases in the history of the use of
natural resources have not ended in conflict.
Competition over scarce resources and security of
supply can indeed be key factors of a particular
conflict. Nevertheless, utmost caution should be
exercised in establishing firm causal links between
natural resources, including energy, and the risk of
conflict.

The determination as to whether there is such a
direct link remains quite a risky challenge in any
specific case. In our view, the roots of conflicts are not
as a rule traceable to a single cause. Disputes are
usually loaded with political connotations, which might
impair objective analysis. In line with that, my
delegation is convinced that there is a more relevant,
stronger link between natural resources and
development, as compared to security.

The Security Council's primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, as
set out in the United Nations Charter, should not be
invoked in general, abstract terms. The Charter
foresees that issues relating to economic and social
development, as is the case with natural resources,
including energy, fall within the purview of the
functions and powers of the General Assembly and of
the Economic and Social Council.

Brazil believes that Security Council resolution
1625 (2005), regarding its role in conflict prevention,
and resolution 1653 (2006), on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, should not be
2

interpreted in an expansive manner, as that would
undermine the roles and responsibilities of the other
principal organs of the United Nations. Encroachment
in areas pertaining to the area of competence of other
United Nations bodies risks not only distorting the
application of the Charter-based purposes and
principles of the United Nations, but also reinforcing
the tendency to mistrust the intentions of the Security
Council.

We remain convinced that the global nature of the
use of natural resources and its multiple dimensions
recommend that any relevant international debate on
the issue first take place at the forum of universal
representation, which is the General Assembly, and
then at the Economic and Social Council and their
relevant subsidiary bodies, including the Commission
on Sustainable Development, the United Nations
Environment Programme, the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and other
international specialized forums.

The exploitation of natural resources falls within
the purview of sovereign States, which in carrying it
out will certainly be mindful of the United Nations
Charter, international agreements and international law.
In no way should normative decisions eventually taken
in bodies of a restricted composition result in new,
undue constraints to the global commodity market.

To sum up, the possible linkage between the
exploitation of natural resources and conflicts should
be examined by the Security Council on a case-by-case
basis and inasmuch as it may be relevant to a particular
decision. In such cases, the Security Council has
established specific mechanisms, such as those
encompassed in the sanctions committees and the
mandates of peacekeeping operations.

Brazil recognizes that the strategic character of
natural resources requires stronger and more effective
cooperative frameworks, including through regional
political mechanisms that recognize their importance
for developing countries in general. Therefore, our
delegation advocates the need to improve the synergy
of the United Nations system in that area. In line with
that, in addressing the root causes of conflicts we stress
the importance of deepening the cooperation among the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council, as set out in paragraph lb of
Article 13 and Article 65 of the Charter.
07-39374
