Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): On behalf of the
Nigerian delegation, I warmly welcome you to the
Security Council, Mr. President. Let me also thank the
Special Coordinator, Mr. Serry, for his comprehensive
briefing.

The Middle East peace process remains
deadlocked, in spite of concerted efforts on the part of
the international community to return the parties to
direct negotiations. Mistrust and a lack of confidence-
building measures have combined to complicate the
outlook. Amid the deadlock, both sides seem to be
contemplating a series of mutually harmful unilateral
actions. While one side is now threatening to annex
settlement blocs and even cancel the Oslo Agreements,
the other is seeking to achieve membership in a broad
range of international organizations. Deeply frustrating
as the continuing deadlock is, the parties must
recognize that the parameters of the two-State solution
and an end to the conflict must be negotiated.

With the Middle East Quartet unable to present a
common platform for the renewal of negotiations at its
last meeting, the only way to avoid the impending
political confrontation is for the parties to immediately
re-enter into direct negotiations on all permanent status
issues, including borders, Jerusalem, refugees and
security. Bringing both sides to constructive dialogue
will be easier to achieve if there is a common platform
or agenda around which all interlocutors, including the
Quartet, can converge. Israel's implementation of its
Road Map obligation to freeze all settlement activities,
and Palestine's commitment to the security of the State
of Israel will undoubtedly facilitate the process. The
international community, particularly the Security
Council, must be fully involved in charting the way
forward.

Inter-Palestinian reconciliation is indispensable to
achieving the peace required to drive the process of
establishing an independent State and peace in the
Middle East as a whole. It is important that the April
reconciliation agreement be sustained and fully
implemented. The formation of a consensus
Government will go a long way towards helping to
forge lasting peace and stability, as well as to
supporting accelerated economic development.

We welcome the improved and steady movement
of goods and services through the crossings into Gaza.
The delivery of humanitarian assistance to the people
of Gaza through the channels established by the Greek
authorities, in consultation with the United Nations, is
highly commendable. We urge all flotilla initiatives to
take similar steps to avoid the escalation of tensions in
the region. The approval by Israel authorities of United
Nations road and school projects is encouraging, and
we hope it will help to improve the welfare of the
Palestinian people. We continue to commend the role
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in
providing much-needed relief and assistance to
Gazans, and we urge greater international financial and
logistical support for UNRWA.

On Lebanon, we reaffirm our commitment to that
country's sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
congratulate Prime Minister Mikati on the formation of
a new Government, which should stay committed to
the country's international obligations, including
resolution 1701 (2006), and to supporting and
preserving the work of the Special Tribunal. We urge
Israel to implement its proposal to formally withdraw
its forces from the northern part of Al-Ghaj ar.

The security and humanitarian situation in Syria
remains a source of concern, with refugee movements
creating serious consequences for neighbouring
countries. We urge the parties in Syria to exercise
maximum restraint and engage in meaningful dialogue
towards a peaceful settlement of the crisis. The
Government's endorsement yesterday of a law that
would allow the formation of political parties alongside
the ruling party is a welcome development. It is
incumbent on the Government to continue to
implement the promised reforms and to grant access to
aid agencies and the United Nations in order to provide
much-needed assistance to those who require it.

Nigeria remains hopeful that, in spite of the
current stalemate in the peace process, a just,
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the Middle
East question is possible. The parties must continue on
the path of dialogue; they must also make the painful
compromises necessary for achieving enduring peace
in the region.

