Mr. Begec (Turkey): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate. I join others in expressing
our condemnation of condolences over the attack
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali.

Turkey greatly values the United Nations
peacekeeping efforts and remains committed to
supporting them. Peacekeeping operations play a Vital
role in sustaining political solutions to crises, stabilizing
conflicts, decreasing violence and protecting civilians,
as well as furthering capacity-building. The 16 currently
deployed United Nations missions have a limited
scope compared to the total number of conflicts and
crisis situations on the United Nations agenda. Peace
operations are no match for the peace enforcement
measures that can be taken also under Chapter VII.

Special political missions are instrumental in
finding political solutions to crises and preventing
and peacefully resolving conflicts, including through
mediation and sustaining peace as recommended by
the recent review processes.Each of these instruments
and mechanisms is a critical asset at the disposal
of the United Nations, but they must be carefully
designed, planned and executed with respect to their
specific contexts.

Peacekeeping missions should be deployed on the
basis of the principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations. The observance of peacekeeping
principles -consent of the host country, impartiality
and minimum use of force only for self-defence or
defence of the mandate - is essential. Turkey believes
that these principles do not preclude protection of
civilians, but the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians rests with States in the first
place. Nevertheless, it has become a core component of
many peacekeeping mandates overtime.

Peacekeeping operations need better adaptability
in order to cope with present threats and challenges.
Accordingly, United Nations peacekeepers must be
better trained, equipped and informed. As long as their
safety and security are threatened by asymmetrical
threats and terrorist attacks, peacekeepers should be
able to defend themselves and their mandate. In that
regard, coordination and exchange of information
between United Nations peacekeeping missions
and counter-terrorism bodies can be undertaken
in accordance with their respective and distinct
mandates. To that end, we encourage efforts to enhance
coordination and coherence among the United Nations
counter-terrorism entities in order to better address the
threats of terrorism and violent extremism.

However, the recommendation contained in the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations that

"United Nations peacekeeping missions, owing to
their composition and character, are not suited to
engage in military counter-terrorism operations"
(S/2015/446, para. 119)

has to be taken into account before expanding
peacekeeping mandates with counter-terrorism tasks.
In the same direction, integrating prevention of
Violent extremism into the activities of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, as suggested
by the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism, should be carefully considered,
with all its implications.

Peacekeeping missions might have comparative
advantages with regard to capacity-building in rule of
law and security sector reform processes that are also
considered part of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. Indeed, peacekeepers would do
better service by increasing their capacity-building
activities than by carrying out military counter-
terrorism and law enforcement tasks.

Turkey considers the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations to be the most appropriate
forum to negotiate and develop the necessary framework
for United Nations peacekeeping operations, and values
the consensual work of the Committee. The triangular
cooperation and enhanced consultation among the
Security Council, the troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat is the key factor for the
better design, planning and execution of peacekeeping
mandates as well as other features pertaining to the
efficacy of peacekeeping operations.

Before concluding, I pay tribute to all personnel
serving under the United Nations banner - ,particularly
those who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the line
of duty - for their courage and endurance.

