Mr. Mahiga: I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency on behalf of your
country, India. I wish also to thank you, Sir, for giving
me this opportunity to brief members of the Security
Council on the latest developments in the Somalia
peace process. I would also like to thank the Council
for its continued support for the peace process in
Somalia. This is moment of both great challenge and
great opportunity for Somalia and for the international
community.

At this historic juncture, I am particularly
gratified to be addressing the Council once again from
Mogadishu. I have just met today with the leadership
of the Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) and the
Mogadishu business leaders. We discussed how we can
work together and reinforce our shared commitment to
a peaceful and stable Somalia.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia and the
region in general is uppermost in our minds. The scale
of humanitarian suffering is immense. The
international community is mobilizing and trying to
2
meet this remarkable challenge. Recent security
developments in Mogadishu, which have unfolded at
breathtaking speed, have likewise provided us with a
unique opportunity and a set of very grave risks. There
is a chance for real progress if we can mobilize the
support necessary to capitalize on this moment.

On the political side, we have reached a critical
juncture as well. The signing, on 9 June, of the
Kampala Accord by President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
and Sharif Hassan Sheikh Aden, Speaker of the
Transition Federal Parliament, ended the five-month
political stalemate between the executive and the
legislature on the way forward. By deferring the
elections for one year and providing for the
establishment of a road map with clear benchmarks,
timelines and compliance mechanisms for the
implementation of priority transitional tasks, the
Kampala Accord sets us on a new forward trajectory in
the peace process.

I am also encouraged by the timely manner in
which the Accord has been implemented so far. In a
show of statesmanship, former Prime Minister
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed resigned his post on
19 June, 20 days ahead of the deadline provided for in
the Accord. His successor, Prime Minister Abdiweli
Mohamed Ali, was overwhelmingly endorsed by
Parliament on 28 June, five days after his appointment
by President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed.

On 11 July, the Parliament overwhelmingly
endorsed the Kampala Accord, in effect receiving a
three-year extension in conformity with the one-year
extension of the Government. On 20 July, the new
Prime Minister appointed a new, lean Cabinet of
18 ministers. I am heartened to note that all of these
developments have taken place ahead of the timelines
envisaged in the Accord.

This is a critical moment in the Somali peace
process, and for Somalia itself. We are beginning to
undertake the substantive work of implementing the
road map, which outlines the key tasks to be
accomplished in the next 12 months. This phase will
begin with the adoption of the road map at a
consultative meeting on ending the transition in
Somalia, which, after some unfortunate delays, will
now be held from 4 to 6 September.

The preparatory committee, chaired by the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS), is
11-44894

completing its work. This morning, the committee
discussed the details of a meeting here in Mogadishu
chaired by the Prime Minister and held in the presence
of the newly appointed Cabinet. The adoption of the
road map will give the people of Somalia much-needed
ownership of the process and will send a clear signal
that real political progress is finally within our grasp.

The unequivocal support and attention of the
international community in this time of crisis will be
especially crucial in order to solidify and guarantee the
progress already achieved. The international
community must be ready to provide tangible support
to the political, humanitarian and security tracks. At
the same time, we will put in place a high-level regular
initiative to monitor compliance and make it clear to
the TFIs that there will be consequences for
obstruction and inaction.

The recent and unexpected withdrawal of the
Al-Shabaab insurgent group from Mogadishu is
likewise a significant event that presents both great
opportunities and, again, new challenges. For the first
time in years, the TFG has the prospect of exercising
authority over the whole of Mogadishu, which is a
welcome development that, if managed effectively, will
expedite political gains and the delivery of much-
needed humanitarian assistance to the thousands of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) who have travelled
to Mogadishu in a desperate attempt to escape the
devastating famine.

Although Al-Shabaab has described the retreat as
only a tactical manoeuvre, the truth remains that
Al-Shabaab has been compelled to retreat from
Mogadishu. Here I pay tribute to the forces of the TFG
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
for their hard work and sacrifice in pushing back the
insurgents. Al-Shabaab's withdrawal is the culmination
of a number of factors, including the pressure that
those forces have steadily brought to bear on the
insurgents.

But it is vital to highlight here that significant
dangers remain as well. The TFG and AMISOM. both
have limited resources to exploit the opportunity
presented by the withdrawal of Al-Shabaab. Pockets of
Al-Shabaab remain in Mogadishu, the security
situation remains precarious, and the insurgents are
likely to resort to terrorist attacks and guerrilla tactics
targeting the TFG and AMISOM. forces and,
11-44894

unfortunately, even the internally displaced and other
civilians.

The insurgents' sudden withdrawal from
Mogadishu and the rapid spread of famine have
radically changed our planning horizon. Events we had
anticipated coming to pass in a year or 18 months are
happening right now. It is essential, in that regard, for
the TFIs to remain united and coherent, and that they
put in place basic administrative structures and
promote law and order in areas under their control.
Without immediate action to fill this gap, a real danger
exists that the warlords and their militia groups will
move forward to fill the vacuum created by
Al-Shabaab's departure. The TF G should immediately
assume a coordinating role in order to bring local
militia under its authority.

We also must encourage and assist the revival of
economic activities in Mogadishu, especially in the
Bakara market, the beating commercial heart of the
city that, as recently as last week, was under the
control of the insurgents. As I said, I met today with a
group of Somali business leaders and I was very
encouraged by what I heard. They are ready to do their
part, and we should help.

I am pleased to inform the Council that the TFG's
National Security Council met and created a
Mogadishu security plan through which the
Government is defining its priorities, including its
resource requirements. The plan calls for the Somali
Police Force, rather than its military personnel, to
occupy the areas vacated by the insurgents. I call on
the international community to expedite the building of
the capacities of the Somali Police Force to allow this
institution to protect, inter alia, the increasing number
of IDPs in Mogadishu. As Somali police deploy in the
recently recovered areas, we must expedite the
deployment of AMISOM. police personnel and
equipment so that they complement the efforts of the
Somali police in protecting civilians and promoting the
rule of law.

In UNPOS, we are adjusting to respond to the
new situation and to meet such new challenges. We
originally anticipated that Mogadishu would be
stabilized within roughly a year, but we are now
revising our planning to focus on the immediate. We
are now actively planning for an expanded United
Nations presence inside Somalia, rather than the light
footprint that we had envisaged. It is thus critical to the
3

Mission that we secure the logistical support, including
the fast-track construction of permanent facilities, to
pave the way for the deployment of additional staff in
Somalia, especially in Mogadishu. An additional guard
force, under AMISOM, must be dedicated to providing
protection and facilitating movement for United
Nations staff in Mogadishu. It is vital and is an
immediate requirement.

I ask the Council to seriously consider bringing
forward the proposed guard force with the resources
that are available and all that it entails in order to
ensure that AMISOM. can successfully meet those new
challenges and adapt to the new reality on the ground
in Mogadishu.

Central to our strategy will be the augmentation
of AMISOM's capabilities, including personnel,
logistics, mobility, aviation and unexploded ordnance
disposal. The force is now being asked to perform a
series of additional complex tasks, such as the
protection of IDPs, the consolidation of vacated
positions and the facilitation of humanitarian
assistance. The AMISOM. Force Commander, who is
sitting here on my right, faces a dilemma over the
deployment of his forces to a much larger area of
cooperation without the key enablers or the full
complement of Security Council-authorized troops.
Significantly, the additional demands of the
humanitarian community to protect and assist with the
delivery of humanitarian aid also stretch the Mission's
limited resources.

Significant gaps in the United Nations support
package to AMISOM. still exist. The force requires
adequate, predictable and sustainable funding to cover
self-sustainment, which includes the most basic, yet
essential, life-support items and services integral to
supporting all peace operations. I appeal to the Council
to consider expanding the support package for
AMISOM. to cover some of the critical categories of
self-sustainment and to look at the issue of the funding
of contingent-owned equipment.

I am gravely concerned, as we all are, by the
humanitarian tragedy that is unfolding before our eyes.
Nearly half of the Somali population - 3.7 million
people - is now in care and directly at risk due to the
famine. Tens of thousands have already perished. Most
of the vulnerable reside in the south of the country. As
our humanitarian partners predicted, famine is
spreading further in south and central Somalia, and the
other regions are now designated famine zones. In
parts of Lower Shabelle and in the settlements of
internally displaced persons in and around Mogadishu,
more than 13 out of 10,000 children under 5 years of
age die every day as a result of malnutrition and
famine-related diseases. That means that 10 per cent of
children under 5 die every 11 weeks. Those figures are
truly heart-wrenching. I hope that we can collectively
view them as nothing less than a call to immediate
action.

Indeed, it is not too late to act. Every day counts.
I strongly urge members of the Council to appeal to
their own Governments and to the international
community to generously support the humanitarian
relief operation currently under way in Somalia. We
need approximately $1 billion for Somalia, channelled
through our Consolidated Appeals Process, to avert a
further worsening of the emergency. So far, we have
received less than 50 per cent of that sum. Our
humanitarian partners are working tirelessly and stand
ready to further scale up their operations. However, our
efforts must focus on reaching all of those in urgent
need wherever they are in Somalia.

I appeal to all opposition groups in Somalia to lay
down their arms during the peace process and to allow
aid agencies to access all Somalis in dire need of
assistance.

As I have said a number of times, this is an
extraordinary moment for Somalia. There are both
great opportunities for progress and huge risks and
challenges to be overcome. Now is the time for the
international community to demonstrate its
commitment and to step forward and robustly support
the peace process immediately on all fronts. The
Somali people simply cannot wait any longer.

