The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Canada.

(spoke in French)

Since its inception last year, the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA) has
contributed immensely to the establishment and
maintenance of peace and security in the Central African
Republic. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
men and women of MINURCA, as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the outstanding
service they have provided to the United Nations, to the
people of the Central African Republic and to the
international community. Their efforts deserve our highest
praise.

To date, MINURCA has successfully provided vital
assistance in ensuring the security necessary to allow peace
to take root firmly in the Central African Republic. Canada
is pleased to have been part of this Mission. We are
particularly gratified by the crucial role MINURCA played
in the successful conduct of legislative elections late last
year.

However, we have not yet reached our goal. Much has
been achieved over the past year, but many of the security,
economic and political problems facing the country are
still unresolved. The Central African Republic remains
relatively calm and stable, but there is the danger that
neighbouring conflicts may spill over into the Central
African Republic and undo the progress achieved. Many
of the agreed economic and financial reforms have yet to
be implemented. Moreover, there remains another vital
step to be taken: the conduct of presidential elections. The
achievement of free and fair elections will be a concrete
sign of progress in political development and a
reaffirmation of the basic democratic covenant between
the people and the State.

(spoke in English)

The draft resolution before us today reflects these
realities. It comes as a response to the recommendations
of the Secretary-General, which we support and
commend. In particular, we agree with the Secretary-
General's assessment that MINURCA's continued
presence at its current strength and force structure remains
critical to the maintenance of peace and stability in the
Central African Republic. Our View is that MINURCA
will likely remain necessary until the forthcoming
presidential elections. Canada anticipates remaining in
MINURCA until its core objectives are realized.

That said, Canada firmly believes that the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace, economic
recovery and the conduct of free and fair elections lies
not with the United Nations or with MINURCA, but
rather with the Government, the political leaders and the
people of the Central African Republic. We urge both the
Mouvance Presidentielle and the opposition parties to
cooperate closely to achieve the resumption of the kind of
constructive political dialogue which is indispensable to
continuing stability in the Central African Republic.

We expect President Patasse to honour his
commitments to comply fully with the Bangui
Agreements and the National Reconciliation Pact and to
translate these commitments into concrete measures. The
success, the future mandate and the ongoing presence of
MINURCA are closely linked to the fulfilment of these
undertakings, as clearly reflected in the draft resolution
before us today. In this regard, we look forward to
receiving the periodic reports of the Secretary-General.

We believe that the continued presence of
MINURCA is a tangible demonstration of the
commitment of the United Nations and the international
community to peace and security in Africa. Canada, as a

 

member of the Security Council and of the group of
Friends of the Central African Republic, as well as a troop
contributor to MINURCA, is proud to be a part of this
effort.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/ 1999/ 122.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
1230 (1999).

The Security Council has thus concluded the voting
procedure.

(spoke in French)

The representative of the Central African Republic has
asked to speak. I give him the floor.


