Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding. We commend Ambassador
Mufioz, Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for introducing the third annual report of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), contained in
document S/2009/444, before the Council this
morning.

We also express our sincere appreciation to the
Permanent Representatives of Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, Switzerland and El Salvador for their good
work in chairing the respective country-specific
configurations and in gathering the lessons learned.

We welcome the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which reflects the activities of the
Commission for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June
2009. We commend the Commission's work. The
Peacebuilding Commission is the central
intergovernmental advisory body that, along with the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office, fills an important gap in the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture.

We are encouraged to see that the PBC has
continued to combine and deepen its linkage to the
three principal organs of the United Nations - the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. We also appreciate the
Commission's continued efforts towards expanding
partnerships with different national, regional and
international actors, including United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, as well as international
financial institutions, regional organizations, the
private sector and civil society.

My delegation would like to reiterate its
principled position on the following issues.

First, the Peacebuilding Commission should have
the central role in post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconciliation processes. Secondly, post-conflict
societies must take charge of their own destiny, that is,
the Commission's work should be based on national
ownership and national priorities. Thirdly, a more rapid
and flexible funding mechanism is necessary for
effective peacebuilding efforts. Finally, women's
involvement and empowerment, in all stages, is a
critical element for any successful peacebuilding
endeavour.

We welcome the revised terms of references of
the Peacebuilding Fund. My delegation is particularly
pleased to see the more flexible and responsive nature
of the Fund, including the role it plays in the context of
those terms of reference for the Commission in
advising the Secretary-General on the selection of
countries eligible for consideration for funding.

We commend the Secretary-Generals' efforts in
producing a comprehensive report on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of the conflict, contained in
document S/2009/304. We are encouraged to see the
Commission's advisory role in shaping the report,
including incorporation of views of the Member States,
which, in effect, makes it more comprehensive and
inclusive.

The challenges that post-conflict countries face in
the immediate aftermath of conflict - defined as the
first two years after the main conflict in a country has
ended - cannot be overstated. We could not agree
more with the Secretary-General when he articulates
the following in his report: the need for strengthening
national ownership of the peacebuilding process and
capacity development from the outset; the necessity of
rationalizing the capacity of the United Nations system
to provide knowledge, expertise and deployable
personnel to meet the most urgent peacebuilding needs
together with partners who have a comparative
advantage in particular areas; and the need for working
with Member States to enhance the speed, alignment,
flexibility and risk-tolerance of funding mechanisms.

In the context of comparative advantage in
particular areas, my delegation would like to highlight
the fact that, being one of the major troop-contributing
countries for more than two decades and currently the
largest police-contributing country, Bangladesh is
uniquely positioned to assist in identifying and drawing
on the most relevant capacity requirements on the
ground in post-conflict countries. For example,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and security sector reform are recognized
as two key elements in the peacebuilding process.
However, those two elements are also included in the
mandates of peacekeeping missions. Thus, any
experience gained and lessons learned in peacekeeping
operations could significantly assist and complement
the Peacebuilding Commission's work. In this regard,
we would like to recall the penultimate paragraph of
the Security Council's presidential statement of 5
August 2009 (S/PRST/2009/24), which underscores the
importance of introducing peacebuilding elements in
peacekeeping operations before a transfer to the
Peacebuilding Commission, which, in reality, is yet to
be translated into reality in any country-specific
context. My delegation therefore emphasizes the need
for strong synergy between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding mandates.

We further take note of the Secretary-General's
recommendation to broaden and deepen the pool of
civilian experts with a view to strengthening United
Nations capacities concerning peacebuilding activities
on the ground. In this regard, my delegation is willing
to engage in Commission's future work, as outlined in
paragraph 86 of the third report, aiming to analyse how
the United Nations and the international community
can help to broaden and deepen the pool of civilian
experts and volunteers for peacebuilding, giving
particular attention to mobilizing more capacities from
developing countries, especially women.

In line with Security Council resolution 1889
(2009), we strongly emphasize the need for the full,
equal and effective participation of women at all stages
of peacebuilding. We further underscore the key role
women can play in re-establishing the fabric of a
recovering society by contributing to the reintegration
of ex-combatants into the family, including post-
conflict reconstruction activities. We would also like to
highlight the need for women's involvement in the
development and implementation of post-conflict
strategies in order to take their perspectives and needs
into account in the peacebuilding process. My
delegation looks forward to becoming engaged in the
future debate concerning women's participation and
inclusion in peacebuilding and planning in the
aftermath of conflict.

We further recognize that civil society and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) can
significantly contribute to the process of achieving
sustainable economic growth leading to lasting peace
and development in post-conflict countries.
Bangladesh, home to world's largest non-governmental
organization and microcredit enterprises, is best placed
to offer to share best practices with regard to the role
of NGOs, in partnership with the public authorities, in
nation-building endeavours. We would further like to
refer to our post-liberation experiences, where we have
developed and learned the importance of domestic
initiatives such as microcredit to address poverty
through, inter alia, capacity-building, self-employment
and women's empowerment.

In this context, I am happy to note that a leading
non-governmental organization based in Bangladesh -
BRAC, which is the largest NGO in Bangladesh and
probably in the world in terms of its population
coverage, with its wide-ranging operations in poverty
alleviation, empowerment of the poor, health,
education including non-formal education, community
development, agriculture and microfinance
development projects - has recently begun to help
residents of Kroo Bay and other communities in Sierra
Leone and, inter alia, in other countries in Africa.

Countries emerging from conflicts need to
consolidate democracy as a step forward; at times they
require national identification cards to help the
Government and the election commission to prepare
non-controversial, transparent and accurate voter lists.
Bangladesh has the experience and expertise in issuing
nearly 90 million national identification cards and
preparing voter lists in recent years and we stand ready
to share our knowledge and capability with post-
conflict countries.

The 2010 review of the Commission's founding
resolutions will provide a good opportunity to take
stock of achievements and remaining challenges,
including charting the future role of the Commission in
support of an expanding United Nations peacebuilding
agenda and enhancing its support to countries emerging
from conflict. We look forward to working in close
collaboration with all in that regard.

In conclusion, may I say that Bangladesh's
commitment to peace and security in post-conflict
countries has a deeply rooted emotional basis. Given
that Bangladeshi peacekeepers, while serving in United
Nations peacekeeping operations in those countries,
often under very difficult situations, were able to
establish strong bonding with ordinary people, thus
gaining their confidence and, more important, their
hearts. We would not and cannot therefore shy away
from any efforts which aim at ensuring the overall
well-being ofthe people of post-conflict societies.

