Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the
outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. We hail your wisdom and your determination,
which have enabled States Members of the United Nations
to state their views at this open meeting on a most
important item that goes to the very core of the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Council is meeting today to discuss the repression and
aggression to which the Palestinian people are
subjected not only in the territories occupied in 1967
but also in those occupied in 1948. That repression and
aggression are blatant violations of international law,
of international humanitarian law and of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949.

The desecration by the perpetrator of the Sabra
and Shatila massacres, the terrorist Ariel Sharon, of the
holy Al-Haram Al-Sharif on 28 September 2000, and
the subsequent use by the Zionist occupation forces of
their military machine, including tanks, helicopters and
missiles, against Palestinian civilians in order to
suppress Palestinian anger, have thus far caused the
death of more than 60 martyrs, among them the child
Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra - whose name means
"pearl", and who is indeed a pearl among martyrs -
and they have caused the wounding of more than 2,000
others. This proves the aggressive nature of the Zionist
entity and presents the international community and the
United Nations with a genuine challenge. Can the
international community, this time, defend what is
right? Can it avenge those who have suffered and
punish those who have wronged them?

Some previous speakers have expressed the hope
that the Security Council would adopt the measures
necessary to put an end to the injustice inflicted upon
the Palestinians by the forces of occupation and that
the Council would hold the criminals responsible.
Unfortunately, the facts would suggest that those
speakers will be disappointed; such action will be
impossible because of the balance of power that has
obtained in the Security Council ever since its
establishment, and because the dominant Power in the
Council - the United States of America - extends all
possible support and protection to that iniquitous
entity, Israel, and provides it with all means of
destruction, including nuclear weapons. It also gives its
blessing to that entity's aggression against Arab States.
That unlimited support to Israel began with its
establishment 52 years ago, and it will continue so long
as the Security Council reflects the interests of the
Power that dominates and controls it.

We say this not to discourage honourable
members of the Council or to discourage other States
Members of the United Nations which, in their statements
yesterday and today, have expressed their very strong
commitment to the principles of the Charter and their
genuine wish to put an end to the injustice inflicted
upon the Palestinians and to the Arab nation. To the
contrary, the present situation should provide an
additional incentive to them all to study the core of the
matter and seriously to seek radical solutions that
would restore the rights of those who rightfully possess
them.

The problem is not how we can push the
Palestinians into unequal negotiations with the forces
of occupation, forces which will certainly not restore
their rights to them. What is needed is to study the core
of the problem in order to find the appropriate
solutions. The problem started in 1917, when a Briton
named Balfour promised another Briton named
Rothschild the establishment in Palestine of a national
homeland for Rothschild and for other extremists like
him. The problem is the military occupation of the
Palestinian territory and the flow of adventurers into
that land from Europe and the rest of the world under
the pretext that it is a land without a people. The
problem is the repeated acts of aggression perpetrated
by that usurping entity against the Arab States and its
occupation of the Arab territories, including the
occupied Arab Golan. The problem resides in the
tragedy of a people under occupation against whom all
forms of repression are being practised. The problem is
the suffering of more than 4 million Palestinian
refugees who were pushed out of their land and who
look back upon it as their homeland; they have the full
right to return to it. The problem is in the Zionist
creed- a racist, expansionist, arrogant and hateful
creed. The problem resides in the threat to the sites
held sacred by a billion Muslims and a billion
Christians.

Palestine is part of the Arab nation, one of the
oldest and noblest nations a nation on whose land
religions and cultures have coexisted and which has
given birth to one of the oldest and most noble
civilizations in history. It is a nation that has a
tremendous capacity to face challenges and greed, and
to prevail over invaders, such as the Zionist entity, as it
did once against the Moguls and the Crusaders. We
expect the international community to stand by that
nation in its just battle.

