Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
Senegalese delegation for convening this important
debate. Ijoin others in thanking the briefers. I warmly
congratulate Mr. Yousef bin Ahmad Al-Othaimeen on
his election as Secretary General of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC). The United Kingdom looks
forward to working with him and with OIC.

As the representative body of 57 Muslim-majority
States, OIC speaks with a unique authority on the issues
facing the Islamic world, so I am glad that OIC's voice
is being heard in the Chamber today. One such issue
facing OIC's members - indeed, all Members of the
United Nations - is the growing threat of extremist
ideologies and violent extremism. Sadly, as we in
the Council know only too well, that threat affects
Muslim-majority States in a truly disproportionate
way, including Iraq, Syria, Libya and many other
places. Put simply and starkly, far more Muslim men,
women and children have lost their lives at the hands of
groups like A1-Shabaab and Da'esh than people of any
other faith or religion. The fact that those evil groups
claim to represent Islam only makes that reality even
more sickening. The United Kingdom is clear that we
must tackle violent extremism in all its forms, whether
it be radical Islam or neo-Nazism. OIC States are
key partners in that fight, and I want to set out today
three ways in which our cooperation can help counter
those ideologies.

First, it is no coincidence that 18 members of OIC
are also members of the Global Coalition Against
Da'esh. Among them are our colleagues from Egypt.
I want to pay tribute to the work of those two great
Egyptian institutions, Al-Azhar and Dar Al-Ifta. Those
beacons of Islamic thinking help provide a narrative
of tolerance that counters the hate preached by the
likes of Da'esh. The United Kingdom is committed to
helping spread that narrative and showing the reality
of the lies of Da'esh. That is why we are hosting the
Coalition's Strategic Communication Cell in London. It
draws on the expertise of Coalition members, including
our partners from the United Arab Emirates, to help
counter the misrepresentation of Islam and its values
by Da'esh.

Countering the ideology is partly about offering
a competing narrative, but it is also about delivering
consequences to those who join Da'esh and supporting
survivors of their crimes by giving them a voice and
ending impunity. That is why the Foreign Secretary
of the United Kingdom launched a campaign to bring
Da'esh to justice, with the Foreign Ministers of Iraq
and Belgium on 13 September, the opening date of the
new session of the General Assembly. Holding Da'esh
accountable is a top priority for the United Kingdom
and we are seeking United Nations action to preserve
evidence of the crimes of Da'esh as a first step to
that end.

My second point is that OIC States have a valuable
role to play in building an even stronger consensus
around the work of the United Nations to prevent violent
extremism. Together, we can make the United Nations
system better at understanding and tackling the root
causes of terrorism, including by addressing violent
extremism narratives. The United Nations is stepping
up in that regard. Last June, the General Assembly
directed the United Nations system to implement the
relevant recommendations of the Secretary-General's
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism and
encouraged States to do the same. We all now need to
work to turn those concepts into action. That means
mobilizing the correct resources and expertise in order
to enable United Nations entities to devise a strategic
approach. It also means Member States developing
national action plans on preventing violent extremism
and helping other Member States do the same.

Thirdly and finally, we need to recognize that
countering extremist ideologies is not always about the
United Nations or about fighting Da'esh. Sometimes it
is about working together to create opportunities that
provide an alternative to false ideologies. For example,
the Islamic Development Bank serves the economic
development needs of the 57 OIC countries, with
annual commitments totaling well over $10 billion. All
OIC States can use those funds to finance projects that
help improve the lives of people living in OIC States.
The United Kingdom is proud to be helping that effort.
Our collaboration can be seen in the $25-million Arab
Women's Enterprise Fund, which will create more jobs
for women. It is also seen in the $9 billion that the Bank
committed at the London Conference on Syria.

In closing, we look forward to our collaboration
with OIC strengthening further. Whether it be through
the United Nations, the Coalition against Da'esh or the
Islamic Development Bank, it is clear that OIC has a
vital role to play in countering the dangerous ideologies
that threaten international peace and security.

