Mr. Reuben (Israel): Allow me to commend you,
Sir, for your able stewardship of the Security Council
this month. In my first speech as Israel's Ambassador
to the United Nations, I appear before you today and
state the profound and enduring wish of my nation to
establish peace with the Palestinians: a peace based on
security and mutual recognition; a peace that will
ensure prosperity for our two peoples.

Peace can only be achieved through direct
negotiations and compromise from both sides. Israel
has continued to show that it is willing to take bold
measures and make difficult decisions in pursuit of
peace. To this end, Israel helped to encourage
impressive growth in the Palestinian economy,
removing hundreds of roadblocks and checkpoints in
the West Bank. We took this action despite legitimate
security concerns and continued terrorism. With a
heavy heart, Israel put in place a self-imposed and
unprecedented lO-month moratorium on settlement
construction.

We are hopeful that the Palestinians will take the
measures necessary for peace. After refusing to engage
in direct negotiations for nine months during the
moratorium, the Palestinians - who at first belittled
the gesture - now demand its extension as a
precondition for continuing talks. Settlements are one
of many issues that need to be resolved in final status
negotiations. History has shown that they do not stand
in the way of making peace - as seen by peace
agreements that were achieved with Egypt and Jordan.
Furthermore, when Israel dismantled all of its
settlements in the Gaza Strip, it received terrorism and
rocket fire on towns and communities in return.

Israel welcomes the extremely important efforts
of the United States Administration to promote peace
and security in the region. In this regard, the United
States is closely engaged with Israel and other parties
to get direct talks back on track.

In looking for a way forward, we must build any
future agreement on the principles of mutual
recognition and security. A request that Israel recognize
a Palestinian State as the nation-State of the Palestinian
people must be met with an acknowledgement that
Israel is the nation-State of the Jewish people. After
generations of conflict, mutual recognition will be
essential in overcoming a long history of incitement,
combating terrorism and establishing peaceful
coexistence between our two peoples. Any peace
agreement must also clearly address Israel's security
concerns with strong arrangements in that field.

The diverse and dangerous threats facing Israel
remain significant. With support from the Iranian and
Syrian regimes, extremist terrorist organizations in the
region continue to rearm and stage attacks on Israeli
civilians. The Hamas-controlled Gaza Strip remains an
epicentre for terror and a launching ground for
continuous rocket attacks against Israel. In Lebanon,
the Hizbullah terrorist organization serves as a constant
obstacle to peace and security for all in the region.

Establishing peace will require more than
declarations or signatures on a piece of paper; it will
necessitate concrete actions on the ground. With this in
mind, the wider Arab world must also show Israelis
and people around the globe that its declarations of
peace will extend beyond words and will translate into
deeds.

This body will discuss in detail the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) in a few
weeks, but in advance of that discussion I would like to
share a few thoughts about the continued challenges
emanating from Lebanon, where radical forces
continue to pose a threat to stability in the region. As
we approach the upcoming report on resolution 1701
(2006), it remains clear that the Hizbullah terrorist
organization continues to build up its military
capabilities and armaments, acquiring sophisticated
weaponry and missiles from its Iranian and Syrian
patrons.

Hizbullah's deadly rearmament endangers
Lebanon itself, as well as the wider Middle East. This
terrorist organization continues to deploy weapons and
build its military infrastructure throughout the civilian
villages of southern Lebanon, adjacent to schools,
hospitals, houses of worship and residential buildings.

Evidence of this phenomenon can be found in a
series of explosions of Hizbullah weapons caches south
of the Litani River over the past 15 months. The last
such explosion took place in the Lebanese village of
Shehabiyya on 3 September. Unfortunately, despite
having real-time information about all of these
incidents, the Lebanese Armed Forces did not intervene
in a timely or robust manner. Furthermore, there is
clear proof that Hizbullah removed evidence from all
of those sites.

Hizbullah's provocations and continued
rearmament must not go unanswered by this Council -
which has repeatedly and clearly stipulated that this
terrorist organization must disarm and disband - as
they comprise a key issue addressed in resolution 1701
(2006).

We also call on the Syrian Government to refrain
from engaging in actions that destabilize the region.
While Syria claims to seek peace, it continues to
support terror. There are numerous indications that the
Syrian regime is hosting Hizbullah training camps
within its territory, including locations where
operatives receive training on missiles and other
weapons. This reflects just the tip of the iceberg in
terms of Syria's extensive support for terrorism in the
region. If Syria genuinely wants to embrace the full
spirit of peace, it must completely abandon its support
for terror.

Let me turn to the greatest danger facing the
Middle East and the world: Iran. The visit last week of
Iran's President to Lebanon underscores the
destabilizing impact of that extremist regime on our
region. Iran's President is a leader who denies the
Holocaust, promotes conspiracy theories about the
11 September terrorist attacks and calls for Israel to be
wiped off the map; he only advances the causes of
destruction and instability.

His regime's support provides a lifeline to the
terrorist organizations of Hamas, Islamic Jihad, and
Hizbullah, which could not exist without Iran. Relying
on those proxies, Iran seeks to foil any movement
toward rapprochement between Israel and the
Palestinians, as well as other parties in the region.
Thus, in searching for a durable agreement with the
Palestinians we must also confront this threat with firm
resolve.

I would like to note that, while Iran's President
and his extremist allies seek to impose fear, bloodshed
and jihad on the population of Lebanon, there are many
other voices in the region. An open letter to President
Ahmadinejad that was recently published in the
Lebanese media offers an example of one such voice.
Let me read to the Council a quote from this letter:

"

. . you are attempting to interfere, just like
others that came before you, in our affairs, where
foreign interference was just to use Lebanon
internally; the big slogans and the good intentions
could not decorate or block the actual truth of this

use.

Even more alarming than its continued support of
terror is Iran's continued pursuit of nuclear weapons
capabilities. Such behaviour endangers not only our
region or merely a specific group of countries. It
endangers us all and must continue to be met by strong
and effective action.

My comments today would not be complete
without expressing our ongoing deep concern that for
more than four years our kidnapped soldier, Gilad
Shalit, has remained deprived of his most basic human
rights, including any visit from the Red Cross. Israel
expects the international community to do all in its
power and more than has been done thus far, to bring
about his swift release.
