Mr. Kutesa (Uganda): On behalf of my
delegation and on my own behalf, I would like to
congratulate the People's Republic of China on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of April 2006.

Members will recall that, during the Security
Council debate in January 2006 on the situation in the
Great Lakes region, I had an opportunity to discuss the
question of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) terrorist
organization as a threat to regional peace and security
in northern Uganda, the southern Sudan and the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also informed the
Council of my Government's decision to establish a
high-level joint country coordination and monitoring
mechanism between the Government of Uganda, the
United Nations, core partner countries and
representatives of non-governmental organizations to
support the Government's strategy and plan of action
to address the humanitarian situation and the
resettlement of internally displaced persons in northern
Uganda.

My colleague, Mr. Amama Mbabazi, will address
the question of the LRA terrorist organization as a
regional threat to peace and security in northern
Uganda, the southern Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. My remarks will therefore
focus on briefing Council members on the joint
monitoring committee and the emergency plan for
humanitarian intervention in LRA-affected areas of
northern Uganda, which will be launched in Kampala
by President Museveni on 26 April.

The Government of Uganda has adopted a high-
level, Government-led joint country coordination and
monitoring mechanism and an emergency action plan
to deal with five thematic issues. Those issues include
cessation of hostilities and regional security; the
enhancement of protection of the civilian population;
increased humanitarian assistance to internally
displaced persons; peacebuilding and reconciliation;
and the return and resettlement of internally displaced
persons. The Government also hopes to finalize, by
August 2006, a comprehensive long-term peace,
recovery and development plan for northern Uganda.

The joint country coordination and monitoring
mechanism will consist of the following components.

First, a joint monitoring committee, chaired by
the Prime Minister of Uganda, will meet once a month
to take critical decisions and to coordinate action for
the emergency humanitarian plan. That will therefore
be a small and effective body of about 20
representative members from Government, the United
Nations and civil society organizations.

Secondly, there will be two subcommittees on
peacebuilding and reconstruction and on protection,
humanitarian assistance and the return of internally
displaced persons. The subcommittees, reflecting the
strengthening of existing coordination structures, will
be comprised of Government institutions and partners
in relevant areas to undertake coordination and
implementation work and to report to the joint
monitoring committee.

Thirdly, there will be a strengthened secretariat in
the office of the Prime Minister, with adequate staffing
and resources to support the joint monitoring
committee and its subcommittees.
The joint monitoring committee on the LRA-
affected northern areas will be tasked with, inter alia,
identifying, discussing and monitoring issues related to
the emergency action plan for humanitarian
intervention in LRA-affected areas; providing advice to
Government, key partners and other stakeholders on
action areas; establishing benchmarks and mobilizing
resources needed for the implementation of the
emergency humanitarian action plan; and ensuring that
decisions taken by the joint monitoring committee are
implemented by relevant ministries and institutions.

The joint monitoring committee will be
expected to ensure the timely implementation of the
emergency action plan designed to improve the
humanitarian situation facing internally displaced
persons (IDPs) through: peacebuilding and monitoring
of reconciliation processes at individual, community
and national levels; enhanced protection of the IDP
population; improving conditions for IDPs through
provision of basic social services and by lowering
morbidity and mortality rates; and strong support for
return and reintegration of IDPs.

As shown in the matrix of the emergency action
plan for humanitarian interventions for LRA-affected
northern Uganda, copies of which have been
circulated, each priority area indicates key actions,
expected results and relevant institutions and
coordination mechanisms. As the Council will notice,
the matrix agreed upon in Kampala between the
Government, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the core group countries on
12 April 2006, reflects general benchmarks. This is
because concrete actions and technical indications and
benchmarks will be worked out in the appropriate
sectoral Government bodies and coordination groups
within 30 days. It is expected, for example, that
benchmarks on the reduction of mortality rates for
IDPs will be worked out by the joint health task force
composed of the Ministry of Health, the World Health
Organization (WHO) and the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF); the technical benchmarks
on peace and reconciliation will be worked out in the
amnesty working group; etcetera.

The Government of Uganda has also, in
consultation with United Nations and the core group
partners, established a small regional security group to
deal with the issue of the LRA terrorist organization.
The security group will focus on, inter alia: a joint
regional military mechanism involving Uganda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan as
well as the United Nations Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) to disarm the
LRA based in southern Sudan and in Garamba National
Park in the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
facilitating and cooperation with the International
Criminal Court to execute the warrants of arrest against
the LRA leadership; and consolidation and promotion
of dialogue between the Government of Uganda and
middle-level LRA commanders to ensure a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in northern Uganda.

I wish to inform the Council that the Government
of Uganda is currently working with development
partners on a comprehensive peace, recovery and
development strategy for northern Uganda. The
Government plan of action on northern Uganda
includes the following elements. The first is launching
and operationalizing the high-level Government-led
joint mechanism committee and the emergency plan for
humanitarian intervention in LRA-affected areas of
northern Uganda. The second is finalizing the writing
and adoption of the recovery development programme
as well as initiating its implementation. The
Government and all agencies will use the recovery
development programme as an entry point for
supporting the attainment of the medium- and long-
term objectives of peace, recovery, post-conflict
reconstruction and development. The ongoing
programmes such as the national IDP policy and the
Northern Uganda Social Action Fund will be integrated
into the recovery development programme.

The third element involves arranging a
pledging/donor conference on the recovery and
development plan for northern Uganda. The fourth is a
Government commitment to increasing funding for
programmes and projects for northern Uganda through
the national budget and other national resources.
Indeed, there are arrangements to provide a specific
budgetary allocation to northern Uganda within the
medium-term expenditure framework for fiscal years
2006-2007 and 2008-2009. The fifth element of the
plan involves increasing the presence of civilian
policing and strengthening the civilian and transitional
justice systems in northern Uganda, and the sixth
strengthening the capacity of the Uganda Peoples'
Defence Force to wipe out the remnants of the LRA
and protect the IDP camps and resettlement areas in
northern Uganda.

The seventh element relates to allowing the
voluntary return of IDPs through accelerated IDP camp
decongestion, and in other ways, so as to ensure the
security of people and property, that is, to strengthen
justice, law and order. The eighth element is improving
service delivery, thereby reducing mortality and
morbidity challenges, illiteracy, etcetera, and the final
element involves strengthening Government leadership
in the delivery of social services through capacity-
building and through instituting mechanisms for
motivation and retention of professional staff by local
governments in the affected areas.

Before concluding my remarks on the
humanitarian situation in northern Uganda, I wish to
make a comment on the report by a number of non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) operating in
northern Uganda entitled "Counting the cost: Twenty
years of war in northern Uganda", which was released
to coincide with Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland's visit to my country in early April 2006.
There is no question that, due to the threats from LRA
activities, the humanitarian situation facing the IDPs in
northern Uganda is unacceptable. However, it is
equally unacceptable that certain international NGOs
should seek to exploit the plight of the IDPs for self-
serving advocacy and political and resource-
mobilization agendas. The report talks about a litany of
failures by my Government and the international
community to protect civilians in IDP camps and to
peacefully resolve the LRA conflict. It alleges that
there are more deaths in northern Uganda today than
there are in Iraq.

First, the report fails to appreciate, as
Mr. Egeland noted during his recent visit to the region,
that there have been improvements in some areas of
northern Uganda due to the joint efforts by the
Government and our development partners to
implement humanitarian response measures to deliver
basic social services such as health, education, water
and sanitation. For example, 40 to 60 per cent of IDPs
in the Teso and Lango subregions have been resettled.
The number of children "night commuters" in Gulu
town has dropped from 40,000 to 6,300, due to the
prevailing peace in the district. As security around IDP
camps has improved, more people have been
decongested to parish levels, allowing for better
provision of social services, more access to land for
productivity and less reliance on food handouts.
Indeed, immunization levels stand at over 90 per cent;
bed net coverage against malaria stands at 30 per cent;
malnutrition has been reduced by 50 per cent; and the
rehabilitation of many health centres has been
undertaken.

Secondly, the NGOs' report used figures from a
flawed draft survey commissioned by the Ministry of
Health, UNICEF and WHO on mortality rates in IDP
camps in 2005. The survey figures of 1.54 deaths per
10,000 persons per day in north-central Uganda fails to
take into account the sub-Saharan Africa average of a
normal l.l deaths per 10,000 persons per day. The
technical team did not use scientific research
methodology. A credible team of Ministry of Health,
WHO and UNICEF officials has been established to
review the report to provide more accurate baseline
data on mortality rates in IDP camps.

Thirdly, the Uganda People's Defence Force has
ensured not only that the 232 internally displaced
persons camps have been guarded but that they have
also been receiving relief supplies. This means that the
Force has kept the routes open for the supply of relief
in addition to hunting the terrorists in the bushes of
northern Uganda or southern Sudan.

It is my sincere hope that the international
community will give the necessary support to the joint
monitoring committee and the emergency action plan
on humanitarian assistance to LRA-affected areas of
northern Uganda and that the Security Council will
give strong backing to regional efforts to disarm the
LRA and hand over the LRA leadership to the
international community.

With your permission, Mr. President, I would
now like to invite my colleague, Mr. Amama Mbabazi,
Minister of Defence, to make his remarks related to
regional security.

