Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to begin
by congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and express our full
confidence in your leadership to make it a successful
month. I would also like to commend the delegation
of Kazakhstan for a fruitful presidency in January. I
would also like to thank Mr. Martin for his briefing.

When the 51 States that established the United
Nations met in San Francisco in 1945 - and my
country, Lebanon, was one of them - they determined
on behalf of the international community to

"unite their strength to maintain international
peace and security, and to ensure, by the acceptance
of principles and the institution of methods,
that armed force shall not be used, save in the
common interest".

That was 73 years ago. While the principles endure,
the methods and architecture are due for a twenty-first
century update.

The security, economic, political and technological
environment is completely different from that of the
time of the founding of the Organization in the 19405.
The challenges facing the international community
urgently point to the need to improve and reform the
global governance mechanisms. Lebanon has constantly
supported all endeavours aimed at reforming the United
Nations and its main organs, whether the General
Assembly, the Security Council or the Economic and
Social Council. But most importantly, Lebanon supports
the efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Guterres, and
will continue to engage constructively in his initiative
to reform the Secretariat.

Lebanon is a firm believer in the need to enhance
and strengthen the working methods of the Security
Council, rendering it more transparent and efficient. To
that end, my country has constantly supported the work
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, and considers it a step in
the right direction.

As underlined in the President's concept note
(S/2018/66, annex) on the improvements in the
Council's working methods over the last 25 years, there
is a need to do more. Better communication and greater
involvement of Member States, especially concerned
countries, in the decision-making process on issues
related to international peace and security remain the
cornerstone of the priorities of these non-members of
the Security Council. The noticeable improvement in
the quantitative access to information should be coupled
with a qualitative and participatory approach. This will
be a solid path to ensure that the Security Council is
more accessible, transparent and accountable, hence
more democratic. Lebanon is fully confident that the
Kuwaiti chairmanship of the Working Group will prove
decisive and fruitful in that regard.

Lebanon believes that the annual report of the
Council to the General Assembly should be more
analytical, ask difficult questions, draw on lessons
learned and call for common action. We look forward
to seeing, in the coming report, the reasons behind the
crippling effect of vetoes exercised last year on matters
affecting peace and security and leading to further
protracted conflict with massive human cost.
There is also a need for non-Council members to
participate in the closed sessions of the Council when
they are concerned. The Council should also devote
more meetings and field visits for the prevention of
conflict. The relationship between the Council and the
General Assembly should not be considered only in the
context of encroachment, but rather in the framework
of shared responsibility in the widest interpretation of
threats to international peace and security.

The prompt adoption of the Security Council's rules
and procedures and the strengthening of coordination
with other organs, mainly the General Assembly,
remain key elements of a more effective Security
Council - one that can meet the enormous challenges
of the day.

