The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council commends the
Haitian people on the successful completion of
the first round of their electoral process,
congratulates Mr. Rene Garcia Preval on his
election as President, and looks forward to
working with the new Government to help build a
better future for Haiti. This process will give
Haiti a unique opportunity to break with the
violence and political instability of the past. The
Council expresses its full support for the work of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Juan Gabriel
Valdes,

"The Security Council welcomes the
announcement by the Haitian authorities to hold
the second round of parliamentary elections on 21
April 2006, which will allow the prompt
inauguration of the President-elect. The Council
emphasizes that timely municipal and local
elections are also fundamentally important to
complete Haiti's electoral process and to
strengthen its democratic institutions. The
Council urges the Transitional Government of
Haiti and the Provisional Electoral Council, with
the support of the international community, to
continue to ensure that the electoral process is
conducted in a transparent and credible manner.
The Council reiterates its call on all parties to
respect the outcome of the elections, remain
engaged in the political process, and promote
national reconciliation and inclusiveness in order
to reach consensus on the basic policies Haiti
should pursue to bolster its democratic transition.

"The Security Council stresses the need to
ensure a secure and stable environment in Haiti
and expresses its support for MINUSTAH's
continued efforts to assist the Haitian authorities
in that respect. The Council, in that regard,
encourages all troop- and police-contributing
countries to remain engaged in MINUSTAH. The
Council reaffirms that the establishment of the
rule of law, including the protection of human
rights, institutional capacity-building, and rapid
progress on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration will be crucial to Haiti's future over
the next few years. To this end, the sustained
the

political will and the common strategic vision of
the Haitian authorities and the international
community are essential. In this context, the
Council underlines the urgent need to proceed
with a thorough and comprehensive reform of the
Haitian national police in line with its resolution
1608 (2005), as well as concurrent justice reform.

"The Security Council is aware that
sustainable development in Haiti remains
essential to the stability of the country. In that
regard, the Council reiterates the need for the
quick implementation of highly visible and
labour-intensive projects that help to create jobs
and deliver basic social services. Recognizing
progress already made in donor efforts, the
Council calls on donors and relevant stakeholders
to work with the new Government through the
Interim Cooperation Framework to reassess
assistance priorities in a targeted way and to work
in close coordination, as appropriate, with
MINUSTAH. The Council reiterates its
willingness to cooperate with the newly elected
authorities in order to address the long-term
challenges facing Haiti."

That statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/13.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.15 pm.
