Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and the
Austrian delegation for your work in the Council
presidency for the month of November. The presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the initiative to
convene this debate highlight the importance of the
subject matter of this meeting. I also thank the
Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and the Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their valuable
presentations.

Ten years after the Security Council began to
address the issue of the protection of civilians in
conflict, the contributions of this organ have been
significant. The adoption of four resolutions and
several presidential statements, as well as the aide-
memoire agreed upon as a guide for the protection of
civilians, are noteworthy advances. This meeting of the
Council therefore represents a useful opportunity to
evaluate such progress and explore other alternatives
that contribute to the protection of the civilian
population in situations of conflict or violence.

Through its democratic security policy, the
Government of Colombia has consolidated its activities
to strengthen and guarantee the rule of law throughout
the national territory. The implementation of this
policy has allowed us to establish more stable
conditions for the protection of Colombians and their
enjoyment of their rights.
Through this effort, the criminality and violence
indicators have fallen to levels not experienced in
many years. In 2002, the country had no police
protection in vast areas of its territory. The presence of
the national police and the military forces has resulted
in a dramatic drop in the violence indicators. Since that
year, homicides have fallen by 44 per cent, extortive
kidnappings by 88 per cent, the number of massacre
victims by 96 per cent, and terrorist attacks by 79 per
cent. Today, the homicide figures are the lowest they
have been in 22 years. Extortive kidnappings have
reached their lowest level in the last decades.

The demobilization of more than 52,000 armed
men also reflects the effectiveness of the policy. More
people are demobilized every day than are captured,
and more are captured than killed. The State seeks
above all to defend life and has the fundamental
objective of ensuring better conditions for the entire
civilian population.

Colombia is guided by the basic premise that the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
falls to the State. And each State may turn to the
appropriate international cooperation mechanisms,
depending to its priorities. In this context, the role of
the United Nations and the international community is
to support national protection efforts.

That primary responsibility and the role of the
States are particularly relevant with respect to
humanitarian assistance in their territories. My country
recognizes in that regard the importance of cooperation
and the facilitation of access to humanitarian
organizations, in accordance with applicable
international law. If humanitarian assistance is to be
reliable and predictable, it must be delivered in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence.

As pointed out in the concept paper circulated to
the Council, the compliance of armed non-State actors
with their obligations towards civilians is of particular
relevance. In this regard, an approach that encompasses
the particular issues and specific circumstances of each
situation is indispensable. Any initiative in this field
must take into account the central role of Governments
and applicable national legislation. In a context of
cooperation, action should seek first to require armed
non-State actors to cease their violent actions against
civilians.

Every year, hundreds of civilian victims
throughout the world - men, women and children -
see their rights and violated and their lives disrupted by
the use of anti-personnel mines. Colombia will have
the honour to host the Second Review Conference of
the Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction, which
will take place in the city of Cartagena from
29 November to 4 December.

The action plan to be adopted in Cartagena will
be an opportunity to make the strengthening and
development of the Convention a shared aim of
Governments, international organizations and civil
society. The goals achieved and the remaining
challenges to the implementation of the Ottawa
Convention should encourage the international
community to continue pursuing the higher goal of
achieving a world free of anti-personnel mines. The
fight against this scourge is a direct contribution to
actions in favour of the civilian population and should
hence be supported with a high level of commitment
and political will.

The implementation of effective controls to the
illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons is also
indispensable. My country will continue to promote
this issue in the General Assembly, and expects the
Security Council to promote the adoption of effective
controls in this area. The illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons threatens civilian security, increases
crime and causes the death or permanent disability of
thousands of people. Without decisive action against
this illicit trade, initiatives to protect civilians may be
incomplete and ineffective.

The Government of Colombia reaffirms its
condemnation of any action aimed against civilians.
Their protection and strict compliance with
international humanitarian law and other relevant
international norms are matters of absolute priority that
will continue to guide my country's policies.

