Mr. Ladsous (Spoke in French): In two months, we
will mark the twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan
genocide, an event that was horrible beyond words,
devastating a nation, a region and the world's collective
conscience. But that tragedy also contributed to shaping
the United Nations and the international community.

Today's debate is evidence of both how much has
changed and how much remains unchanged. Perhaps
never before in history have world leaders directed such
focused attention on the protection of the defenceless.
Yet, all too often, we continue to see civilians' rights
violated during conflict. From South Sudan to Syria to
the Central African Republic, countless men, women
and children are caught in the crossfire, displaced by
conflict and even targeted because of their religion,
political affiliation or ethnicity.
But it must be acknowledged that lessons have
been learned from past experiences, and that nowhere
are they more evident than in the field of peacekeeping.
Today, it must be emphasized that no less than 95 per
cent of peacekeepers work in missions mandated by
the Security Council specifically to protect civilians.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations has
worked diligently to clarify operational guidelines
in that important area, which forms the core of many
mandates - nine, to be precise.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
peacekeepers have utilized a clear and robust mandate
to respond to the perpetrators of attacks on civilians.
In that respect, I believe that the November incident
involving the surrender of the Mouvement du 23 mars
testifies to the effectiveness of such work.

Over the years, the Department has made a
determined effort to develop a consistent operational
concept on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping,
based on a comprehensive, holistic approach and
drawing on the full range of the possible activities of a
United Nations mission aimed at enhancing protection.
The Council's clear intent and, importantly, the
consensus of troop- and police-contributing countries
together are of major importance. Protection crises are
never times for doubt. In my opinion, it is crucial, in
terms of daily operations, that the expectations agreed
to by all actors be expressed as precisely as possible.

Last month, the Council faced a very grave decision
when violence erupted in South Sudan. I believe that
the Council took decisive action, increasing the troop
strength of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
by authorizing significant reinforcements. The Mission
has met the challenge, providing what I consider to
be unprecedented protection and opening its doors to
increasing numbers of displaced persons, amounting
now to 85,000 civilians.

Yet it must be acknowledged that, despite
burdening the Mission's human and material resources,
hundreds of thousands of other South Sudanese remain
at risk. Clearly, our soldiers cannot impose peace upon
the parties to that conflict, and resolving protection
challenges ultimately requires political solutions.
Peacekeeping is fundamentally a part of those political
solutions.

Today, virtually all of our missions not only
incorporate civilian expertise in political affairs, human
rights, the rule of law, along with, of course, military
and police officers, but many are also integrated with
our humanitarian partners. In Mali, our peacekeepers
are supporting a delicate political process aimed
at establishing an inclusive Government. In Haiti,
Liberia and C6te d'Ivoire, our peacekeeping missions
are supporting and strengthening the respective
Governments' capacities to assume their protection
responsibilities.

(spoke in English)

Supporting host Governments in meeting those
protection responsibilities lies at the heart of modern
peacekeeping. It is therefore no coincidence that the
human rights due-diligence policy grew out of the work
of peacekeepers and, more specifically, their work in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo several years
back. While our troops may need to stand against rogue
Government elements in order to protect civilians,
peacekeeping is viable, ultimately, only with the consent
of the host Government. The protection of civilians by
United Nations peacekeepers should therefore never be
confused with non-consensual intervention under the
third pillar of the responsibility-to-protect framework.

With the increasing complexity of the situation in
the field, peacekeepers are vital actors in improving
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, and they
play a central role in the Secretary-General's "Rights
up front" framework. They support accountability
for human rights violations and promote compliance
with international human rights and humanitarian law.
Peacekeepers are also important in many places for
the facilitation of humanitarian assistance while also
respecting humanitarian space.

Where applicable, our missions have developed
comprehensive strategies for the protection of civilians.
Those strategies draw together all mission components
in a concerted effort focused on the most critical threats
to civilians. They provide for dedicated organizational
and leadership structures to facilitate early warning
and joint operational response.

The limits of peacekeeping are real. Within their
capabilities, missions must do their utmost to protect
but, beyond those limits, other means must be found.
No peacekeeping mission can physically protect all,
or even most, civilians where a serious conflict has
broken out. Of couse, often our missions are judged by
journalists who are seeking headlines or by analysts
who emphasize too strongly the use of force. Therefore,
the Council has an important role to play in articulating
its expectations for the protective capacities of
peacekeepers - expectations that will form the basis
for clear standards for action. Ultimately, civilians will
be fully protected only when there is sufficient peace
and there are sufficiently stable national structures to
sustain and protect it. That must be the overall goal.

Today, we also face a world that, in many respects,
is more dangerous than it was in 1994. United Nations
personnel now face threats that were unheard of 20
years ago. Recently, in Afghanistan, the United Nations
family lost four of its members in a senseless attack on
a Kabul restaurant. In Mali, our peacekeepers face the
possibility of terrorist groups that are willing and able
and actually want to target Blue Helmets. That makes
the job of protecting civilians an extremely challenging
task.

In navigating those new environments, we must
be more flexible - learning and adapting as an
Organization. Exploring new capabilities and adopting
new technologies will not be an optional matter in
the future of peacekeeping. We must improve our
capacities for early warning and rapid reaction, in
which gathering, analysing and acting on information
will be vital.

Let me take this opportunity to thank the Council
for approving the use of unarmed, unmanned aerial
systems in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with
the consent of the Government. Clearly, that is already
making a difference on the ground.

Now, do not mistake my point. Much has been put
into place, but we still continue to face challenges, and
we have a great deal farther to go. In too many places
throughout the world, civilians suffer in conflict. That
situation, whether in countries with peacekeeping
missions or without, is a vital issue that requires the
Council's continued attention.

Peacekeeping is an expression of the will of the
Security Council and, let me say again, of troop- and
police-contributing countries. Its success depends
upon clear, decisive and resolute direction from the
Council. It depends upon the commitment of all those
who take part in peacekeeping to fully implement the
mandate and the provision of sufficient capabilities and
resources to effectively confront the challenges on the
ground.

Peacekeeping was born when the Council
sought to hold combatants apart. Let us confirm its
continued vitality through our permanently reaffirmed
determination to protect civilians from violence.
