Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): The progress in the peace
process in Angola is indeed significant. When the
Security Council last convened in its chamber to discuss
the situation in that country, my delegation, like others,
expressed satisfaction that the parties had finally
undertaken the long-overdue measures to make good their
commitments. In the establishment of the Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation, the return of the
deputies of UNITA to the National Assembly and the
enactment of the law on the special status of the President
of UNITA, we wanted to see evidence of a decisive
breakthrough in the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol. We believe that this optimism of ours has not
been unjustified, and we hope that the parties concerned
in Angola and UNITA, first and foremost, will not be
trying to outmanoeuvre each other and that they will work
together for the future of their country.

In the political field, the expansion and
normalization of the State administration in the country is
the first priority and of paramount importance for the
future of the peace process. We are concerned at the
frustratingly uneven pace of the governmental structures
installing themselves throughout the country. My
delegation urges the members of UNITA immediately to
stop obstructing this process. We are also anxious about
the continuing dissemination by UNITA of hostile
information which negatively influences the political
atmosphere in the country.

With regard to the military aspects of the peace
process, my delegation regrets again having to make
critical comments as to the disarmament of the civilian
population as well as the finalization of the process of
demobilizing ex-combatants. One more observation seems
to be justified at this juncture - the failure of UNITA to
provide information about the strength of Mr. Savimbi's
security guards, including weapons in their possession.
This is important in the light of numerous indications that,

 

contrary to obligations under the Lusaka Protocol, UNITA
is anxious to preserve its military potential. We call on
UNITA to get rid of its armed potential, as it agreed, and
to transform itself into a political party.

The negative impact of the situation in the
neighbouring Democratic Republic of the Congo on the
relationship between the parties in Angola causes us
concern. As have others, we have taken note of the recent
increase in tensions in the northern provinces of the
country. Here again, we believe that the best way to
eliminate problems or, better still, to avoid them, is to
implement the relevant agreements to the letter. The
Government of Angola should, as was stipulated in the
Lusaka Protocol, notify the United Nations peacekeeping
operation of each movement of its troops. In our view, this
measure would certainly help to defuse unnecessary
tensions.

My delegation is convinced that the situation in
Angola calls even more than before for President Dos
Santos and Dr. Savimbi to get together and to talk to each
other directly, without intermediaries and without using
propaganda tools. Their meeting is, in our view,
indispensable for easing tensions and thus speeding up the
peace process.

Our delegation fully supports the idea of transforming
UNAVEM. III into the mission whose acronym is MON UA,
and we are going to vote for the draft resolution. We agree
with the Secretary-General that under the present
circumstances, the mandate of this follow-up mission
should include, among other tasks, assisting the Angolan
parties in the consolidation of peace, enhancing confidence-
building and creating an environment conducive to the
overall development of the country. We fully support the
Council's decision to make further extension of the
mandate dependent on the parties' ability to work together
in the spirit of their agreement. We believe, for the same
reasons, that the new mission needs to retain some military
potential, at least for the time being. Consequently, the
Secretary-General should be entrusted, as envisaged in the
draft before us, with the task of implementing the scheduled
withdrawal of UNAVEM. military units, in consistency with
his assessment of the situation on the ground and in line
with progress in completing the remaining part of the peace
process. Allow me to take this opportunity to emphasize, as
we always do, the importance of the security and freedom
of movement of the personnel of the mission the Council is
about to establish.

My delegation shares the Secretary-General's
opinion that his Special Representative, who proved to be
capable of playing a vital role in the peace process in
Angola and whose efforts we highly appreciate, should
further assist the parties. It is important that the Special
Representative continue his cooperation with the observer
States of the peace process as well as with regional States
and their organizations. Such cooperation will be even
more important after the termination of UNAVEM. III.

We also share the Secretary-General's view
concerning the parties' request to enhance the presence of
human rights observers and related United Nations
activities in Angola.

With the mandate of UNAVEM. III coming to a
conclusion, my delegation would like to pay tribute and
express its gratitude to the personnel of this peacekeeping
operation. However volatile the situation in Angola
remains, their contribution to the better, peaceful future of
that country cannot be overestimated. We are proud that
the group of Polish military observers, working hand in
hand with their colleagues from other countries, has had
the chance to be instrumental in achieving so much.

Last but not least, I would like to thank the States
observers to the Angolan peace process for their work and
guidance.

Finally, I wish to point out that Poland has
associated itself with the statement of the delegation of
the Netherlands, delivered on behalf of the European
Union.

