Mr. Ramm: I am honoured to speak alongside
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and colleagues from
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
and UNICEF. We are committed to working together
to ensure greater protection for children and greater
accountability for the grave violations perpetrated
against them.

Save the Children works in dozens of countries
affected by conflict, delivering life-saving assistance
to millions of children and families in need. We see
at first-hand the devastating impact and suffering
of children in conflicts around the world. There are
three areas that I would like to highlight today: sexual
violence against children, the use of explosive weapons
and attacks on schools. I also want to emphasize the
importance of prevention as well as response.

Sexual violence affects millions of children in
conflicts. Our research and programming indicate
that the majority of the survivors of sexual violence in
conflict-affected countries are children - mostly girls
but also boys. Sexual violence has significant physical,
psychological and social impacts on children, but
their needs for specific protection and child-sensitive
responses are frequently neglected. In the eastern
Democratic Republic of Congo, our assessments in
and around Goma have revealed significant numbers of
children affected by sexual violence. Save the Children
is working in the camps to identify victims so as to
assist them with appropriate health and psychosocial
services. More action is needed to end sexual violence,
including legal reforms and adequate funding to
support child-sensitive and appropriate responses. We
call on Member States to place children at the centre of
international action on sexual violence in conflict; to
ensure the necessary resources, expertise and political
backing for prevention and response; and to hold
perpetrators accountable.

The use of explosive weapons in conflict has
devastating consequences for children, who are
killed and maimed in greater numbers as a result of
such weapons. They are left with deep physical and
psychological scars and are denied access to education
and health care, owing to damaged infrastructure, and
they end up displaced from their homes as families flee
insecurity. In Syria, we witness those effects at first-
hand. As one little girl told us:

"At the beginning there was no shelling at
my school, but after some time the shelling started.

1 stopped going to school It was not safe. I feel

sad that my school was burned."

Save the Children calls on States to refrain from
the use of explosive weapons with wide area effects
by revising and strengthening military policies and
procedures; supporting the collection and sharing of
data with the United Nations on the impact of such
weapons on children; and holding to account those who
use such weapons.

Save the Children is responding to the Syrian crisis
and, to date, we have assisted over 300,000 children and
their families inside Syria and in Lebanon, Jordan and
Iraq. We are providing impartial, life-saving support,
including food, clothing and essential items to improve
health and hygiene. We run child-friendly spaces
offering psychosocial support, education activities
and a safe place to play. As the Secretary-General
himself says, the toll of the conflict on children is
"unacceptable and unbearable" (5/2013/245, para. 208).
Security Council members must unite to work towards
a negotiated settlement in Syria and, in the meantime,
ensure that humanitarian assistance is funded and
reaches populations most in need.

Schools are increasingly targets of attack, with
children frequently killed or injured. Greater action
is needed in order to protect children, teachers and
schools from targeted violence and to stop the use of
schools for military purposes. In 2011, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1998 (2011) to strengthen
the monitoring and reporting mechanism so as to
include attacks on schools and hospitals as a trigger for
action. Save the Children calls on the Council to ensure
that attacks on schools are acted upon in accordance
with that resolution, so that victims receive support and
future attacks are prevented. Schools must be respected
by all parties as conflict-free zones, and measures must
be taken to restrict their military use.

Humanitarian agencies like ours do all we
can to assist victims of conflict, but we need the
help of Governments and the Security Council to
prevent children from becoming victims in the
first place. In Mali, Save the Children is reuniting
children separated from their families during the
recent conflict, providing psychosocial support and
strengthening community-based responses. Since
1998, we have trained thousands of military personnel,
police force members and peacekeepers throughout
Africa in child rights and protection. Currently, we
are cooperating with UNICEF and DPKO to develop
mandatory training on the protection of children for
all United Nations peacekeepers worldwide, as noted
earlier. When authorizing peacekeeping missions, the
Security Council must require personnel to receive
pre-deployment training in child protection, as in Mali,
including the capacity to prevent and monitor grave
violations against children.

Parties to conflict must abide by their international
legal obligations and take measures to ensure that
children are protected at all times. Member States must
support efforts to ensure not only that grave violations
are documented but also that perpetrators are held to
account.

We applaud the Security Council's efforts to ensure
the protection of children from the grave violations
committed against them. We encourage the Security
Council to ensure that the children and armed conflict
agenda remains strong with future open debates.
Children throughout the world need us to act to spare
them from suffering before more violations occur.
