Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for taking part in
this debate and commend Mr. John Holmes, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his
detailed and instructive briefing.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made earlier by Angola on behalf of the African Group.

The delegation of Senegal welcomes the initiative
of having the Security Council take a fresh look at the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. Indeed, the
initiative of this public debate enables us to follow up
on the sixth report of the Secretary-General of October
2007, in which he strongly emphasizes that, when we
cannot prevent an armed conflict, the protection of
civilian populations is and must remain an absolute
priority. That responsibility, he adds, is incumbent
upon the United Nations, the Council and, first and
foremost, all States.

A recent study by our Organization concluded
that, during the 19905, civilians represented 90 per cent
of the victims of armed conflict, whereas during the
First World War, the proportion was 5 per cent. That
exponential growth in the number of civilian victims in
less than a century's time concerns the international
community as a whole, and shows quite clearly the
need to undertake urgent, bold and coordinated action
in order to put an end to it.

For that purpose, Senegal supports the five
initiatives proposed by the Secretary-General in his
report and appeals to all States to cooperate closely in
implementing them.

My country concurs with the Secretary-General
that humanitarian access and assistance to populations
in distress represents critical challenge facing the
Council and Member States, which must, in that
connection, ensure a strict implementation of the
norms of international humanitarian law.

It is particularly regrettable that both States in
conflict and non-State actors are increasingly ignoring
the principle of distinction underlying international
law, which requires that warring parties distinguish
between civilians and combatants and prohibits any
attack against civilian populations. The same principle
of distinction also prohibits the indiscriminate use of
force and requires that the parties to conflict guarantee
humane treatment to civilians who fall prey to the
violence of war.

Despite those universally recognized basic
principles, we see that civilians are being increasingly
targeted by warring parties. Therefore, the question
arises: is international humanitarian law not
sufficiently well known, or is the punishment for such
violations not enough of a deterrent? Clearly, more
effective protection, which civilians - particularly the
victims of conflicts - are entitled to expect from the
international community, will depend on the response
of the international community to that major concern.

In that connection, Senegal welcomes the advent
of the international criminal tribunals and the
International Criminal Court (ICC), which play a
healthy deterrent role, besides issuing rulings in cases
where odious crimes have been committed during
national or international armed conflicts. However, the
international community must guarantee the proper
functioning of the international criminal tribunals and
must also emphasize the promotion of greater
knowledge about the principles of international
humanitarian law, which remains the basis for all
activities aimed at protecting civilians in armed
conflict.

The task of protecting civilians in times of
conflict is all the more delicate today, because
violations are being committed by some of the very
people whom our universal Organization sends into the
field to maintain peace. In our view, measures to deal
with that phenomenon must be given priority in the
recommendations that might emerge from these
deliberations.

Keen to participate in the international effort to
protect civilians and faithful to its commitment to
protect and promote vulnerable and disadvantaged
groups, Senegal is working at the subregional, regional
and international levels to eradicate all forms of
violence that could affect civilians during armed
conflicts. That is why the Government of Senegal
hosted a subregional workshop last April on the
protection of civilians, organized by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). That
meeting enabled subregional and regional
organizations to exchange information and share their
experiences, in order to consolidate the progress made
in the area of protecting civilians and to propose
measures likely to ensure better coordination of the
action taken by various actors in conflict areas.

That workshop, like others held in other regions
of the world, gave us the opportunity to raise the
awareness of all actors and further mobilize them
regarding the urgent need to do everything possible to
eradicate, or at least reduce, all forms of suffering and
offences endured by civilian populations in conflict
situations. The experience of those regional workshops
reinforces our conviction that educating and raising the
awareness of all actors, including peacekeeping forces,
remain the best means of prevention in combating
abuse and Violations against civilians.

For that reason, Senegal would like to support the
Secretary-General's recommendation aimed at setting
up a working group comprising experts mandated to
facilitate the consideration and analysis of issues
related to the protection of civilians, which already
form part of the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping missions.
In conclusion, I should like to commend the
courage and the sense of responsibility of the members

of humanitarian organizations, who are working
tirelessly to protect civilians in armed conflicts.
However, their activities, which must always be based
on neutrality and independence, cannot replace the
primary responsibility of States and the international
community. The Security Council, which is the
guarantor of international peace and security, must
ensure that United Nations action in this area arrives
on time and continues until the risks to civilians are
under control or even eliminated.

