Ms. DiCarlo: During the 1973 Arab-Israeli war, the
Syrian Arab Army crossed the 1967 ceasefire line on
the Golan, known as the Purple Line, initially gaining
territory. In a swift counter-attack, the Israel Defense
Forces recaptured the 10st ground and advanced further,
crossing the 1967 ceasefire line and occupying a
salient portion of Syrian territory. The conflict quickly
reached an unstable stalemate, with tensions remaining
high for months.

Following United States-led diplomatic efforts, on
31 May 1974 Israel and Syria signed the Disengagement
of Forces Agreement between Israel and Syria. On
the same day, the Security Council welcomed the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and, through
resolution 350 (1974), in accordance with the protocol
to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement, established
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force.

The situation in the Golan remained generally calm
until 2011, when fighting between the Syrian armed
forces and armed opposition groups began. In 2018, the
Syrian Government re-established full control of the
area known as the Bravo side, thereby re-establishing
a status quo ante. Throughout this period, Israel has
periodically stressed the critical importance of the
Golan to its security.

On 25 March, United States President Donald
Trump signed an official proclamation recognizing
Israel's sovereignty over the occupied Syrian
Golan. The Secretary-General has taken note of this
development, including Member States' reactions to the
United States decision. Let me reiterate the Secretary-
General's statement that the United Nations position on
the Golan is known and clear. That position is reflected
in the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, notably Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 497 (1981).

We hope that the recent developments will not be
used as an excuse by anyone to pursue actions that
could undermine the relative stability of the situation
on Golan and beyond. We will continue to closely
monitor developments on the ground and will keep the
Council informed, as appropriate.

