Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
meeting on the two reports of the Secretary-General
on, respectively, the United Nations Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA), nine months after its opening, and
on the troubling threat posed by the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) in Central Africa and the Great Lakes
region (S/2011/704 and S/2011/693). I would also like
to thank and commend Mr. Abou Moussa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
UNOCA, for his briefing. I also welcome the presence
and participation of Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma,
Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), in our debate. I also
thank Ambassador Tete Antonio for his briefing.
Lastly, I welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representatives of the Central African Republic and
the Republic of South Sudan in our meeting.

I would like to reverse the order of topics in our
debate today and start with UNOCA. I should like to
reiterate my country's full willingness to continue to
support the Office, as well as to express our
appreciation for the work accomplished by the Office
in the past few months. We welcome the different
contacts that Mr. Abou Moussa has undertaken with
States in the subregion, with organizations and with
other stakeholders in Central Africa. Those contacts
will make it possible to assess situations on the ground,
but also to better develop United Nations support
strategies for countries, given the challenges to peace
and security in Central Africa. Mr. Moussa has just
summed up what those challenges are, as perceived by
the authorities in the subregion.

In supporting the creation of UNOCA, ECCAS
heads of State and Government expressed the hope
that, like its counterpart in West Africa, the Office
would contribute to implementing an integrated
approach to challenges to peace, security and
development in Central Africa. The Office should also
facilitate coordination between the United Nations and
subregional organizations.

In the presidential statement of 31 October 2002
(S/PRST/2002/31), the Security Council, for its part,
sought the same objective, emphasizing capacity-
building of countries in the subregion, conflict
prevention through mediation and good offices and
economic integration. As Mr. Moussa said, the
subregion is implementing a number of initiatives,
which UNOCA has been called upon to support.

You would agree with us, Mr. President, as we
have already emphasized, that a mandate of this scope
requires substantial financial, human and logistical
resources. UNOCA will also need enough time to grasp
the regional context to do a good job dealing with very
complex and delicate issues having to do with peace
and security in Central Africa. In that regard, we
welcome the attention that UNOCA has already paid to
pressing questions, such as the electoral process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the issue of the
destabilizing circulation of small arms and light
weapons in Central Africa.

The disturbing development of piracy, which
affects the States of the Gulf of Guinea, is a new
challenge for Central Africa and a threat to security
and navigation and maritime activities. UNOCA must
support the fight against that scourge and do so in the
context of an integrated strategy and in coordination
with the Office for West Africa and the concerned
agencies of the United Nations, subregional
organizations such as ECCAS, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and States themselves.

Finally, the Office should support subregional
efforts to reform the security sector in countries
emerging from conflict. Additionally, in taking up
coordination and administrative functions of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, the Office should
contribute to promoting good governance and relations
of trust between States.

With respect to the Lord's Resistance Army, the
LRA continues to be a serious threat to security in the
Great Lakes and Central African region. Civilian
populations, including women and children, are the
leading victims of the deadly violence of that and other
armed groups. Humanitarian action is impeded in
countries affected by new waves of violence by the
LRA. Villages and towns are often targeted in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in South Sudan.
Joseph Kony and his combatants are operating in the
north-eastern part of the Central African Republic. We
know that the weakness of the army of the Central
African Republic, with its inability to cover the entire
territory, creates fertile soil for the LRA.

Given the defiance of the LRA, the international
community must step up its pressure in order to put an
end to LRA attacks against civilian populations, stop
the recruitment, abduction and use of children, and
secure the release of women, children and other
non-combatants held by the LM.

We would like to commend the actions against
the threats and violence of the LRA conducted by the
military forces of the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of
South Sudan and Uganda. Similarly, we welcome the
commitment and initiatives of the African Union
against the LRA, which it calls a terrorist group, not
only in terms of civilian protection but in building the
capacities of States. Gabon would like to take this
opportunity to welcome the support that the European
Union is giving to the African Union to that end. These
efforts, by States and by the African Union, should be
strongly supported by the international community.

For its part, Gabon participated in the ministerial
meetings on the LRA recently held in October 2010 in
Bangui and in June 2011 in Addis Ababa. Gabon
welcomes the establishment of the regional
intervention force and the Joint Information Operations
Centre. These bodies are part of a coordinated regional
strategy developed by States affected by LRA violence,
in cooperation with the African Union, the United
Nations and other partners. They should certainly be
operational by 2012.

We would like to thank bilateral and multilateral
partners for their contribution to these initiatives,
especially the United States of America, France, the
United Nations and, as I mentioned earlier, the
European Union. My delegation would also like to
welcome the personal commitment of President Barack
Obama and the support of the United States
Administration through its LRA disarmament support
strategy. My country welcomes the deterrence actions
and actions to protect civilians conducted by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and by MICOPAX, the Mission for the Consolidation
of Peace in the Central African Republic. Here we also
wish to commend the commitment of the units of
MONUSCO, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding

Office in the Central African Republic that have
continued to work closely together on that issue.

In that context, the United Nations must be at the
centre of a strategy comprised of the following
elements: protection of civilian populations,
re-establishment of regional stability, support to States
by building their military capabilities, and strengthened
action to put a definitive end to the threat of the LRA.

Gabon also wishes to reaffirm its commitment to
the fight against impunity for the perpetrators of
massive crimes and violence. We call for the execution
of the arrest warrants issued in 2005 by the
International Criminal Court for the main LRA leaders,
in particular Joseph Kony and his two commanders
who are still active: Okot Odhiambo and Dominic
Ongwen. As recommended by the Secretary-General
and by the Council, combating the LRA must be a
priority of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa, and that Office must continue its
cooperation with ECCAS, the African Union and the
States affected by the matter.

Finally, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General, who has taken the initiative to
establish UNOCA, as well as members of the Council
who supported it. We also wish to endorse the
presidential statement that will be adopted at the end of
our debate.

