Mr. Mubarak (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Permit me at the outset to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your delegation's presidency of the
Security Council this month. We are convinced that
you, both personally and as a representative of your
country, will play an outstanding role in leading the
work of the Council to success. I should also like to
take this opportunity to thank your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of France, for his efforts as
President of the Council last month. In addition, I
cannot fail to associate myself with earlier speakers in
thanking the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, who
made a very important statement to the Council this
morning; Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa; and Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Executive
Secretary of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), who have participated effectively in
the debate on this agenda item.

I am speaking today on behalf of my Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Shalghem, who is unable to take
part in this important meeting. He has asked me, Sir, to
express our gratitude to your friendly country, Ghana,
for the initiative to debate the agenda item "Peace
consolidation in West Africa".
My country's participation in this debate reflects
its interest in the subject and its concern for
strengthening international, regional and national
efforts to build peace, security and stability in the West
African countries of C6te d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. We consider those countries
to be our sisters, and my country has special bilateral
relationships with them. We are all members of the
same regional integration organization, the African
Union (AU), of which Libya was a founding member.
Indeed, the AU has played a very important role in
addressing many of the continent's problems,
particularly those of West Africa.

This debate is of particularly critical importance
given the destructive internal conflicts that have taken
place in many countries of the region, including in
Cote d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra
Leone. These conflicts have led to a loss of control
over those countries' national institutions and have
resulted in a high death toll among innocent civilians.
Indeed, they have destroyed infrastructure and property
and have caused the displacement of hundreds of
thousands of inhabitants of those countries and has
given rise to the illicit exploitation of their natural
resources. These events have had a negative impact on
economic, political and social life after a decade of
conflict.

At long last, national leaders have been able to
acknowledge that peace is the speediest and best way
to settle these conflicts. My country has worked very
hard at all levels, particularly at the leadership and
ministerial levels, to find settlements to the conflicts in
that region. The Libyan Arab J amahiriya has joined in
many international and regional efforts to that end. As
an example, I would cite the donor conference that
took place in Freetown under United Nations auspices
at the beginning of 2002, as well as our participation in
the joint initiative to rebuild Sierra Leone, which was
launched in Tripoli in February 2002, and which led to
the establishment of a joint fund for the reconstruction
of Sierra Leone in the amount of $24 million. Another
example is the 2002 campaign to destroy small arms
and light weapons in Sierra Leone. These are very
significant examples of our resolve to put an end to
these conflicts.

With the cooperation and coordination of the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), United Nations efforts have
led to the establishment of peacekeeping and security
operations in a number of West African countries.

We are optimistic about the political future of
these countries, in particular in terms of the gradual
transition from war and conflict to peacebuilding,
reconstruction and stability. In that regard, we thank
the Secretary-General for attaching such importance to
the problems besetting the African continent, West
Africa in particular. We share the concerns expressed
today by the Secretary-General in his statement to the
Council, in particular the weakness of good governance
arrangements, which prevents these countries from
benefiting properly from their natural resources. Yet,
we see efforts being made on a daily basis to promote
peace and security, notwithstanding the problems to
which the Secretary-General has drawn attention. In
our view, we can achieve lasting peace and security by
building and promoting national institutions,
particularly in areas such as security, democracy-
building, the rule of law, human rights, the resettlement
of internally displaced persons and refugees,
transparency in the establishment of better conflict
management and settlement mechanisms and enhanced
early warning systems designed to address conflict
before it erupts. It can also be achieved by dealing with
problems such as poverty and unemployment, which
lead to the recruitment of young people into armed
forces. International efforts should be stepped up to
mobilize resources and financial and technical
assistance that could make it possible to build peace,
stability and sustainable development. This requires
efforts by all States and regional and international
institutions in order to ensure success.

In conclusion, I assure the Council that we are
ready to contribute positively to efforts to establish
lasting peace and security, not just in West Africa but
throughout Africa, because bolstering peace and
security in the continent is at the top of Libya's foreign
policy priorities.

Mr. President, we thank you for convening this
important meeting and wish the Council every success
in the debate.

