The President: Thank you, Ambassador, for your
important statement, which I think went precisely to the
goals of this meeting.

I will now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States and then ask Mrs.
Ogata to respond, if there is time - a quick colloquy -
and then I have a presidential statement that we have all
agreed to.

First let me say that the 14 previous speakers have
so adequately covered the terrain that I would like simply
to abandon my prepared text, which has been distributed.
I would like to speak from the heart, to be quite frank,
because I have working on this problem since 1978. In
fact, the year I started working on it was the year I first
met Mrs. Ogata. We are all refugees in another sense of
the word, from the Cambodian-Thai border, where we
began our deep personal involvement and, I might add
with great pleasure, our deep personal collaboration in the
field of refugees.
I commend you, Mrs. Ogata. I commend you, my
dear friend, for the precision and brilliance of your
statement, and I echo what Ambassador van Walsum said
about your fearlessness in addressing the fact that there
are political causes for refugees, and they must be
addressed. You have helped us for next week by pointing
out that what we discuss on Burundi will affect your
work. Too often here we deal only with the consequences
and not sufficiently with the causes, and you have done
us a great service in laying the framework for next
week's discussions.

I also want to echo what the representative of Mali
said, that it is time to take more concrete actions. I also
echo what Ambassador Qin Huasun of China said, that
we are here to correct imbalances in the world, and I will

 

specifically address the imbalance I wish to focus on at the
moment.

I failed to acknowledge at the outset that we are also
joined today by Francis Deng, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on internally displaced persons. He
and Roberta Cohen have written a very important book on
the subject, and I would commend it to all members.

Since everything that needs to be said about refugees
in Africa has already been said, and Sir Jeremy Greenstock
has also alluded correctly to the fact that refugees in other
parts of the world are in dire straits, I would make only one
specific regional comment and then move on to the
question of internally displaced persons, and that relates to
West Timor.

I must say frankly that I remain dissatisfied with the
rate of return from West Timor since the trip I made in
November. It fluctuates. I recognize that some 20 per cent
or more of those refugees will not ever wish to go back to
East Timor. Fine. The Indonesian Government should
resettle those people immediately, because some of them
are terrorizing the camps and others are just sitting there in
lieu of getting out into society. That puts a burden on the
international community which in this case is no longer
necessary. Finally, some elements within the Indonesian
military are still supporting the militia.

I mention this point today because next month, the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET) will be
replaced by the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET). There are still 1,000 militia in
the area. They tested the Australian-led INTERFET and
found that that was a dangerous and sometimes fatal action.
I would not be surprised if they try to test the United
Nations when the command changes, and this could create
additional problems in the camps, as well as a problem for
us that we do not need when we want to focus on Africa.
In this room, we have many of the distinguished people
who, led by Ambassador Andjaba, went to East Timor. I
hope we will all keep a careful brief on that, Mr.
Ambassador, and I hope you and your colleagues who were
there will keep us informed.

Allow me to turn to the subject under discussion
today. This is obviously a huge problem. I wish to focus on
the fact that two thirds of the world's refugees do not fall
under the official purview of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). We
call them "IDPs". In our Mission across the street, we have
tried to figure out ways of abolishing this odious term. The
very use of initials to refer to people is in itself not
healthy. When I was a young child growing up in New
York, we talked about DPs, so it is not new to have such
phrases. But these are people, and to a person who has
been driven from his or her home by conflict, there is no
difference between being a refugee or an internally
displaced person. In terms of what has happened to them,
they are equal victims, but they are treated differently.

I recognize that this distinction raises complex legal
issues of international sovereignty. It raises enormous
questions of resource allocation, and it has far-ranging
bureaucratic implications as well. I also recognize that the
Governments represented in this room and elsewhere have
various reactions to the issue. But let us remember that
individual lives are at stake.

What is an internally displaced person? What is a
refugee? They do not care; they are all homeless. We
must address this problem. We need to acknowledge
frankly that there is no real difference to the victims
involved. Then we need to call upon the world body and
all its specialized agencies, and through its Member
States, to figure out what to do with the problem that was
not fully foreseen when the United Nations Charter was
shaped and when the UNHCR drew its mandate. For
example, Francis Deng is responsible to the Commission
on Human Rights in Geneva. That is fine; I applaud the
Commission on Human Rights. But in my view, he
should be working directly with and for the UNHCR,
with the Security Council and with the Economic and
Social Council across the board, in order to stimulate all
of us to deal with this problem. His book - Roberta
Cohen's book - contains many practical suggestions and
a lot of analysis.

I would go further. Speaking from my own
perspective, having worked on this issue for a quarter of
a century, I think that responsibility for internally
displaced persons should be fixed in a single bureaucratic
entity. When my colleagues and I were in Angola last
month, we saw that 90 per cent of the refugees were
classified as internally displaced persons and that, for the
most part, they were out of reach of the international
community's assistance. But to the extent they had
support from the international community, it tended to be
from the World Food Programme (WFP). The WFP is a
fine organization, but the best organization operating in
the world - the best one, with the longest track record
and the best infrastructure - is the UNHCR. Some of the
non-governmental organizations in the room have told me
how sometimes the UNHCR does not support efforts,

 

even when it has surplus capacity of motor vehicles or
personnel, because of bureaucratic restrictions, restrictions
of the host Government or, I regret to say, occasionally
inadequate relationships between the agencies involved.

The reason we all turn to UNHCR, and then often
criticize it, is precisely because it is our last best hope for
dealing with these problems. Therefore, the pressure should
not be viewed as criticism, and the criticism itself should be
viewed within the context of the organization that we look
to most of all for leadership.

Without putting a formal and specific proposal on
behalf of my Government before you today, I would hope
that all of us would recognize that what we must do is
expand the definition of what is a refugee, erode - if not
erase - the distinction between a refugee and a person
who is internally displaced, deal with these problems, fix
the responsibility more clearly in a single agency and not
fall back on one of the worst of all euphemisms,
"coordinate closely". In Angola's case, this is a physical
impossibility, since the United Nations agencies are
scattered in 10 different buildings in a city without good
working telephones or good infrastructure. And let us get
on with trying to address the problem.

Speaking in my national capacity, I hope that this
conversation we are having today - to continue with Mrs.
Ogata's response in a moment - will stimulate all of us,
with her leadership and, I hope, that of the Secretary-
General, to re-examine the definitions and to treat internally
displaced persons, who are 90 per cent of the problem in
Angola and 70 per cent of the problem world-wide, in such
a way that they do not fall between the bureaucratic cracks.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I would like to ask the High Commissioner to
comment or respond to anything she heard. From this point
forward until I read the Presidential Statement, I would like
to consider this a conversation, not a series of set-piece
speeches. We welcome your comments, Mrs. Ogata.

