Mrs. Mladineo (Croatia): Allow me, Mr. President,
to thank Judge Fausto Pocar, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and Chief Prosecutor Carla del
Ponte for their assessments pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1534 (2004), of the work of the
Tribunal. I also take this opportunity to congratulate
Judge Pocar on his recent assumption of that important
post.

In so far as Croatia is concerned, the written
report of the ICTY (S/2005/781, annex 1) before the
Council has been superseded by subsequent events. As
is well known, Croatia has worked with the Tribunal in
implementing its action plan for the resolution of the
sole outstanding matter, namely, the case of Ante
Gotovina. The Tribunal has continuously been kept
updated on all activities related to the implementation
of the action plan. The Chief Prosecutor of the Tribunal
confirmed the credibility of the Croatian Government
in her report to the European Union task force dated
3 October 2005.

The rule of law is a fundamental tenet of modern
governance. Croatia has demonstrated that it will not
accept exceptions to the rule of law. Impunity does not
serve justice. Every indictee must face his indictment
and appear before the Tribunal to answer the charges
brought against him. At the same time, those coming
before the ICTY do so with the presumption of
innocence. Respect for the rule of law must be
mirrored by justice being done in accordance with the
principle of due process.

Croatia has a vested interest in having the truth
established and a strong interest in the Tribunal's
successful implementation of its mandate. The
homeland war was a defensive, just and legitimate war.
Croatia was the victim of aggression and had the right
to self-defence and the liberation of its occupied
territories pursuant to Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter. The individualization of guilt, where it is
found to exist, can only serve to strengthen the
legitimacy of the homeland war.

Croatia has worked closely with the Tribunal. It
has responded in due time and comprehensively to the
Tribunal's requests for documents and witnesses.
Cooperation between legal and judicial institutions in
Croatia and the Tribunal has been good. In order to
foster cross-border cooperation in war-crime trials,
earlier this year Croatia signed an agreement with
Bosnia and Herzegovina and with Serbia and
Montenegro on cooperation in war-crimes proceedings
and in combating organized crime.

The Security Council has been discussing the
Tribunal's completion strategy since August 2003. Part
of that strategy is the work that it is undertaking with
the national courts of the countries concerned. Work
has been done to increase the capacity of judges and
lawyers in Croatia in preparation for the transfer of
cases for prosecution under national jurisdiction. One
such case, involving two accused, has recently been
referred to the Croatian jurisdiction. Those efforts will
further strengthen the capacity of our legal system.

We note that the Tribunal's completion strategy
involves a three-step process encompassing the
completion of investigations, trials and appeals
according to the time lines established by the Security
Council in resolution 1503 (2003). The first of the
benchmarks, namely, the completion of investigations,
was met at the end of 2004. We trust that the recent
events have brought the conclusion of the Tribunal's
work more closely into view.

