Ms. Yanez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is grateful for the convening of this meeting.
We recall that the United Nations has reaffirmed the
Security Council's permanent responsibility

"with regard to the question of Palestine until the
question is resolved in all its aspects in accordance
with international law and relevant resolutions",

as set out in the seventh preambular paragraph of
General Assembly resolution 73/19, of 2018.

We are also grateful for the informative briefings
by Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo,
the work done in the field by the co-Directors of
EcoPeace Middle East, the Secretary-General's report
(S/20l9/251) on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) and the April report prepared by the Office of
the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process (S/2019/251).

Nevertheless, this year we once again express our
concern about the very serious deterioration of the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. As of March, the situation has not
changed. The reports I mentioned give an account of the
persistent factors that threaten the stability of the West
Bank and the survival of the aspiration of building a
Palestinian State, such as the expansion ofillegal Israeli
settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, the demolition and confiscation ofproperties
and the destruction of Palestinian infrastructure. All
that is compounded by declining financial support,
which has lead to a severe fiscal crisis coupled with
growing humanitarian needs and the lack of political
prospects for a negotiated solution.

We again appeal to Israel to review its decision on
the partial withholding of 6 per cent of the revenues it
collects on behalf of the Palestinian Authority. We also
condemn the indiscriminate firing of rockets and mortar
shells against Israeli civilians, which is prohibited by
international humanitarian law. We condemns violence
by all actors.

In November 2018, 156 Member States voted in
favour of General Assembly resolution 73/19, which
reaffirms the need to achieve a peaceful settlement to
the question of Palestine, at the heart of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, in all its aspects, and to intensify all efforts
to that end, as well as the urgency of safeguarding the
prospects for achieving the two-State solution, Israel
and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security
within recognized borders, on the basis of the pre-1967
borders, and of making tangible progress towards the
implementation of that solution and towards a just
solution to all final-status issues. In addition, 148 States
also shared our position on several provisions relating
to occupied East Jerusalem and reiterated that any
measures taken by Israel to impose its laws, jurisdiction
and administration on the Holy City of Jerusalem are
illegal and therefore null and void and have no validity
whatsoever, and called upon Israel to put an immediate
end to all such illegal and unilateral measures. The
Secretary-General's report nevertheless shows that the
evictions and displacements of Palestinians continue
and that settlement activity threatens to increase.

In the face of the persistent serious and
deteriorating situation, my delegation reiterates its
call to the international community to make tangible
progress in supporting the advancement of a definitive
and just peaceful political solution on the basis of the
existence of two States, Palestine and Israel, which, as
the Secretary-General has reiterated, is the only way to
achieve peace and stability in the Middle East, restore
the rights of the Palestinian people and bring about the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine as a
full-fledged Member of the United Nations.

Our delegation would like to acknowledge the
invaluable efforts made by the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Egypt
and all States involved to contribute to stability in
the region.

Finally, my delegation expresses its full support
for the mandate of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and its appreciation to the Agency's
Commissioner-General and staff for their tireless
efforts and valuable work in assisting Palestine refugees
with emergency assistance, which has saved the lives
of 1.5 million Palestine refugees affected by conflict
and humanitarian crises, especially in Gaza and Syria.
We welcome with hope the strategic dialogue of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians that will take
place tomorrow, 30 April, in Brussels, to discuss
sustainable ways to continue to support UNRWA and
alleviate tension in Gaza.

