Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the convening of this open debate on the
Ebola crisis. We would like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-Moon, Dr. Nabarro and Director General
Margaret Chan for their respective briefings. China also
listened carefully to the statement of the representative
of Medecins Sans Frontieres.

At present, the Ebola pandemic is rapidly spreading
throughout countries in western Africa, including
Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea, seriously threatening
the health and life of their populations. The Ebola crisis
has already transformed from a public health issue into
a complicated and multifaceted problem, impacting
the politics, security, economies and societies of the
countries concerned and threatening the security of
international public health. Therefore, fighting the
Ebola pandemic is not only a task of African countries
and their peoples, but also a common responsibility of
all countries in the world. .

China believes that efforts should be made in
the following three areas. First, the international
community should respond to the Ebola outbreak
with a heightened sense of urgency by expeditiously
providing assistance to the affected countries. Time is
of the essence in the current Ebola crisis, as the disease
has been spreading rapidly, widely and deeply. The
longer it is allowed to continue, the more difficult and
costly it will be for those countries to contain it. China
appeals to the international community to address
the crisis with utmost attention and offer immediate
assistance to the countries in the affected areas.
Diseases do not heed national borders, and adversity is
the touchstone of genuine friendship. We hope that the
international community's assistance will bring hope
to the populations in the affected areas; help alleviate
the sense of helplessness, panic and isolation; and build
confidence to tackle the Ebola pandemic.

Secondly, the international community should
further coordinate various responses to the crisis.
China supports the United Nations leading role in
coordinating international responses to the pandemic,
and welcomes the initiative of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon to establish in West Africa the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, which we
believe will help mobilize various parties to integrate
international assistance efforts and will form a synergy
in the whole process. China supports the World Health
Organization (WHO) in further using its expertise to
monitor the pandemic, to facilitate the expeditious
research and development of treatment plans and
vaccines, and at the same time to step up prevention
campaigns. Other United Nations organs and agencies
should play their own parts, coordinate their efforts
and establish a reasonable labour division among them,
working together to contribute to the fight against the
Ebola pandemic.

Thirdly, the international community should
address both the root causes and symptoms of the
problem by assisting African countries in accelerating
their economic and social development. The current
Ebola outbreak has overwhelmed the public health
systems of the three countries, further hampering
the already fragile economic and social development
in those countries and their neighbours. When
providing emergency medical relief and assistance
to those countries to help them cope with the current
pandemic, the international community should keep
their long-term needs in mind, actively increase input
in and support for the development of their medical and
health-care systems and help them to establish as soon
as possible comprehensive health systems and systems
for pandemic prevention and control. In the meantime,
the international community should vigorously help
those countries advance their economic and social
development and strengthen their capacity-building
ininfrastructure and public administration, so as to
enhance their capacity for pandemic prevention and
control.

China was hit by the severe acute respiratory
syndrome epidemic in 2003, so we greatly sympathize
with the people of the African countries concerned, who
are suffering from the current pandemic. The Chinese
leadership and Government attach deep importance
to the problem of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa
and have, since the very beginning of the epidemic,
provided assistance to the countries concerned and
shared with them China's experience in pandemic
control. To support African countries in their response
to the Ebola outbreak, China provided assistance in cash
and kind as early as April and, in August, we assembled
and immediately sent to the three countries materials
for pandemic control and relief valued at ¥30 million.
China also dispatched two groups of public health
experts and clinicians to the affected areas to provide
guidance and assistance.

Since the outbreak of the crisis, the Chinese
medical team on the ground has stayed on to actively
help the local people in preventing and controlling the
epidemic. Recently, China dispatched to Sierra Leone a
medical team of 59 members and a biological security
laboratory for lab testing and the management of
patients kept for observation. To date, China has sent
174 medical experts and workers serving in affected
areas in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea.

Earlier today, Chinese President Xi Jinping, who
is on a visit to India, announced that the Chinese
Government has decided that, in addition to the two
previous contributions, another contribution valued at
¥200 million in cash, food and material will be sent
to Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea. China will also
provide $2 million dollars in cash respectively to the
WHO and the African Union in support of their efforts
aimed at fighting the pandemic.

China will continue to work with all the countries
of the world and join hands with the West African
countries concerned to help them weather the current
crisis. We hope that with the all-out support of the
international community, the West African countries
and peoples will defeat the crisis at any early date,
restore national stability and resume economic and
social development as soon as possible.

