Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First and
foremost, I would like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
the briefing that he has just given us and the
representatives of Israel and Palestine for their
respective statements.

Allow me to take this opportunity to bid farewell
to Ambassador Dan Gillerman, to convey to him the
gratitude of Panama and myself for the manner in
which he has led his mission to the United Nations, and
to wish him every success in his future activities.

Mr. Pascoe's briefing conveyed both a negative
and positive picture of the region, but it is on the latter
that Panama wishes to place emphasis on this occasion.
As was stated by Mr. Pascoe in his report, the ceasefire
mediated by Egypt over a month ago between Hamas
and Israel has remained nearly unbroken, inaugurating
a period of relative calm to Gaza and Israel and
allowing their respective populations at the very least
to live in a space free from violence. We trust that that
reciprocal measure will enable the bilateral
negotiations between the Israelis and Palestinians to
take place in an improved climate of trust, and we call
for the extension of the ceasefire to the West Bank.

We are also encouraged by the news of the
exchange of prisoners or human remains between Israel
and Hizbullah through the mediation of Germany,
proximity talks between Israeli and Syrian negotiators
through the good offices of Turkey, and the efforts of
the President of France to encourage Syria and
Lebanon to resume diplomatic relations.

In addition, we recognize the significant efforts
deployed by Qatar towards the establishment of a
national unity Government in Lebanon. The delegation
of Panama expresses its profound gratitude to all those
individuals and Governments who worked to ensure
that those events would take place.

Those achievements confirm the fact that, in spite
of the desire and need to obtain a comprehensive peace
in order to resolve the question of the Middle East,
taking discreet steps and reaching timely agreements
can serve as catalysts for reaching broader and more
substantial agreements. In that context, my delegation
echoes all those Governments and non-governmental
organizations that have declared that Israel's
occupation of the Palestinian territories, and in
particular its construction of settlements in those
territories, remain serious obstacles to the peace
process. Israel must therefore immediately cease the
construction of settlements.

In that context, Panama takes this opportunity to
affirm, as we have on earlier occasions, that any peace
agreement between Palestine and Israel must provide
for the existence of two States living side by side in
peace with each other and with their neighbours, with
the 1967 borders recognized as their common borders.
In that regard, we call for a timely completion of the
respective negotiations to achieve the rapid release of
the abducted Israeli corporal, Gilad Shalit, and Israel's
transfer to Lebanon of the Shaba'a Farms.

Finally, now more than ever, the peace process in
the Middle East requires the political resolve of all the
parties directly involved and the active participation of
the international community and of this Security
Council. Everything indicates that this is a rare and all-
too-elusive moment of hope.

