Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to express my Government's sincere
condolences to the State of Pakistan over the cowardly
terrorist attack that led to more than 140 victims. We
condemn that criminal act in all its aspects, which can
be described only as a crime against humanity.

In the context of today's debate, I express Egypt's
sincere appreciation to the Chadian presidency for its
initiative in convening this important thematic debate,
with the participation of Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad. It reflects the
commitment of the brotherly nation of Chad to the
maintenance of peace and security from both the
regional and the international perspectives.

My delegation also aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
This meeting is important not only because its
subject reflects one ofthe main pillars ofthe relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
but because it is timely. It is being convened concurrently
with the launch of the Secretary-General's High-level
Independent Panel to Review Peace Operations, which
is tasked with evaluating and reviewing peacekeeping
operations. Egypt recalls that the review is supposed
to achieve tangible results aimed at strengthening
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) in peacekeeping operations. It also
requires that African States contribute to developing
the vision of the Panel.

Likewise, we welcome the words of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Egypt delivered at the High-level
Meeting in New York on 26 September, when he called
for the holding of regional African consultations on the
review process regarding United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We look forward to the convening of those
regional consultations. In 2006, Egypt proposed that
such an item be included on the agenda of the African
Union Peace and Security Council.

Above all, the relationship between the AU and
the United Nations with regard to peacekeeping efforts
must focus on building AU capacities to deal with
conflicts. For its part, Egypt will make every possible
effort in that context, including by contributing to
the full operationalization of the African Standby
Force - by 2015 or by whatever date agreed on by the
African States - for deployment anywhere in Africa,
as well as to efforts to strengthen various capacities.

Egypt volunteered, before any other country, to
assist the African Capacity for Immediate Response
to Crises, and participated in a summit in June on the
margins of the AU Summit in Malabo. We are currently
holding talks with various African missions on the
nature of Egypt's participation in that effort.

The AU also held two important meetings in Cairo
during the past month. One was a meeting of senior
officials of the African Union and the East African
Community on the subject of maintaining peace and
security. Furthermore, on 20 and 21 November, there
was a meeting of the African Union Peace Support
Operations Division. It is certain that those two
meetings will strengthen the African Union's capacities
in coordinating efforts with other African mechanisms,
with a focus on strengthening African Union capacities
in general.

Egypt has always believed that conflict resolution
involves not only peacekeeping, but must also include
the complete conflict cycle. Post-conflict efforts are
necessary to prevent relapses into conflict, ensure
sustainable peace and promote development. In that
context, Egypt's efforts to promote the development
of institutional cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU has included hosting workshops
in Egypt in 2014 to develop the regional dimension
of peacekeeping. Egypt is also a member of the
Peacebuilding Commission, where we have proposed
the establishment of a real peacekeeping architecture
for the African Union, because there is a dire need
to address the relationship between security and
development and to prevent a relapse into conflict.
Egypt has concluded that current efforts to reform
the existing mechanisms of the African Union and
the United Nations are insufficient, so we have also
called for the establishment of an African Union centre
for reconstruction and development in post-conflict
nations, which should become one of the main pillars of
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations.

None of these efforts to strengthen the partnership
between the United Nations and the AU will be
fruitful unless we have competent human resources.
In this context, the Cairo Regional Centre for Conflict
Resolution and Peacekeeping is active in developing
human resources and capacity-building in the areas of
peace, security and peacekeeping in Africa, regionally
and internationally. In that respect, I stress the
important role being played by the Centre in northern
Mali and in the Ebola crisis. We must also increase the
human resource capacities of the African Union by
managing interaction between the two organizations at
all levels, including direct interaction and by delegating
representatives and envoys. Egypt urged the African
Union to establish a forum for meetings between
officials of the United Nations and the AU. The forum
was created in 2010, and it continues to offer a unique
opportunity to exchange our experiences.

All these efforts are geared towards empowering
the United Nations and the African Union to uphold
their responsibilities and duties in maintaining regional
and international peace and security in order to promote
stability and development. The African Union has
made great strides in this direction and has developed
the African Peace and Security Architecture. We now
look forward to the United Nations increasing its

contribution to support the African Union, as required.
We hope and are confident that this thematic debate
will help help to that end.

