Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe): Zimbabwe is deeply
concerned about recent and current developments in
Angola. The peace process, in which lie all our hopes for
a stable and prosperous Angola, has not only lost
momentum, but has actually come under serious threat
over the past few months and is in mortal danger of
collapse. The renewal of civil war is a grim prospect that
cannot be altogether be discounted.

It has taken awfully long, particularly for UNITA, to
implement fully the obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol. This, along with the resultant renewal of
sporadic hostile activities and reports and rumours of
arms build-ups, recruitment drives and training camps, has
dangerously undermined the peace process in Angola.
We join the international community in demanding
that UNITA implement immediately all its obligations
under the Lusaka Protocol, including the total dismantling
of its armed forces and so-called mining police and their
integration into the national army, the transformation of

 

its radio station VORGAN into a non-partisan broadcasting
facility and full cooperation in the process of normalizing
State administration throughout Angola.

I wish to recall that on several occasions in the past
the Security Council came close to implementing punitive
measures against UNITA owing to that party's persistent
failure to fulfil the commitments it freely entered into
within the framework of the Lusaka Protocol. The peace
process in Angola has generally progressed in fits and
starts, and too often this has been owing to UNITA's
inertia, as well as to last-minute and minimal moves which
came only in response to international threats of harsher
measures and mounting pressure to keep the peace process
alive. Clearly, such a situation should not be allowed to
persist, let alone to prevail. We therefore call upon all those
who can make a contribution to help put the peace process
on track to do so.

In this regard, Zimbabwe would fully support a
decision of the Security Council to implement further
punitive and coercive measures against UNITA and would
urge the Council to adopt unanimously the draft resolution
now before it. We are displeased with UNITA's
performance and, at the same time, we wish to demonstrate
and reaffirm our commitment to ensuring that the Angolan
peace process and that country's destiny are not further
jeopardized by narrow, selfish or partisan interests.

In the meantime, we call upon the people of Angola
to show maximum restraint and to refrain from any action
which might lead to a renewal of hostilities.

Finally, Zimbabwe supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation to postpone the withdrawal of the United
Nations military units from Angola until the end of October
1997, with the understanding that the drawdown would be
completed in November this year, taking into account the
situation on the ground and progress in implementing the
remaining relevant aspects of the peace process.
Accordingly, Zimbabwe has already informed the Secretary-
General that its contingent of observers, as well as Force
Commander Major-General Philip Sibanda, will remain at
the service of the United Nations Observer Mission.

