The President: I would now like to make a
statement in my capacity as representative of Pakistan.

I would like to add my voice and that of my
delegation to those speakers who have thanked
Ambassador Mufioz for presenting the first 120-day
oral report to the Council, as required in paragraph 12
of resolution 1526 (2004).

Pakistan fully supports the work of the Al Qaeda
and Taliban sanctions Committee. We have taken note
of the annual report on the activities of the Committee
in 2003, as contained in document S/2004/281. We also
appreciate the work done by the new Monitoring Team
in the brief period since its establishment. We would
like to commend the Chairman of the Committee for
his active performance and his contribution, which
were reflected in the report presented to the Council
this morning.

In the context of today's discussions, my
delegation would like to make a few points that we
think are important. First, the Committee needs to
evaluate the performance of States not simply on the
basis of their country reports, but on the basis, mostly,
of the actions taken on the ground to counter-terrorism.
The practical combat of terrorism must remain the first
priority of the activities of the Committee.

Secondly, we have noted the usefulness of the
visits of the Chairman of the Committee to various
countries - including, this time, to Africa and Europe,
and also, last year, to Pakistan - in trying to bring the
Committee closer to the ground, so to speak, in
addressing the issues that are involved with regard to
sanctions against Al Qaeda and the Taliban.

Thirdly, the consolidated list of individuals and
entities continues to be a key tool for the Committee,
but there is a need to further improve the quality of the
information that is provided to assist prosecutors and
national authorities to proceed against the listed
individuals and entities. At times, this is not sufficient
to stand up in the judicial process. In this context, we
support the Chairman's recommendation that a system
of consultations and pre-notifications between member
States submitting names for inclusion on the
Committee's list be encouraged.

The Chairman's report has confirmed that, in
many cases, States lack capacity to combat terrorism
effectively. It is therefore quite important, as pointed
out by Ambassador Munoz, that we continue to focus
on the need to build States' capacities, in particular to
strengthen border controls to combat terrorism.

As regards the financing of terrorism, apart from
other measures, one important step required is the fine-
tuning of the international response and extending
assistance to States to help them improve their normal
financial systems and to prevent all forms of terrorist
financing. The international financing system itself
needs to become more competitive so as to prevent the
large-scale use of the informal channels that become
the sources of terrorist financing.

As regards Pakistan's policy role on Al Qaeda
and the Taliban, and terrorism in general, let me say a
few words. Pakistan has a key role in fulfilling the
objectives of the Al Qaeda and Taliban Sanctions
Committee. We have played this role in the virtual
breakdown of the Al Qaeda organization and network.
We have captured over 500 Al Qaeda and associated
terrorists, including most of its top leadership. We have
cooperated in tracking down members of the
organization in several other countries. Pakistan has
created a national anti-terrorism capacity -
intelligence police, law enforcement and so on - to
participate in this effort against terrorism. Our efforts
to track down Al Qaeda and associated terrorists on the
frontier with Afghanistan are continuing following the
recent major operation in that area, with 70,000
members of our armed forces deployed on the border
with Afghanistan.

The Al Qaeda and Taliban Sanctions Committee,
in our view, faces several challenges. Two of these
challenges are fundamental. First is the mutating nature
of the Al Qaeda network. The organization, which at
its peak was a loose network, appears to have further
mutated into smaller splinter groups, often acting
independently, coordinating loosely and recruiting
globally. This has greatly escalated the challenge of
containing, tracking and breaking down these
networks. The Chairman's recent visits to African and
other countries have confirmed the breadth and the
complexity of the challenge.

Secondly, measures against the Taliban confront a
very different kind of problem. Al Qaeda and the
Taliban became closely associated at the top leadership
level in the months preceding 11 September 2001.
Elements of this association remain in their
cooperation in regions of Afghanistan and along the
Pakistani-Afghan frontier region. However, other
Taliban elements in Afghanistan may be operating
independently of Al Qaeda, utilizing local resentments
as their calling card. Others are inactive; some are
cooperating with local and national Afghan authorities.
President Karzai appears to have adopted a wise
strategy of seeking to isolate the hard-core Taliban by
securing the cooperation of those persons and groups
that do not subscribe to the ideology and objectives of
the terrorists. The Committee will need to adopt a
similar sophistication in its approach to the
implementation of the sanctions regime against the
Taliban.

Finally, Pakistan believes that it is time we
started working on a comprehensive strategy to combat
terrorism. In particular, the international community
should not allow the fight against terrorism to be used
to suppress human rights, including the right of peoples
to self-determination, especially in cases of foreign
occupation or alien domination. The two are clearly
distinct, and this distinction needs to be maintained
through an agreed legal definition of terrorism, which
we do not have as yet.

We need to address factors that, if not directly
linked to terrorism, contribute to its emergence. These
factors include poverty, socio-economic injustices,
political repression, foreign occupation and the non-
settlement of long-standing and festering disputes
between peoples. We particularly support the
Chairman's recommendation that there should be a
continual awareness of the need to avoid a North-South
divide in the fight against terrorism and also to avoid a
clash of civilizations. In particular, we must not allow
the campaign against terrorism to be transformed into a
war against Islam, as some people would wish.

The strategy of enlightened moderation proposed
by the President of Pakistan before the General
Assembly last year and at the Kuala Lumpur Islamic
summit offers a viable policy path for both the Islamic
countries and the rest of the international community to
promote a strategy of eliminating terrorism through
cooperation and mutual support.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Japan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

