Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Security Council has just adopted a resolution on
the extension of the mandate of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). It is an important resolution. Its adoption
has provided the basic guarantee for the successful
implementation of the mandate of the largest
international peacekeeping operation in the history of
the United Nations. It is on those grounds that the
Chinese delegation voted in favour of the resolution.

The issue of the Sudan has attracted the enormous
attention of the international community in recent
years. All parties have come to understand that the
peace and stability of the Sudan, an important country
on the African continent, has an impact on the peace
and stability of the region and the continent as a whole
that cannot be ignored. The Sudan is a country with a
large territory, many neighbours and complicated
historical, religious, economic and social issues. It has
endured protracted wars and disputes.

However, in recent years, thanks to the concerted
efforts of the Sudanese Government and all political

forces in the country, and with the generous assistance
of the international community, the Sudan has achieved
notable progress in the peace process. The signing of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement signified the end
of the decades-long war between the North and the
South. People have every reason to expect that the
Sudan will finally embark on the right track of peace
and development.

The tremendous potential for development should
not only enable the Sudan to feed and clothe its people
and bring them a happy life, but also make it possible
to contribute to peace and development in Africa as a
whole, which is in the common interest of the
international community. So long as they are conducive
to the peace process in the Sudan, all efforts that help
improve North-South relations in the country, facilitate
the settlement of the Darfur issue and promote
harmony between the various political parties deserve
the generous support of the international community.

As part of the Sudan's domestic problems, the
Darfur issue has been at the centre of the international
spotlight in recent years. The Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, jointly carried out by the United Nations and
the African Union, is a mission involving huge
investment and of unprecedented size. Its success not
only concerns the early stabilization of the security
situation in Darfur and the smooth delivery of
humanitarian assistance on the ground, but also has an
impact on the safety and security of the tens of
thousands of international peacekeepers in the country.

Moreover, the fundamental solution to the Darfur
issue lies in political negotiations. Without sincere
political consensus of all parties in Darfur on the
pursuit of peace, there can be no peace in the region,
no matter how many international peacekeepers the
United Nations sends to the region. The successes and
failures of international peacekeeping operations in
recent years have shown repeatedly that a basic
prerequisite for the success of any international
peacekeeping mission is to seek the appreciation and
cooperation of the Government and the people of the
country concerned. Without that prerequisite,
international peacekeeping operations, no matter how
meticulously designed, can experience setbacks and
even failure.
Through several years of exploration, the
international community has deepened its thinking on
the Darfur issue and has gradually formed consensus
on basic approaches such as the dual-track strategy and
the tripartite mechanism. The core of that approach is
to give equal emphasis to the political process and the
deployment of peacekeepers in an effort to establish a
political mechanism of mutual trust and cooperation
among United Nations, the African Union and the
Sudanese Government, with particular emphasis on
promoting the Sudanese Government's cooperation
initiative. Those successful mechanisms have been
important for the progress made so far and, thus,
should be fully respected and supported by all parties.

The Darfur issue is very complicated. The
international effort for its settlement involves various
elements. To achieve desirable results and win the
genuine support of the people of the Sudan and Africa,
it is necessary to manage the overall balance and
priorities of political negotiations, the deployment of
peacekeepers, humanitarian relief, economic
development and justice, and to move forward steadily
with good coordination among all parties. Only in that
way can the course of international peacekeeping
continue along the correct path with healthy progress.

Any imprudent and hasty action that disregards
the objective conditions, despite its good intentions,
cannot gain the approval and support of the
international community. At present, the parties
concerned are striving to find a political solution to the
Darfur issue, but no progress will be possible without
the full cooperation of the Sudanese Government. The
indictment of the Sudanese leader proposed by the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) is
an inappropriate decision taken at an inappropriate
time. It will seriously undermine the atmosphere of
mutual political trust and cooperation between the
United Nations and the Sudanese Government, fuel the
arrogance of the rebel groups not willing in the
political process and harm the fragile and turbulent
security situation in Darfur.

The proposed indictment therefore inevitably
came under extensive criticism from many countries,
represented by important international organizations
such as the African Union, the League of Arab States,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Non-Aligned Movement. That deserves the Security
Council's full attention and respect. China is of the
View that seeking to resolve the issue of impunity
through the indictment of the Sudanese leader by the
ICC will only derail the process of resolving the Darfur

issue, and even render useless all efforts made so far by
all parties for the proper settlement of the issue.

The Security Council bears the political
responsibility for the overall peace process in the
Sudan. It must approach the issue from the political
perspective to ensure that the overall interests of the
political process and the peacekeeping deployment in
Darfur are not compromised.

Recently, during the consultations on the text of
the draft resolution on the extension of the mandate of
UNAMID, many members of the Council expressed
insightful views that China fully endorses. China
supports the reasonable request by the African Union
and other organizations for the Council to take early
action to suspend the indictment of the Sudanese leader
by the ICC, in accordance with the relevant provisions.

The Chinese Government has done a great deal of
work to push for the settlement of the Darfur issue.
Chinese peacekeepers are already on the front line of
the international peacekeeping operation in Darfur. At
present, all the engineering contingents participating in
the mission in Darfur have been deployed. The Chinese
Government is duty-bound to create favourable
conditions for them to carry out the international
peacekeeping mission safely and smoothly. I solemnly
pledge that the Chinese Government will work with the
rest of the international community to push for an early
settlement of the Darfur issue and to contribute to the
peace, stability and development of Darfur.

