Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting
to discuss the current situation in Ukraine. It is our
hope that under your presidency the Ukraine issue will
progress further towards a resolution. I thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Mr. Ivan Simonovic' and Mr. John Ging for
their important and timely briefings. Unfortunately, the
facts mentioned today show that the Minsk agreements
of 12 February this year, and of 5 and 19 September of
last year, have not been implemented in full.

The armed and pro-Russian groups are continuing
their attacks on positions and control centres of
the Ukrainian armed forces, as well as on civilian
residences. Since the ceasefire of 15 February, the
militants have carried out over 750 attacks. As a result,
the Ukrainian armed forces have lost 64 soldiers and
341 have been wounded. On the last day alone, terrorists
attacked positions of the Ukrainian military 58 times.
Since the launching of the anti-terrorist operation last
year, 1,541 Ukrainian soldiers have been killed and
6,226 wounded.

The Russian side and pro-Russian separatists
launched an offensive on the city of Debaltseve, which
has already become a symbol of Russia's flagrant
violation of international humanitarian and human
rights law. As Ambassador Apakan, head ofthe Special
Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), informed the
Council last Friday,

"This was an attempt to create new facts on the

ground, and so to change the basis on which the

latest package of measures had been agreed. These
attacks were against the letter and the spirit of the

Minsk agreements." (S/PV. 7395, p.3)

After Debaltseve, Mariupol is the most likely target
of an attack. Furthermore, with the start of the ceasefire,
the self-proclaimed leaders of the so-called Donetsk
People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic
demonstrated their reluctance to create conditions that
would allow the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to
effectively monitor and verify the ceasefire regime and
the withdrawal of heavy weapons.

For our part, we remain fully committed to the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, including
those reached in September 2014. We believe that they
remain the road map for seeking a peaceful settlement of
the conflict. The Ukrainian armed forces have strictly
followed the order issued by the President of Ukraine to
implement the ceasefire as of 15 February. Ukraine has
continued to withdraw its heavy weapons from the line
of contact. At the present time, 150-millimetre artillery
weapons have already been removed from the line of
contact. Grad missile operations were halted yesterday
and the Uragan systems are withdrawing today.
That step was carried out under OSCE monitoring
and verification. But the withdrawal of heavy
weapons from the Donbas by the Ukrainian Army
and the Russian-backed fighters should be carried
out simultaneously. Moreover, it must be precisely
coordinated and monitored by the OSCE. Ukraine
is committed to continuing to provide all necessary
assistance to the OSCE in Ukraine in that regard.
We once again call on the Russian Federation and the
Russian-backed mercenaries to immediately fulfil their
obligations under the Minsk agreements and Security
Council resolution 2202 (2015). We demand that the
Russian Federation influence its agents in eastern
Ukraine to guarantee all of the conditions necessary
for the OSCE to fulfil its duties in the field.

We find it difficult to trust the words ofthe Russian
side; they have made so many statements. We have
lost confidence even in their actions, because there
has been no real action; only the pretence of such. We
await the outcome of the implementation of the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements of September 2014 and of February 2015.

(spoke in English)

The latest report of the Human Rights Mission in
Ukraine presented today by Mr. Simonovic dismisses
any internal human rights pretext for the ongoing
external aggression in Ukraine. On the contrary, it
clearly indicates a continuing flow of heavy weaponry
and foreign fighters from the Russian Federation into
the areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions controlled
by illegal armed groups. It is crystal clear that an
immediate end to the Russian aggression in the Donbas
and the occupation of the Crimea is an indispensable
precondition for ensuring respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the Crimea and the Donbas
regions in eastern Ukraine. At the same time, Ukraine
is doing its best to take forward a human-rights agenda,
including through developing a National Human Rights
Strategy, which envisages elaborating a National Action
Plan for Human Rights.

By any standard, Russia's detention and ill-
treatment of Ms. Nadiya Savchenko constitute a grave
violation of human rights. We remind the Russian
side that at the Normandy format summit in Minsk
on 12 February it was agreed that all hostages and
illegally detained persons must be released within
19 days. The agreed measure fully covers the case of
Nadiya Savchenko. We call on Russia to honour its
commitments by immediately releasing Savchenko and
all other Ukrainian hostages.
My delegation is grateful to numerous States and
organizations for their clear and strong statements in
support of the immediate freeing of Savchenko. We
reiterate our protest against the continued attempts
by Russian authorities to fabricate new trumped-up
charges against other Ukrainian political prisoners in
Russia, among whom are Oleg Sentsov and Oleksandr
Kolchenko.

A year ago Russia launched its full-fledged
aggression against Ukraine. There is no need to
remind members of the Council how the occupation
and annexation of Crimea was conducted. What is
the human rights situation in that occupied territory
at the moment? The implementation of Russian laws,
which contravenes General Assembly resolution
68/262, has had serious human rights implications. We
have witnessed the arrests and detentions of Crimean
Tatar activists on totalitarian charges relating to the
demonstrations and activities of their civil society
organizations, and media outlets are being disrupted
on the false grounds of preventing so-called extremist
activities. The arrests, prosecutions and deportations
of Crimean Tatar leaders, including People's Deputy
of Ukraine Mustafa Dzhemilev, the Chairman of the
Crimean Tatar Mejlis, Refat Chubarov, and his Deputy,
Ahtem Ciygoz, are politically motivated. Over 10,000
have been forced to leave Crimea for mainland Ukraine.
It has been the most serious blow to the Crimean Tatars
since the Stalinist deportation.

Those and other outrageous acts must be
immediately dealt with by the Council. Under no
circumstances can the United Nations accept that
Russia has turned Crimea into an isolated military
camp and its residents into recluses. We encourage the
United Nations to be more persistent in ensuring the
implementation of international human-rights treaties
and the recommendations ofthe Human Rights Mission
in Ukraine by Russia and the administration installed
in Crimea by the occupying Power. They must also
allow access by missions of international organizations
to the peninsula seeking to monitor the observance of
human rights.

More than 6,000 deaths, many thousands of injured
people and over one million internally displaced
persons - that is the human toll that Ukraine is paying
for Russia's intervention. The Ukrainian Government is
doing its best to cope with the unfolding humanitarian
crisis. We appreciate the United Nations humanitarian
efforts, namely, the launch last week, jointly with the
Government, of the 2015 humanitarian response plan.
The Government of Ukraine devotes great attention
to the people who now live in areas temporarily
uncontrolled by the Ukrainian authorities. The
Ukrainian Government has done everything possible,
from supplying gas and electricity to providing
humanitarian assistance. Russian-backed militants
impede, through shelling and other threats, the efforts
of Ukrainian personnel to repair gas pipelines and
electricity lines. As for the Ukrainian Government's
humanitarian assistance, most of it has not, to date,
reached non-Government controlled territories, owing
to the refusal ofthe Russian-backed terrorists to provide
safe and unhindered access for humanitarian deliveries
and personnel. On 4 February, there was an unfortunate
explosion at one of the biggest mines in Donetsk. Our
special rescue team was just 45 kilometres away from
the mine, and the Ukrainian Government immediately
offered to send it there to help extract the miners
from below ground. The separatists senselessly and
mercilessly refused to let the team in.

For its part, the Russian side continues to send so-
called humanitarian convoys without the involvement
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
fully excluding the Ukrainian side. What the Russian
delegation stated today on the issue of the humanitarian
convoys is nothing but an attempt to misinform the
international community and the Security Council. I
should like to remind the Council that it is not only a
serious violation of international and national law; it is
a crime.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, a year ago, Russia became like a blind
painter who has decided to recolour the international
landscape according to his own taste. That is why a
series of black marks have appeared, blackening the
reputation of the Charter of the United Nations. That
black paint was applied by Russia's hand alone. What
remains for us to do is to try to remove those black
marks on the Council and everywhere else. I would like
to thank all members of the Security Council for their
support to Ukraine.

