Mr. Bergh (South Africa): My delegation, Sir, joins
previous speakers in congratulating you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. Your well-
known skills assure us that the Council's business is in
good hands. We also congratulate the representative of
Poland for his successful stewardship of the Council's
deliberations last month.

We thank the Secretary-General for his lucid and
gratifying report on the situation in Angola. We would like
to commend him, his Special Representative, Mr. Blondin
Beye, and the representatives of the three observer States
for their consistent efforts in ensuring that the peace
process is kept on track. Indeed, these efforts have now
been rewarded by the promulgation of legislation on the
status of Mr. Savimbi, the swearing in of UNITA deputies
and the inauguration of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation.

The inauguration of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation is an event which heralds a new era
of peace and stability in Angola. This is an era which the
peoples and the Governments of southern Africa see as
representing an extension of the process of democratization
in our region. We commend the Angolan leaders for this
display of statesmanship.

South Africa welcomes the decision of the Joint
Commission to dispatch special groups to quartering and
demobilization centres to assess the situation and to identify
measures that will help accelerate the incorporation of
UNITA soldiers into the Angolan Armed Forces and the
Angolan National Police. We urge cooperation with the
Joint Commission in its endeavour, as the slow pace of the
incorporation of UNITA soldiers and their desertion from
the demobilization centres remain a cause of concern and
warrant urgent attention.

We also hope that both parties will demonstrate zeal
when dealing with the dismantling of the remaining illegal
command posts and checkpoints and the disarmament of the
civilian population. We firmly believe that cooperation
based on good faith and mutual trust will facilitate the
implementation of all the agreements contained in the
Lusaka Protocol.

We wish to underscore once again the urgency of a
meeting between President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi.
This long-awaited meeting will provide an opportune
moment for both parties to address the outstanding prickly
issues and to chart the way forward.

The optimism generated by the current developments
in Angola should not obscure the difficult challenges that
lie ahead. Angola will need the continued generous
support of the donor community. This support is crucial
for the reconstruction and development of the war-
ravaged economic infrastructure and for the creation of an
environment conducive to social reintegration.

My delegation supports the recommendation of the
Secretary- General for the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) until 30 June 1997 and for the subsequent
establishment on 1 July 1997 of a United Nations
observer mission in Angola. The establishment of an
observer mission is necessary for the completion of
military and other tasks and for the consolidation of the
national reconciliation process. We consider that the
implementation of this recommendation is essential to
ensure that stability and lasting peace manifest themselves
in Angola.

