Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to congratulate the delegation of the
United Kingdom on holding this important meeting
as numerous countries around the world in general,
and in the Middle East in particular, are facing many
challenges and conflicts. That requires activating
mediation mechanisms and enhancing dialogue at all
levels to achieve peace and stability.

The Kingdom of Bahrain believes in resolving
disputes and establishing stability and peace in the
world through joint political will and respect for
the foundations on which the relationships between
countries are built. These include good neighbourliness,
non-interference in the internal affairs of other
countries and honouring international treaties and
conventions. Therefore, the best way to deal with the
crises is by enhancing good offices and mediation
efforts in any dispute.
At the United Nations level, the Special Envoys
of the Secretary-General shoulder considerable
responsibilities as they endeavour with determination
to manage crises and mobilize the necessary political
will to urge all parties to a conflict to take a seat at the
negotiating table.

In that regard, I would like to highlight the role
played by special political missions in numerous
countries. They address many situations in flexible
and different ways, and do what they can to support
the political process and work with partners to ensure
sustainable peace. Many such missions are working
under difficult security circumstances. Hence, the
international community must provide them with every
possible form of support and assistance so that they
can carry out their work to achieve reconciliation and
establish security and stability.

I would also like to commend the initiative of the
Secretary-General to establish the High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation in order to provide counselling
on mediation initiatives, in addition to dialogue and
negotiations. We consider that initiative to be a unique
and important one. We are confident that the members
of the Security Council will, with their experience,
push forward mediation and dialogue processes in many
important situations while working with all parties to
the conflict.

1 would also like to commend the active role of
women and youth in mediation and dialogue processes.
They are a main and effective element in bringing about
peace and stability.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain emphasizes
that respecting the sovereignty of countries and the
principle of non-interference in their internal affairs
are among the most important factors for achieving
and sustaining security and peace. Mediation efforts
in any dispute will be successful only if all parties,
in particular external parties, respect the principles
of good neighbourliness and non-interference in
the internal affairs of other States, while honouring
international treaties and principles.

