Mr. Pedersen: I would like to thank all the
members of the Security Council for their firm support
for my mission and for the work that I and my team are
trying to do in delivering a new Syria. As I said, that
must obviously be a Syrian-led and -owned process, but
we also need strong international support in order to
move forward. I am encouraged by what I have heard
here today. I am, of course, looking for what unites us
and not what highlights Council members' differences.

I have been asked several questions. Let me start by
emphasizing that I think that we all share the concern
about the increased violence, which I mentioned in my
briefing, not just in the north-west but elsewhere too.
In the past few weeks, as was rightly stated, we have
seen attacks on Government positions and on civilians
by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, and we have also seen the
Government respond by striking various targets in Idlib
governorate. As I said in my briefing, that has led to
increased civilian casualties and further displacement.
However, I think it is also important to remind ourselves
that the situation has been relatively more stable in the
wake of the ceasefire agreed on through Turkey and
Russia. As I said in my briefing, we encourage Turkey
and Russia to continue to uphold the ceasefire and to
increase the patrolling in the area, which we believe is
key. I also emphasized in my briefing to the Council
that all counter-terrorism activities must respect
international humanitarian law, and I want to repeat
that once more.

With regard to the constitutional committee, I

want to emphasize that I do believe we are making

progress. As I said, it is a package. It is a discussion of
names and the rules of procedure. As I tried to make

clear in my briefing, we have made what I believe to

be tangible progress on the rules of procedure, and it

should be possible to come to some kind of agreement
in that regard. When it comes to the names there is still
some work to be done, but what we have achieved is
also good, I believe. As I said, we have agreed that six
names have to be replaced. We are currently discussing
how we can establish a format that could be agreeable to
all parties in the Government and the opposition so that
we can move forward on it. I have emphasized from day
one that I think the constitutional committee could be
a door-opener for the political process. In itself it will
not mean much if there is no political will to use that
door-opener, and of course it should be the beginning
ofa process. We need the Council's support to continue
that work. Listening to everyone today, I am confident
that I will have it.

From day one, one of my top priorities has been
the issue of detainees, abductees and missing persons.
As I highlighted to the Council, both in my briefing
in March (S/PV.8475) and today, that has been one
of my key messages to both the Government and the
opposition. I have emphasized to the Government that
in my view unilateral action is needed when it comes
to the issue of detainees and missing persons. As I
said, I have received good responses, but what I need
is tangible results. I will therefore continue that work,
together with my team and hopefully also with the
support of relevant international actors. I hope to be
able to report more on that when I return to the Council
next month.

I want to emphasize that after eight years of war, it
is difficult for the warring parties to take the first step.
That is why I believe it is extremely important that the
Syrian parties, the Government and the Syrian National
Council continue to hear from the Security Council that
it is united behind my mandate and supports a political
process, and that hopefully we can soon start to work
seriously in Geneva.

Once more, I want to thank the members of the
Council warmly and offer my congratulations to
Germany, as I understand that this may be the last
meeting under the German presidency.

