Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank Mr. Miyet for introducing the
Secretary-General's report and to express Canada's
support for the recommendations contained in the
report concerning the mandate and expanded structure
of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE).

We believe that the Security Council can make a
further contribution to the commendable diplomatic
efforts that have been deployed in the settlement of this
conflict, including those of the Organization of African
Unity, the Government of Algeria and President
Bouteflika, the European Union and the United States,
all of which we would like to thank.

Diplomacy has played its role in an effective
manner. It is now up to the Security Council to
consolidate the gains achieved through the rapid
deployment of an effective United Nations presence
that would ensure, through a clear-sighted and
achievable mandate, not only the continued suspension
of hostilities but also the necessary conditions for a
lasting peace. We associate ourselves with the
statements made by the representatives of the
Netherlands and Argentina in this respect.

Canada considers that this Mission will provide
the United Nations with the opportunity to demonstrate
its peacekeeping capabilities. We believe that the
Secretary-General's report is particularly persuasive
because of its very thoughtful and detailed nature,
which clearly was helpful in the elaboration of the
recommendations.

We would also like to thank those who
participated in the reconnaissance mission that took
place from 4 to 18 July and to take note of their work,
which made it possible to elaborate the framework for
a complete and integrated mission. We believe that this
kind of evaluation mission should be sent before each
peacekeeping operation and that, whenever possible,
representatives of such missions should be present
during deliberations of the Security Council aimed at
elaborating new mandates.

(spoke in English)

The positive nature of UNMEE's evolution to this

point should not, however, obscure the continuing need
for increased capacity and authority within the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to conduct
early contingency planning and liaison deployment
ahead of Security Council authorization. This is an
essential element of efforts by Canada and others to
enhance the United Nations ability to respond in a
timely, effective and appropriate manner to emerging
peacekeeping requirements.

The complex needs of the situation in Ethiopia
and Eritrea will require a substantial deployment of our
collective political, humanitarian, security and
development resources. We should nevertheless make a
virtue out of necessity and value the integrated
structure of UNMEE as the most effective way of
addressing these needs.

The participation of the Organization of African
Unity is most welcome, given its continuing role as a
champion of the agreements between the parties. The
presence of public information and mine action units
will make an important contribution to protecting
citizens from fear and from harm.

Finally, the establishment of a coordination
mechanism with humanitarian organizations, including,
perhaps, a dedicated humanitarian coordinator within
the mission, will allow aid workers to operate more
effectively and in safer conditions.

We are laying the groundwork for a successful
mission. Ultimately, however, the burden of success or
failure rests on Ethiopia and Eritrea. We are duty-
bound to end a needless conflict that has killed more
than 100,000 and endangered millions. There are
encouraging signs in this regard, including Eritrea's
signature of the Geneva Convention on 7 August. This
important step is a reminder of the fundamental
obligation in the area of international humanitarian and
human rights law that Ethiopia and Eritrea must acquit
themselves of, most notably with respect to access to
prisoners of war, the return of displaced persons and
the promotion and protection of human rights.

