Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (Spoke in Russian): I would like to thank Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his analysis
of the evolving circumstances in Afghanistan. And,
of course, we listened carefully to the statement by
Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. We agree with
many of the views expressed in the most recent quarterly
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security (S/2017/783), and for our part would like to
make the following comments:

We are concerned about the deteriorating
military situation and increasing terrorist activity in
Afghanistan. We continue to be particularly worried
about the activities of the Afghan wing of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its attempt to
establish itself in the northern provinces. According to
our estimates, the group currently has an impressive
total of more than 7,000 fighters in the country. ISIL's
expansionist drive represents a real threat to the security
of our friends in Central Asia and to the southern
regions of Russia. Nor can we ignore the problem of
the unidentified helicopters in northern Afghanistan
that have been observed providing assistance to ISIL
fighters. This situation must be thoroughly investigated
and any such covert activity stopped immediately.

The drug problem in Afghanistan is getting worse.
We are concerned about the continuing increase in the
acreage used for drugs and the rise in their production.
Narco-dollars now account for a considerable part of
terrorists' income - as much as 35 or 40 per cent - in
Afghanistan. We therefore want international efforts
to combat the Afghan drug trade to be enhanced.
We believe there is good potential for strengthening
cooperation in that regard between Afghanistan and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization.

Regrettably, we have been compelled to conclude
that the protracted and major presence in Afghanistan
of military contingents from the United States and
NATO has not helped to stabilize the military and
political situation. We also have questions about their
intention to shift the focus of their tactics to using force
to put pressure on the armed opposition and individual
countries in the region. As we know, that approach has
not had positive results in the past and has served only
to escalate the conflict.

We firmly believe that at this stage the emphasis
should be on negotiation efforts, which will enable
us to launch the national reconciliation process as
soon as possible. Needless to say, it is Kabul that
should play the principal role in that process, but the
international partners providing external support for
it should cooperate on an equal basis and take into
account the national interests of every country in the
region, without exception. Unfortunately, despite the
presence of numerous international entities in this area,
we have failed to achieve the main goal of involving
the Taliban in peace negotiations. In that context, we
should consider the Moscow format for consultations
on Afghanistan - in which almost all the interested
parties, including the Central Asian States, are
participating - as the optimal platform for substantive
talks on national reconciliation and establishing a direct
dialogue between Kabul and the Taliban. We believe
the format is fully in line with the requirements.

We continue to believe that UNAMA plays an
important role in coordinating international assistance
to Afghanistan, and we took note of the Secretary-
General's special report on the strategic review of its
mandate (S/2017/696). However, we should note the
world's growing realization of the importance of the
regional context in settling the Afghan crisis, and
therefore of the potential of well-established entities
in the area, especially the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO). We hope to see success through
the revived mechanism ofthe SCO Afghanistan Contact
Group, whose first meeting is scheduled for 11 October.

