Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting of the Security Council. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights for their very
comprehensive briefings at the opening of this debate.

The Bahrain Declaration (A/68/959, annex),
reiterated the outcomes of the Alliance of Civilizations
Forum, held last May, with the participation of eminent
representatives of several religions and doctrines as
well as a worldwide network of universities. The Forum
reiterated the fact that humanity is something that all
persons share, no matter what their race, ethnic group,
linguistic or other origin may be Dialogue is the very
basis that brings people together in all their diversity to

achieve peace, security, justice, development, equality,
liberty and democracy.

The use of hate speech is incompatible with
humanity and civilization. Unfamiliarity with those
who are different from us leads to hatred, which in
turn leads to exclusion, discrimination, terrorism,
confrontation instead of dialogue, violence instead of
peace, and hatred instead of solidarity and friendship.

Bahrain is an oasis of multiculturalism and
multiracialism in the region that was the cradle of
civilization. We have woven a social fabric that is
open and welcoming to all, no matter what religion
or doctrine they may belong to. The mosque, the
synagogue and the church sit close together in our
capital Manama, within less than one square kilometre.
One can see Christians and Jews in Parliament and as
representatives abroad. Our leader, His Majesty King
Hamad bin Issa Al Khalifa, reiterated the need to build
a new human civilization, which will serve as the basis
of our fraternity and bind all of us together under the
flag of human values to be protected from extremism
and terrorism.

Bahrain firmly believes in the need to fight
extremist thinking, which not only degrades human
nature but also damages the precepts of the Islamic
religion, as we can see from the actions of Daesh and
others. Men of religion and knowledge must respond to
that mentality. It attacks not only individuals but ethnic
and religious minorities as well. Such people are being
displaced and their cultural heritage is the being looted
and destroyed. All of this is completely incompatible
with the precepts of any religion.

As mentioned in the concept note (S/2015/176, annex), the international community must assume its
responsibility to ensure that the Middle East remains
welcoming and open to all - a centre that protects
minorities, both ethnic and religious, and allows them
to flourish because of their variety and their cultures.
This is why we are providing humanitarian assistance
to groups that have been preyed upon by discrimination
and displacement.

