The Deputy Secretary-General: I am pleased to
be able to address the Security Council on the question
of Afghanistan this morning. But it is sad to have to do
so on a day when there is yet more bad news from that
unhappy country. You have just referred, Sir, to the
severe earthquake in the north of the country, which
has caused heavy loss of life and thousands of injuries,
and left tens of thousands without shelter. The
Secretary-General issued a statement this morning
expressing his distress at this news, which I am sure we
all share.

United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations have already sent relief items and
assessment teams into the area. A helicopter with
people from the United Nations and the International
Security Assistance Force is currently surveying the
damage. Chairman Karzai and Mr. Nigel Fisher, the
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, intend to visit the area tomorrow.

I note the large number of non-members of the
Council participating in this open meeting, and I am
encouraged by the continuing interest and support of
the international community in helping the Afghans
rebuild their society. Above all, I am pleased to be able
to introduce the Secretary-General's report to the
Security Council on the situation in Afghanistan. As
you know, in addition to providing an update on recent
events, the report also presents the Secretary-General's
concept for the future United Nations presence in
Afghanistan, for which we will seek the endorsement
of the Security Council.

Before addressing the structure of the new
mission, I would like to highlight a few developments
that have occurred in Afghanistan since the report was
issued. As the report was released only last week and
as the list of speakers before us is fairly long, I hope to
be brief.

The Interim Administration and the United
Nations have made education a key priority. The first
day of the school year, which was last Saturday,
marked a major step in getting children back to school.
Chairman Karzai launched a nationwide back-to-school
programme at a high school in Kabul, and similar
ceremonies took place throughout the country. Carol
Bellamy, of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), was also in Kabul for the occasion. It is
estimated that, around the country, 1.5 million students
were able to return to school. As part of the
programme, UNICEF organized the delivery of more
than 7,000 tons of supplies to 3,000 schools across the
country. These will provide primary-school learning
materials to more than 1.8 million children, and
teaching materials to 51,000 teachers. UNICEF is also
working to help restore some of the 2,000 schools that
have been damaged or destroyed since 1979. In
addition, 500 tents will be provided in areas where
there are no schools.

There is other good news, too. Increased rainfall
has left many farmers in the west, north and north-east
of the country optimistic about the next crop, after
three years of drought. There has been a massive
increase in land under cultivation. That optimism is
reflected in recent population movements. Internally
displaced persons have, in some areas, started to return
home spontaneously, without waiting for assistance
from aid organizations. Similarly, a record number of
refugees have benefited from an assisted-return
programme organized by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
the Interim Administration and the Government of
Pakistan. An average of 10,000 refugees a day crossed
into Afghanistan from Pakistan between 18 and 22
March. More than 83,000 Afghans have returned since
the programme began on 1 March. Six more
registration centres will be opened by UNHCR in
Pakistan within the next few weeks to cope with this
accelerating increase in demand. Preparations are under
way for the start of a similar scheme for refugees from
Iran, beginning in April.

While we are heartened by this demonstration of
popular confidence in Afghanistan's future, we are also
concerned about nutritional deficits in some parts of
the country. Rapid emergency assessments are being
undertaken in areas identified as having high rates of
malnutrition. The recent outbreak of scurvy in the
Taiwara district of Ghor province, which resulted in 20
deaths, highlights the severity of the malnutrition
problem and the need for carefully targeted
interventions. The World Food Programme (WFP) will
shortly launch a new emergency programme in the
most-affected areas. Up to 8.8 million people,
including internally displaced persons, will receive
food assistance over the next three months. In addition,
by December an estimated 1 million schoolchildren
will receive food handouts.

And yet, even while United Nations agencies
have been gearing up to meet these major
challenges - the back-to-school programme, the
return of refugees and the continuing malnutrition
crisis - they have also become increasingly alarmed
by the slow pace of funding. Almost a month ago, at
Kabul, we presented the Immediate and Transitional
Assistance Programme for the Afghan People for this
year, spelling out requirements of $1.18 billion. We
now urgently need to convert the generous pledges
already made into actual contributions. Otherwise we
shall not be able to carry on with the vital activities I
have just described.

Turning to the political front, here too we can
report significant progress. The first stage of the Loya
Jirga process will soon be completed with the public
announcement of the rules and procedures for the
selection and indirect election of participants in the
Loya Jirga and for the convening of the Loya Jirga
itself. Those rules have been developed by the Special
Independent Commission for the Convening of the
Emergency Loya Jirga following a process of
consultation that took place across Afghanistan and at
all levels of society.

A budget has been drawn up to cover the
complicated organizational and logistical arrangements
needed to convene the Loya Jirga. We are extremely
grateful for the generous contributions already made by
Germany - which has contributed $3 million - and
by the United Kingdom, the United States and the
European Commission. The Commission's secretariat,
with the support of Mr. Brahimi's Office, has designed
a public information campaign to inform Afghans
throughout the country about the Loya Jirga process.
That campaign is in part supported by the Open Media
Fund for Afghanistan, which was recently established
on the initiative of the well-known journalist and
expert on Afghanistan, Mr. Ahmed Rashid. It is
perhaps a sign of how things have changed that a man
who became famous for his reporting on war and
oppression in Afghanistan can now lend his name to
the process of democratic change there.

Recent trips by the Loya Jirga Commission to the
provinces have confirmed the enormous interest in the
Loya Jirga process across the country. In Herat, a
meeting hastily convened in the space of two hours was
attended by over 1,000 people. When it was discovered
that no women were present, another meeting was
organized at a girls' school nearby, and was attended
by several hundred women. On the other hand, the
possibility that the Loya Jirga might be intimidated or
corrupted remains a key concern. There are reports that
in Herat people have been arrested for speaking out in
favour of the Loya Jirga. In other regions people claim
that they cannot speak openly about the process for
fear of their lives. Addressing those concerns is
directly related to the question of security, to which I
will now turn.

The security situation across the country as a
whole appears to have improved somewhat over the
past few weeks. There have, however, been further
violent incidents in a few places. In particular, clashes
took place between Hazara factions in Daikundi, in the
province of Oruzgan. Mr. Brahimi met with
representatives of those factions, who then agreed to
accept an independent delegation from the Interim
Administration to mediate their differences. That
mediation process is under way. In Kandahar a grenade
was thrown into a crowded bazaar, killing one person
and injuring others. Finally, there are reports that
Taliban elements are regrouping in southern Paktia for
a guerrilla campaign against the Interim Administration
and foreign troops. Those incidents remind us how
volatile the situation in Afghanistan still is and should
warn us not to be complacent. The concerns about
security expressed in the Secretary-General's report
remain all too pertinent.

I would also like to address the related, and
increasingly important, question of the demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants. A working group
composed of the Interim Administration, the United
Nations, the International Security Assistance Force
and other parties has been established to find solutions
to this question. This group, which has already met
twice, is preparing proposals that will be considered at
a conference on security financing to be held in Geneva
on 3 April.

There have been encouraging signs form the
Ministry of Defence, commanders and soldiers that
many ex-combatants would be interested in
reintegration programmes. Work is under way to
identify labour-intensive projects and other schemes
that can employ former combatants and provide them
with an alternative to war. One promising possibility is
to train a further 5,000 deminers to help clear the vast
number of mines still scattered around the country.

The International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) has continued to build on its success in
reducing crime and improving security in Kabul. On 19
March, the command of the Kabul multinational
brigade was handed over to the German contingent,
while the United Kingdom continues to maintain
overall command of the ISAF. ISAF is about to
complete its training of the 1st Battalion of the Afghan
National Guard. The unit will hold a parade on 4 April,
and will thereafter assume its new role alongside the
existing palace guard.

Preparations for the training of a national Afghan
police force are progressing. An advance party of a
German training team arrived on 16 March. The six-
week basic training course will start in July, when the
renovation of the police academy is complete. A public
information campaign is under way to attract new
recruits. The National Commission on Police Reform
has also started its work.

Now I would like to turn to the important issue of
human rights. As stated in the Secretary-General's
report, four standing working groups were established
at the Afghan national workshop on human rights held
in Kabul on 9 March. With the support of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in particular, those working groups are planning
programmes to implement the human rights provisions
of the Bonn Agreement, including the establishment of
an independent Human Rights Commission, the
investigation and monitoring of human rights abuses
and the provision of human rights education. The
establishment of the Commission is particularly
pressing in the light of reports of continuing human
rights abuses, such as the attack on ethnic Pashtun
civilians in the north of the country, which are
described in the Secretary-General's report.

With regard to a related matter, after wide
consultations, the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General has prepared a paper on the
Judicial Commission outlining its proposed mission,
composition, powers and operating procedures. The
paper provides a necessary basis for proceeding with
the establishment of that Commission, as required by
the Bonn Agreement.

Finally, I should like to say something about the
future United Nations mission to Afghanistan, which
has been provisionally named the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). In his
report, the Secretary-General proposes a mission
structure supported by two pillars: pillar I for political
affairs and pillar II for relief, recovery and
reconstruction activities. The proposed structure
contains mechanisms for inter-pillar coordination at
both the mission headquarters and the regional levels,
thus ensuring that political and reconstruction activities
support each other rather than run at cross purposes.

A key innovation of UNAMA is the integration of
humanitarian relief, recovery and reconstruction
activities within a single pillar. The Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in charge of
pillar II will thus be responsible for direction and
oversight of all United Nations relief and
reconstruction activities in Afghanistan. This integrated
configuration will make it easier to work closely with
the legitimate Afghan authorities to rebuild
Afghanistan in a sustainable way.

Another innovation is the Secretary-General's
proposal that the mission have a light expatriate
footprint. This is to ensure that Afghans take the lead
in the post-conflict recovery phase and that the bulk of
foreign aid pledged to Afghanistan actually goes to
Afghans.

Human rights will be central to the purposes and
functions of the new mission, both as it fulfils the
provisions of the Bonn Agreement directly related to
human rights and as it seeks to integrate human rights
fully into its humanitarian, reconstruction and political
activities, including the rule of law and national
capacity-building.

A senior human rights coordinator in the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
will work with staff in both of the mission's main
operational pillars and will also coordinate human
rights activities under both pillars. The coordinator will
serve as the principal contact for the independent
Human Rights Commission and will liaise with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and other United Nations human rights
mechanisms. Staff, including Afghan nationals, will be
equipped to perform the human rights aspects of their
work, including the integration of rights-based and
gender-sensitive approaches, in the Mission's relief and
reconstruction activities.

With regard to policing, Germany has taken the
lead in this sector and has initiated a number of
significant projects related to police reform. It has
dispatched a highly experienced team of police
advisers to Kabul to undertake this work. Germany has
made clear, however, that assistance will also be
required from other donors and international
organizations. The two meetings convened in Berlin
over the past two months on the subject of policing
were aimed at securing such commitments.

In order to support German efforts in Afghanistan
and to ensure that UNAMA has adequate resources to
coordinate closely with the German team, the Afghan
Ministry of Interior and the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), as well as to provide advice
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the Secretary-General has recommended that three
police advisers be added to the mission. Both Germany
and the Ministry of Interior have welcomed that
recommendation.

The new mission in Afghanistan will face
extremely complex challenges. I believe that the
Secretary-General's proposals, developed in close
consultation with Mr. Brahimi and his team, are an
imaginative and constructive response to the
operational challenges on the ground. I look forward to
the Council's discussion of those proposals, and I very
much hope that the Council will endorse them.

