Mr. Griffiths: The eyes ofthe world are focused on
the momentum generated at the end of last year for the
peace process by the consultations in Stockholm and
the hope of the tangible improvement in the situation
of the Yemeni people. As I stated to the Security
Council immediately after those consultations, the
success in Stockholm was its success. I must therefore
start by thanking the members of the Security Council
for adopting the resolution to which the President has
referred (resolution 2451 (2018)), which endorsed the
Stockholm Agreement, authorized the deployment
of the advance team to support and facilitate
implementation, and expressed support for the
continuation of consultations early this year, including
on the framework for negotiations. I believe that the
resolution adopted last month (see S/PV.8439) sends
a very clear signal of the international community's
support for the achievements that we were able to
bring together in Stockholm and our plans to build
subsequently on the momentum gained.

Today I will take all this opportunity to brief the
Council on the implementation of the commitments
made by the parties in Stockholm, namely, the
agreement reached on the city and governorate of
Al-Hudaydah and the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa; secondly, the executive mechanism on
activating the prisoner-exchange agreement; and
thirdly, the statement of understanding on Taiz. I also
hope to provide an update on our preparations for the
next round of consultations.

Since the Stockholm consultations and in very
recent days in this past week, I have had the privilege
of meeting with President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, and also, indeed, with the Ansar Allah leader,
Abdulmalik al-Houthi. President Hadi Mansour, with
whom I met yesterday in Riyadh, warmly welcomed
the progress made in Stockholm and the Agreement
made there to which he was the key decider, and he
confirmed to me in very real and constructive terms
his hopes, as we all have, that this is an important first
step towards a comprehensive solution to the conflict.
I was interested to hear a reflection of exactly those
sentiments, when I was in Sana'a on Sunday, in my
meetings with Abdulmalik Al-Houthi, who firmly
told me in no uncertain terms of the decision and
commitment of his movement to implementing all the
provisions that were agreed in Stockholm. So they both
expressed determination to find a way forward and
to build further on the progress made in subsequent
rounds. I would like us all to bear that in mind, as I do,
when we look at the progress - some of it somewhat
difficult - on the implementation of those agreements.
But I am grateful to President Hadi Mansour and, of
course I am also grateful to Abdulmalik Al-Houthi.

This enthusiasm for actually making Stockholm
work and provide tangible differences on the ground
for the people of Yemen was also echoed by other
concerned parties and key Member States I have had
the privilege to meet since Stockholm and, in particular
in recent days, and I am grateful for their support and
they know who they are.

I am pleased to report that both sides have largely
adhered to the ceasefire we agreed in Stockholm in
Al-Hudaydah governorate that entered into force on
18 December and that there has been a significant
decrease in hostilities since then. Unfortunately,
and perhaps unsurprisingly, there has been some
violence, including in Al-Hudaydah city and in the
southern districts of the governorate. However, this is
remarkably limited compared to what we saw in the
weeks before the Stockholm consultations, and this
relative calm, I believe, indicates the tangible benefit
of the Stockholm Agreement for the people of Yemen,
and it also illustrates the commitment of both parties to
making their agreements work.

Thanks to the swift authorization provided by the
Council through resolution 2451 (2018), the United
Nations has deployed an advance monitoring team to
Al-Hudaydah, under the leadership of my esteemed
colleague Major General Patrick Cammaert of the
Netherlands, who arrived in Yemen on 22 December. In
this context, I should say that I think it is a remarkable
achievement that retired Major General Cammaert tore
himself away from other commitments and launched
himself with his team into the region at very short
notice to establish the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, the committee that will monitor the
agreements in Al-Hudaydah. We are very grateful to
General Cammaert.

That rapid deployment has given a clear signal to
the parties and the Yemeni people of the international
community's desire to turn the Agreement into
facts on the ground. General Cammaert has chaired
several meetings of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, with the participation of representatives
from both parties, to oversee the implementation of the
redeployments and the ceasefire, as agreed to in Sweden
on Al-Hudaydah. He is working with the parties on the
details of the redeployments of forces, again as foreseen
in Sweden, the provision of security in the city and the
opening of humanitarian access routes, as agreed to
in Stockholm.

The activation of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, which has happened since the arrival of
General Cammaert in late December, is very welcome.
I urge both parties to continue to engage regularly and
in good faith with General Cammaert and his team
so that the security arrangements - and, crucially,
the improvements in humanitarian access - can be
implemented swiftly, in line with what was agreed
to in Stockholm. That will build the confidence of
the parties, the Yemeni people and the international
community that what was talked about in Stockholm
can be a reality.
Regarding Taiz, as Council members will recall,
the parties agreed in Stockholm to the creation of
mechanisms to reach consensus on how to address
the situation in that city and governorate. Taiz is of
enormous historic significance for Yemen as a whole,
and the city and its people have been a driving force in
Yemen's economic and cultural life for many years. To
give it a sense of proportion, the governorate of Taiz has
a population of 2.5million people, and the city of Taiz
has been divided, by virtue of the conflict, for some
considerable time. The civilians in Taiz have suffered
far too much for far too long, and the destruction in the
city has been dreadful. The flow of humanitarian aid,
of course, needs to increase and cross the line between
the parties, and the people need the chance to rebuild.
Those are the issues that we believe that the joint
committee, which I will refer to, is there to resolve.

Since Stockholm, I have talked with the parties and
many prominent people from Taiz - my office also met
the Governor yesterday - and they all want the city to
return to calm and for the people to have hope that the
city will flourish once again. I am glad that Stockholm
provides a potential platform for that.

With the agreement of the parties, we therefore
plan to hold the first meeting of that committee as soon
as possible, ideally this month. We are also working
on a civil society mechanism, including the significant
participation of women, to support thatjoint committee
in its endeavours. I am hopeful that what we might
plan to see in Taiz is something that we might also see
achieved in Al-Hudaydah, which should not be the only
beneficiary of the agreements that we made in Sweden.

On the agreement for the exchange of prisoners, we
are working with both parties to finalize the lists of
prisoners submitted by each in Stockholm. Iparticularly
want to record our appreciation for the invaluable
support provided by the International Committee of the
Red Cross in that regard. As agreed to in Stockholm, we
plan to hold a meeting of the supervisory committee,
which includes both parties. I am hopeful that it will
take place in Amman, from where I will be speaking
on Monday. That will be a step towards the day that we
hope to see of an airlift of many thousands of prisoners
exchanged and released to return to their families.

I am grateful for the commitment and patience that
both parties have shown since Stockholm. Progress
on some of the issues has been gradual and, indeed,
somewhat tentative, but there is a tangible contribution
to peace. There are no doubt many hurdles to be
overcome in the days, weeks and months ahead, but I
would say here that the parties must not be diverted
from their commitments through issues of delays or
difficulties, which are unexpected. I ask for the support
of the Council in encouraging the parties to stay the
course and overcome together any challenges that may
be encountered along the way, and reminding them that
we are here to help them.

I am under no illusion that these are very sensitive
and challenging days for both parties and Yemen as a
whole. The war continues in other parts of the country,
which is why we need to make progress quickly. I call
on the parties to recognize that these first steps need
to be protected so that we can reach those other parts
of the country in due course. The conflict continues to
have a terrible impact on the economy and the overall
humanitarian situation, as I know Mr. Lowcock will
describe in a minute.

It was unfortunate that we were unable to reach
consensus on our way forward on the Central Bank of
Yemen while we were together in Sweden, and on the
opening of Sana'a airport during those consultations in
December. Both ofthose issues, ifresolved, would make
a significant contribution to relieving humanitarian
suffering. Of course, as we discussed in the Security
Council meeting in December (see S/PV.8424), we
are continuing to work on finding solutions before the
resumption of the next round of consultations.

I should mention that, as ever, the demands of
southern groups are also a key part of the solution to the
Yemeni equation. I am grateful for the effort exerted
by key Yemeni stakeholders and the international
community to improve stability in the southern
governorates in recent months, which has been a
remarkable achievement. As I have always said, I am
committed to ensuring the participation of southern
groups in the peace process. I am continuing to work
with that goal in mind with a range of those groups.
Their contribution will be of vital importance in
fulfilling the hope of peace.

In conclusion, the message that I have been
receiving, particularly from the parties but also from
key Member States and those with an interest in peace
in Yemen, has been consistent in these past days. It is
that we must implement what was agreed to in Sweden
and show substantial progress in those commitments if
we are to build the confidence that we have hoped to
create from them. There is a sense of tangible hope.
There is a sense ofoptimism, as well as concern. It is my
View, and it is shared by the leadership of both parties
but also others, that substantial progress, particularly
on Al-Hudaydah, is something that we would like to see
before we reconvene the next consultations.

Members of the Council will remember that in the
Stockholm Agreement there was an agreement to open
those consultations without conditions. It is not a matter
of conditioning that decision. It is a matter of making
progress so that in the next round we will not be dealing
with the issues that were experienced in the first. I am
therefore still hopeful that we can proceed to a next
round of consultations in the near future. I am working
with both parties to make sure that it will happen at the
earliest possible date, and that in those consultations
we will begin both to monitor the progress made out of
Sweden and discuss the fundamental issues that need to
be addressed to resolve the conflict.

