Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): I thank the Russian
Federation for convening today's debate. This meeting
is an important opportunity to recommit to effective
cooperation in countering terrorism, the scourge of
which has become more diffuse, with an increase of
terrorist acts, including those motivated by intolerance
or extremism.

No country in the world is immune to terrorism.
The international community should stand united
and work hand in hand to counter terrorism in all its
dimensions. Any attempts to justify those who inspire
or perpetrate terrorism and violent extremism or
those who incite hate crime and violence, especially
in conflict environments, should be decisively and
unequivocally condemned at all levels.

Armenia remains a staunch advocate of enhanced
international collaboration to combat terrorism,
regardless of geography, underlying motives or
narratives. It is our deep conviction that terrorism
should not be associated with any particular
civilization, religion, nationality or ethnic group. We
are gravely concerned about instances where entire
communities are deliberately targeted for the mere
fact of belonging to a particular ethnic or religious
group. The meticulously planned acts of barbarism
and vandalism against cultural monuments, as well as
the annihilation of several world heritage sites in Iraq
and Syria, are a case in point and a matter of serious
concern for humankind.

Armenia was among the first Member States to
resolutely condemn the persecution of the civilian
population perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, the Al-Nusra Front, Al-Qaida and their
affiliates. The brutal crimes against the Armenian
population in the Syrian cities of Kesab and Deir ez-
Zor, the deliberate destruction of cultural and religious
monuments and the mass atrocities committed by
terrorists from the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham and the Al-Nusra Front have demonstrated that
terrorism is essentially a manifestation of the denial of
fundamental human rights. Armenia has demonstrated
consistent commitment to helping to bring lasting
change to the areas affected by the crisis, as reflected
through the deployment of our national humanitarian
mission in Syria.

Armenia remains firmly committed to the global
fight against terrorism and is actively engaged in
international and regional activities to this end. We
highly value the existing cooperative platforms aimed
at amplifying our national efforts and improving
bilateral dialogue to prevent and counter terrorism.
Armenia continues its thorough implementation of the
United Nations counter-terrorism conventions and their
additional protocols, as well as the relevant resolutions
adopted by the Security Council.

The recent visit conducted by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
to Armenia highlighted our country's progress in
addressing terrorism-related challenges, including
through effective international cooperation. Following
the recommendations contained in the CTED report
on the follow-up assessment visit, Armenia began
the process of establishing and applying advanced
passenger information systems.

Regional and subregional organizations have
a pivotal role to play in promoting and facilitating
cooperation, including through sharing best practices
and building greater capacity to effectively address
the threats of terrorism. We give high priority to the
ongoing activities conducted in partnership with
the Anti-Terrorism Centre of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) and the relevant structural
units of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO). The competent authorities of Armenia
continue to contribute to the effective implementation
of the 2017-2019 CIS programme of cooperation of the
CIS member States in combating terrorism and other
violent manifestations of extremism. Representatives
of national security agencies, special services and law
enforcement bodies have consistently participated in
the joint counter-terrorism exercises of the CIS, under
the general coordination of its Anti-Terrorism Centre.

As we speak, the two final stages of the Ararat
Anti-Terror 2019 exercise are being carried out in
Armenia, with the participation of the competent State
security agencies from several CIS member States,
including Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
the Russian Federation, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
Armenia actively participates in the regularly conducted
joint operations of the CSTO member States - Kanal,
Nelegal, and Proxy - as well as in the joint counter-
terrorism exercises of the CIS, coordinated by its
Anti-Terrorism Centre.

Armenia attaches equally high importance
to its work within other regional and subregional
organizations of which it is a member or with which
it enjoys close cooperation. As a dialogue partner
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, we are
looking forward to further expanding the agenda of our
partnership and taking our dialogue forward.

Against the backdrop of the current international
agenda, with proliferating threats, challenges and
conflicts, cooperation among States from subregional
to regional to global levels has been and remains as
relevant as ever in helping identify common solutions
and sustainable dialogue for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

