Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, on behalf of the delegation of
Lebanon, to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
country, China, for assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I would also like to
commend the Belgian delegation, which presided over
the Council during the past month. I commend
Mr. Serge Brammertz for continuing in a highly
professional manner the investigations that have been
entrusted to him.

The Council has followed the just efforts of
Lebanon to face the terrorist acts that have been
directed against our State for over two years. It has
actively followed the events surrounding the
assassination of Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and
established the International Independent Investigation
Commission (IIIC) to find those who planned and
carried out this major crime against Lebanon. Since
then, the Council has not hesitated in responding
positively to the requests of the Lebanese Government
for technical assistance with regard to terrorist crimes
that followed, the most recent of which was the
assassination of Member of Parliament Walid Eido.

The persistence of the international community
and the Council in these matters was crowned by the
adoption of resolution 1757 (2007), which laid down
the legal context for the establishment of the special
international tribunal for Lebanon, in accordance with
an arrangement that resulted from considerable study
between the United Nations and the Lebanese
Government. Since the establishment of this tribunal
will put an end to impunity, it will no doubt contribute
to deterring all those who would like to continue their
terrorist activities and will enhance the stability of our
country and the sense of security of our people.
07-43152
The Council is meeting today to consider to the
eighth report submitted by Commissioner Serge
Brammertz, which represents an advanced stage in the
march for justice and truth that we have started
together. We have listened attentively to the briefing by
Commissioner Brammertz on the results achieved by
IIIC over the past four months, and on behalf of my
Government I would like to emphasize the following
points.

First, we commend the high professionalism that
characterized the work of the IIIC Commissioner and
all his staff and their efforts in continuing to seek
information on a solid and clear basis.

Secondly, we welcome the clear progress that the
investigation has made, which will now allow
Commissioner Brammertz to analyse the information
provided and present the Commission's conclusions, as
the Commissioner mentioned in more than one
paragraph of his report.

Thirdly, we must mention that the Commission
has started taking measures to provide the best possible
conditions for the transition of its work to the Office of
the Prosecutor of the international tribunal.

Fourthly, we wish to thank the Commission for
the technical assistance that it is providing to the
Lebanese authorities to investigate the terrorist crimes
that followed the assassination of Prime Minister Hariri
and his companions, which has enabled us to establish
causal and methodological relations between many of
these crimes.

Fifthly, my Government asserts its keenness to
ensure the security of IIIC and the safety of its
personnel. It has thus intensified the measures to
07-43152

provide security to the Commission. Political
assassinations and terrorist explosions that seek to
destabilize Lebanon and its sovereignty will not be
allowed to undermine one of the pillars of Lebanese
and international justice and should not be allowed to
affect in any way the work of international legitimacy
in Lebanon - that is, the task of the international force
and its role in southern Lebanon.

The eighth report of IIIC arrives on the first
anniversary of the destructive Israeli aggression against
Lebanon. The Council played a major role in putting an
end to that aggression and urged the international
community to provide assistance to Lebanon in
different fields. The Council's commitment to the
stability of Lebanon, its safety and the security of its
people is reiterated every time the Council condemns
terrorist acts that seek to destabilize Lebanon and its
unique national experiment, which is based on
diversity, openness, democracy and respect for private
and public freedoms.

The Council's meeting today is indeed an
expression of the solid interrelationship between
justice and stability and the Council's keenness for
international peace and security.

