Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): My delegation welcomes
your very strong leadership, Mr. President, in
steering the work of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions in
an open and transparent manner. I thank you also for
your continued personal presence here to listen to all
our views. We also appreciate the work of Japan, the
previous Chair of the Informal Working Group, and its
role in issuing and revising note 507 (S/2017/507, annex).

I believe that we have been fortunate today to
have had two comprehensive briefings, by Ms. Karin
Landgren of Security Council Report and Mr. James
Cockayne of the United Nations University Centre
for Policy Research. They gave us plenty of food for
thought. This morning, we also heard a very important
statement, which was delivered by the Permanent
Representative of South Africa on behalf of the 10
elected members (E-lO) of the Security Council.
Singapore endorses that statement in its entirety.

The statement of the E-10 is significant because
it speaks for the wider membership. Indeed, it is our
expectation that all elected members will seriously
take the working methods of the Council as their
responsibility during their terms, and we also hope that
all elected members will be committed to improving
the working methods of the Council. From Singapore's
point of View, that is how we willjudge the performance
of elected members: their commitment to improving
the working methods of the Council.

That is not a question of dividing the Council
between the permanent members and the elected
members. For Singapore, it is a question of making the
work of the Council more transparent and accountable
so that the large majority of the United Nations Members
that are not in the Council and have difficulties in being
elected to the Council can participate in and support the
important work being done in the Council.

As a small country, Singapore strongly supports
improvements to the working methods of the Council,
and we believe that this would bring benefits to all
States, big and small, including the permanent members.
It is an area where we can all make an immediate and
noticeable difference without getting caught up in the
legalities and technicalities pertaining to amending the
Charter of the United Nations.

I would like to focus my remarks on a few areas.

First, we are pleased that good progress has been
made on transparency and accountability. There has
been an increased number of open debates and informal
briefings on the work of the Council to the wider United
Nations membership and more meetings are being
covered by webcast, which is a trend we encourage.

Notwithstanding that, the practice of closed
consultations remains. My delegation fully understands
the necessity for closed discussions on certain issues;
indeed, they are often necessary in order to have a
very candid and frank discussion among the main
stakeholders. Nevertheless, we believe that it would
be useful if some form of summary records or at least
decision points were maintained for those meetings
and shared with the wider membership. In addition,
the Council should seriously think of beginning a
conversation on formalizing its provisional rules of
procedure. They constitute the only set of rules guiding
the working methods, and yet they remain provisional
after more than 70 years. If codified, the rules of
procedure would help the Council to account for its
own performance and, more importantly, enhance the
Council's legitimacy and credibility.

Secondly, on inclusiveness, we are encouraged
that the Council has made greater use of formats
such as Arria Formula meetings and Toledo-format
dialogues to engage more interactively with the
General Assembly. We are also encouraged by the
regularization of introductory and wrap-up meetings
with the wider membership by each month's President.
We hope that these meetings will continue as a standard
practice, and that they will contain more interactive
discussion and greater analysis. We would suggest that
the monthly wrap-up meetings be reflected as part of
the programme of work of the Council and that the date
and time of these meetings be fixed well in advance
and communicated to all Members with ample notice so
that all of us can come prepared to participate.

My delegation is also encouraged by signs of
increased intra-Council inclusiveness. The E-lO have
held regular meetings, including with the Secretary-
General, and we think that they have promoted the
E-10's more inclusive performance within the Council.
We are heartened to see more E-10 members taking
on penholder roles in the Council. A Council where
members feel sidelined is not only non-inclusive, but
will also be ineffective in representing the interests of
the wider membership.

With regard to inclusiveness, the report of the
Security Council to the General Assembly plays an
important role because it is the means by which the
Council reaches out and communicates to the wider
membership in the Assembly. As was pointed out
earlier, the report is due by the spring and yet we
do not have it yet. In order for all Members to have
a considered debate on the work of the Council, these
reports should be made available to all members in
good time. Unfortunately, in recent years we have seen
a trend whereby the report has been submitted later and
later and, worst still, the debate on the report has been
rushed and held at very short notice, thereby not enabling
Members to be prepared properly for a substantive
discussion. We hope that Council members will take
note of this and submit the reports in good time so that
the wider membership can have a substantive debate
on the work of the Council. In our view, a delay in the
submission of the report does not help the credibility or
legitimacy of the Security Council. In fact, a thorough
debate in the General Assembly on the work and report
of the Council would help to enhance the Council's
credibility and legitimacy.

My third point relates to effectiveness. The
Council's record on this remains mixed, with a strong
voice being raised on some issues, but a lack ofadequate
action on others. The veto, unfortunately, has too often
been used to block Council action aimed at preventing
mass atrocity crimes. Singapore joined more than 100
countries in supporting the French-Mexican initiative
and the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group's code of conduct on limiting the use of the veto
against mass atrocity crimes. While the five permanent
have special privileges, these, in our View, must be
wielded with increased responsibilities. Otherwise, the
Council will not be able to discharge its duties in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Let me conclude, Mr. President, by thanking your
country for the attention it has brought to bear on this
issue and you personally. We support your intention
to follow up on today's meeting by further discussing
practical proposals within the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
We call on all members to continue constructive

engagement in improving the working methods of the
Council. In line with the E-10's earlier statement, we
support the adoption of specific notes by the President
on specific working method issues as and when they are
agreed in order to allow for practical reforms. We look
forward to a good outcome under your able leadership.

