Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
debate. We would also like to thank Mr. Annabi for
having presented us, as always, a fully detailed and
exact description of the situation in East Timor.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union-
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia-
as well as Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, which are also
associated with the European Union, endorse this
statement.

The European Union wishes today to reaffirm its
support for what the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) has done to
lead East Timor to independence. A year ago, almost to
the day, the East Timorese people chose independence.
UNTAET, decisively spurred forward by the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Mr. Vieira de Mello,
has already done considerable work, and that work
must be pursued in full cooperation with the East
Timorese themselves. It is essential that all strata of the
Timorese population be able to take an effective part in
building the future independent State. The
establishment last month of a joint Government,
bringing together representatives of UNTAET and of
the Timorese on an equal footing, seems to us to be
quite positive in this regard.

Nonetheless, the European Union remains
extremely concerned over the situation of tens of
thousands of East Timorese refugees in West Timor.
The European Union urges Indonesia to fulfil totally
and unconditionally its commitment to help those who
wish to be repatriated and to put an end to the
unacceptable campaigns of disinformation and
intimidation waged by the militias in the refugee
camps. The European Union condemns in the strongest
terms the assault on 22 August against a team from the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and deplores the fact that that
attack, far from being an isolated act, was part of an
almost continuous series of acts of harassment and
violence against humanitarian personnel and refugees
since the end of spring. The European Union notes with
particular concern that these conditions compelled
UNHCR to suspend its cooperation for a number of
days.

The European Union takes note of the new
commitments made by the Indonesian Government to
settle the refugee question. It calls upon the Indonesian
Government to take effective measures to restore law
and order, to create conditions of safety and security
for the refugees and the international humanitarian
personnel, to make it possible for that personnel to
have access to the camps in full freedom and security
and to immediately arrest and bring to justice the
extremist militia members who are trying to sabotage
the reconciliation process. All these measures are
indispensable in order to complete the registration of
refugees, which will give them real freedom of choice
between returning to East Timor as soon as possible or
being settled in Indonesia.

The European Union is deeply concerned at the
destabilizing impact of the incursion of well-trained
and well-equipped militias into East Timor from West
Timor. The militias' activities could make the process
of transition to independence more fragile. In this
context, the European Union especially condemns the
killing of two UNTAET Blue Helmets, in late July and
early August. It also deplores the recent death of a
Bangladesh soldier.

The European Union believes that the conditions
are in place in East Timor today to enable the Timorese
to pursue a real and sturdy process of national
reconciliation. In this context, it is vital that the
international community continue to demonstrate its
commitment to supporting the recovery and
development of East Timor.

Timor has been the subject of an unprecedented
United Nations operation. UNTAET has enjoyed
considerable backing from the international community
and the largest budget of all current peacekeeping
operations. As has been the case for other
peacekeeping operations, the costs and means of this
operation need to be evaluated on an ongoing basis to
ensure the best possible allocation of resources. In this
context, the European Union recalls the request made
by the Security Council last 3 August to have a military
assessment of security conditions and of their
implications for the structure of UNTAET's military
component. The European Union would especially like
to have up-to-date information on UNTAET's military
needs, the effective distribution of capabilities in the
territory in relation to local security constraints, the
tasks actually assigned to UNTAET's military
component and the prospects for how it will continue
to evolve.
As we stressed last June in the Security Council,
the European Union considers that the transition period
in East Timor is entering a crucial phase. The United
Nations mission, together with the East Timorese, must
facilitate the emergence of a new, democratic State,
one built upon the essential foundation of the primacy
of law, an independent State that is fully integrated into
its region and at peace with all its neighbours.

