Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Since this is the first formal meeting of
the Security Council in September, it gives me sincere
satisfaction to welcome you, Sir, to the post of President
of the Security Council and to wish you success. I should
also like to express gratitude to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia, Ambassador
Wisnumurti, for his skilled guidance of the activities of
the Council in August.

The delegation of the Russian Federation has already
on several occasions expressed serious concern over the
explosive situation in the subregion of the Great Lakes in
central Africa. The tense situation existing there, resulting
from the exacerbation of political and ethnic problems, is
significantly aggravated by the uncontrolled spread of
arms among civilians and refugees, which is creating a
real threat to peace and stability for all the countries of
the region. Particular concern is caused by reports of the
supply of arms to former Rwandan government forces in
violation of the embargo imposed by resolutions 918
(1994) and 1011 (1995).

The Russian delegation is firmly convinced that the
tasks of ensuring security, peace and stability in Rwanda
and throughout the region can be implemented only
through a balanced and comprehensive approach. An
integral part of this, in our view, must be the
establishment of a solid barrier to the illegal
dissemination of arms, as such a flow could give rise to
a new cycle of bloody violence and fratricidal war in
Rwanda, with all the devastating consequences that would
arise for the peoples of the region.

 

On that basis, we have voted in favour of the
resolution just adopted, together with all the other members
of the Council. The resolution adequately reflects the
existing situation and is balanced and measured. We are
convinced that the establishment of the International
Commission to investigate allegations of supplies of arms
to the former Rwandan government forces will substantially
contribute to averting a resumption of the conflict in the
region. It is important that the Commission commence
implementation of the mandate entrusted to it without
delay. It is clear that the success of the activity of the
Commission will significantly depend on the cooperation
and support of the Governments of interested countries of
the region, and we call on them to provide the Commission
with all necessary assistance and support.

We believe that the conclusions and recommendations
of the Commission will be a sound source of assistance for
the international community in its efforts to normalize the
situation in the Great Lakes region.

