Mr. Seck (spoke in French): I would first of all like
to express our deep appreciation for the able manner
in which you, Mr. President, have guided the work of
the Security Council in October. I would also like to
pay special tribute to the Secretary-General for his
support for the exercise of the fundamental rights of
the Palestinian people and his constant assistance
during the conflict over the summer. We are grateful
for his detailed briefing on the results of the recent
Cairo Conference and his visit to the region. The
tireless efforts of the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, and of
the Commissioner General for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, Mr. Pierre Krahenbiihl, together with their
outstanding specialized teams on the ground, must also
be recognized. I also take this opportunity to commend
Ambassador Mansour for his presentation to us this
morning.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People has condemned,
in the strongest possible terms, the excessive and
disproportionate use of force during the Israeli assault
on the occupied Gaza Strip, which resulted in the deaths
of more than 2,100 Palestinians. The Committee also
condemned the indiscriminate rocket fire emanating
from Gaza.

We were therefore greatly dismayed to hear, in the
wake ofthat conflict, Israel's announcement ofnew plans
for settlements and for annexing land outside its 1967
borders. The Committee and the entire international
community strongly condemn such actions, which are
not conducive to a peaceful settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian crisis.

In Gaza, the Secretary-General expressed the view
of the vast majority of Member States when he said that
there would be no peace in the Middle East, nor security
for Israel, while the crisis in Gaza was not resolved. He
also emphasized that the "build-destroy" cycle must
be broken and that the mindless pattern of blockade,
rockets and destruction must stop. The Committee

shares the conviction of the Secretary-General and
calls for an immediate end to the blockade of Gaza by
the occupying Power.

The Committee would also like to express its
appreciation for the efforts of Egypt and Norway in
organizing last week's Cairo International Conference.
We welcome the generosity of the international
community in pledging $5.4 billion to support
reconstruction in Gaza and meet the urgent needs of
the Palestinian people. In that connection, the Special
Coordinator must play a particularly important role
in overseeing the delivery of construction materials
through a negotiated, tripartite access regime. The
international community, especially the Security
Council, will need to ensure that the mechanism works
appropriately to meet the needs of those most affected.

Together with the rest of the international
community, the Committee welcomes the establishment
of the Government of national consensus in Gaza. Its
effective work will help to consolidate governance and
secure the importation of equipment that is critical
for the reconstruction efforts. The decision by the
Government of Israel to facilitate access for Palestinian
Ministers from the West Bank to Gaza is a step in the
right direction, and the Committee hopes that Israel
will continue to thus facilitate the efforts of the new
Government to accomplish the immense task before it.

The Committee also welcomes the decision by the
new Government of Sweden to recognize the State of
Palestine, and appreciates the commitments made by
the Government of France. Together with the vote last
Monday by the British Parliament calling for recognition
of the Palestinian State, those separate decisions have
given new impetus to the international momentum in
support of the exercise of the legitimate and inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people.

Along with the rest of the international community,
the Committee hopes that this momentum will breathe
new life into the negotiations between the parties, which
must be restarted as soon as possible, this time with a
specific deadline and a firm commitment to agree on
viable borders for both the State of Israel and the state
of Palestine. Moreover, the Committee supports the

proposals made by the state of Palestine at the United
Nations and invites the Security Council and the rest of
the international community to support that initiative.

To the pessimists and extremists on all sides, I
would like to offer a lesson from Professor Noam
Chomsky, an eminent thinker and a public figure
who is emblematic of our universal conscience, who
addressed our Committee a week ago to the day.
Professor Chomsky emphasized that the choice before
the international community, and in particular its organ
that is charged with the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council, was either
a viable two-State solution or a continuation into the
indeterminate future of the status quo, with more
Israeli settlements and a continued siege of Gaza, and
thus a prolonged period of instability for both Palestine
and Israel.

The United Nations Committee for the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People can
certainly not support that second option, which would
guarantee the fait accompli of the occupation and the
denial of the fundamental rights of the Palestinian
people. During this International Year of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, the Security Council must
not allow the status quo to stand.
