Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): I
should like, at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council and
to express the appreciation of the delegation of Egypt for
the important role that you have been playing in your high
post - a role underscored by your high diplomatic skills.

Allow me also to express our appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Oman for the outstanding
work as President of the Council during the month of
November 1995.

At the outset, I wish to convey the Egyptian
delegation's appreciation to the Security Council for its
prompt response to the request of the group of States whose
representatives signed the letter asking that this meeting be
convened with the aim of considering the means whereby
the effectiveness of consultations between the Council and
countries contributing troops to peace-keeping operations
may be consolidated and enhanced.

Egypt had the honour of participating in this initiative,
which was taken and sponsored by Argentina, with the
participation of 36 States, from different geographic regions
of the world and of various degrees of economic growth.
All of those States share a common interest, namely
increasing the support of all States for the role performed
by the United Nations in the area of peace-keeping, and
enhancing the efficacy of that role. This is an objective
that, we are sure, enjoys extensive international support.
Therefore, I should like to extend thanks and appreciation
to the delegation of Argentina and in particular to
Ambassador Cardenas, for sponsoring this new initiative.
Egypt's delegation wishes to express its full solidarity with
the contents of the statement by Ambassador Cardenas in
this respect.

I wish to point out also that the present initiative
stemmed from the basis we laid a year ago through the
initiative taken by Argentina and New Zealand, which led
to the adoption by the Security Council of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/1994/62) of 4 November 1994. In that
presidential statement, the Council established general rules
governing the procedures for consultations with troop-
contributing countries which consultations are to be held
through meetings between members of the Council, troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat, in good time
before the Council decides to effect significant changes in
the mandate of any peace-keeping operation or to
terminate any particular such operation.

The Council also decided to keep the arrangements
for the exchange of information and views with troop
contributors under review in order to consider further
measures to enhance those arrangements in the light of
experience.

At the time, we welcomed those consultation
arrangements adopted by the Council as they represented
marked progress towards recognition of the right of the
countries that contribute troops to peace-keeping
operations to participate in making the decisions that
affect the security and safety of such troops, in
accordance with the spirit of Article 44 of the United
Nations Charter.

Notwithstanding, the delegation of Egypt, in
statements to the General Assembly and to the Security
Council, has repeatedly voiced the conviction that the
consultation arrangements adopted by the Council fall far
short of providing for troop-contributing countries'
effective participation in the decision-making process as
they lack any formal or institutional aspect and are held
in a manner that lacks regularity.

Practical experience has shown that most
consultation meetings held in accordance with the
presidential statement made on behalf of the Council have
been held without allowing the troop-contributing
countries enough time to communicate to their delegations
in New York their views or to supply those delegations
with whatever information may be available to their
Governments. The troop-contributing countries have also
noticed that those consultation meetings have become a
mere formality that is performed as a ceremonial act that
has no effect whatever on the Council's decision when
the Council modifies the mandate of a peace-keeping
operation.

At meetings of the special committee dealing with
peace-keeping operations, as well as at meetings of the
General Assembly in the course of this fiftieth session,
numerous States have expressed the view that the present
consultation arrangements, despite their many benefits,
need to be reviewed urgently by the Security Council.

The statement by the Ambassador of Argentina has
expressed the least common denominator in the positions
of the group of States, including Egypt, that requested the
convening of this meeting. We affirm that the proposals

 

those States agreed to put forward represent a fine balance
that reflects the interests of the troop-contributing countries,
while taking into account the responsibilities and spheres of
competence of the Security Council with regard to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The first step towards reforming and developing the
consultation arrangements between the Council and the
troop-contributing countries is to institutionalize and
formalize those consultations. We propose in this respect
that the Council, on this occasion, should adopt a resolution
to regularize the consultation arrangements. Such a
resolution should aim in its preamble at the implementation
of Article 44 of the Charter. The resolution could also
provide for the establishment of a subsidiary organ of the
Security Council, in accordance with Article 29 of the
Charter. The primary task of that subsidiary organ would be
to conduct such consultations before the Council decides to
adopt a resolution regarding the mandate of a particular
peace-keeping operation.

Here, we must reaffirm the importance we attach to
ensuring that such consultation meetings should have an
effect on the Council's resolutions. We wish to highlight
also the importance we attach to ensuring that such
consultation meetings should provide the effective means
for the troop-contributing countries to voice their concerns
and of ensuring that such concerns are taken into account
by the Council when the Council makes its decisions. We
are well aware of the fact that the creation of a subsidiary
organ of the Council would not, by itself, automatically
guarantee the achievement of this goal and that there is a
need for the Security Council to adopt a well-informed and
clear resolution whereby it would recognize an official role
for the countries contributing troops to peace-keeping
operations as full partners in the decision-making process
with regard to the mandate of any particular operation.

In order to guarantee a positive outcome to
consultation meetings, the participating troop-contributing
countries should be informed of such meetings well in
advance. In addition, before each meting, the Secretariat
should provide the States concerned with the information
that is available to the United Nations from the theatre of
operations, as such information could have implications for
the resolution the Security Council may adopt. Consultation
meetings should also be held well in advance of the
adoption by the Council of the relevant resolutions, so that
delegations may be able to advise their Governments of the
available options and to receive their Governments'
instructions in that regard.

There is also a need for consultations with potential
troop-contributing countries before the adoption by the
Council of the mandate for the operation in question.
Furthermore, the States the Secretariat believes to be in a
position to contribute troops to any given operation could
be invited to a consultation meeting with members of the
Security Council. The object of such a meeting should be
to acquaint such States with the expected conditions of
the operation and of the probable role of their troops in
the operation. The contributing States should also be
afforded the opportunity of voicing their views with
regard to the best means of implementing the mandate of
the peace-keeping operation.

The preceding proposals in no way infringe the
authority or competence of the Security Council in the
area of maintaining international peace and security. In
fact, those proposals would contribute to ensuring and
enhancing the democratic and representative aspects of
the Security Council's resolutions and guarantee the
support of troop-contributing countries and peoples to
those resolutions. In addition, the proposed measures
would have to do only with fundamental changes that
may be introduced to the mandate of any operation or to
the termination of such operation.

At a time when we are all trying to reach agreement
about the best means of reforming the Security Council's
procedures and methods of work and of increasing its
membership, the improvement and development of the
arrangements of consultation between the Council and the
troop-contributing countries for peace-keeping operations
is but an important step towards greater democratization
of the work of the Council and the enhancement of the
efficacy of its resolutions.

