Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Since it is so late in
the day, I wish to assure you, Sir, that I will be very
brief. I wish to join delegations that have taken the
floor before me in sincerely commending your country
for organizing this open debate and for assuming the
presidency of the Council. We particularly thank you
for inviting stakeholders, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
because such stakeholders are heavily involved in
issues relating to the protection of civilians.

Botswana attaches great importance to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We accordingly welcome
the informative report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/376) and its insightful recommendations. The
convening of the open debate today could not have
come at a better time, given the continuing gross
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
of innocent people resulting from ongoing conflicts
around the world, including particularly in Syria. My
delegation believes that the issue should remain high on
the agenda of the United Nations for as long as heinous
crimes continue to be committed.

The international community must step up efforts
aimed at offering protection to civilians in armed
conflict and in particular the most vulnerable groups
at risk, namely, women and children. The perpetrators
of violence continue to undermine international
humanitarian and human rights laws by violating the
rights of those vulnerable groups, who often lose their
lives. It is deeply regrettable that the perpetrators
continue to use children as killing machines or as
human shields. The use of rape or sexual violence as a
weapon of war is equally unforgivable.

It has been observed that the absence of
accountability is a leading factor in undermining the
rights of civilians in armed conflict. It is for that reason
that my delegation calls on the Security Council to
aggressively promote accountability by thoroughly
investigating and prosecuting persons responsible
for war crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity
and other serious violations of international law and
international humanitarian law.

There should be greater collaboration between the
Security Council and the International Criminal Court
(ICC). As the Charter body with responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
the Security Council's role in referring situations
that threaten international peace and security to the
International Criminal Court is critical. Here I must
add that Botswana is among the signatory countries
of a letter (see S/2013/19) submitted to the Council
requesting referral of the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians not only highlights concerns and
challenges affecting civilians in armed conflict but has
also contributed to the advancement of debates through
its identification of five core challenges, which are:
first, enhancing compliance by parties to conflict with
international law; secondly, enhancing compliance by
non-State armed groups; thirdly, enhancing protection
by United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant
missions; fourthly, improving humanitarian access; and
fifthly, enhancing accountability for violations.

My delegation notes with concern the challenges
faced by the international community in that regard.
Consequently, we of the view that while strong
normative frameworks have been put in place for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, a lot
still remains to be done, as the situation endured by
civilians calls for urgent and drastic measures. Almost
all conflicts are now not between States but within
national boundaries, and for that reason, my delegation
wishes to reiterate the primary responsibility of States
to respect and ensure protection of human rights for all
individuals within their territory.

A recent UNICEF report highlights the fact that
in Syria more than 60,000 people, mostly civilians,
have been killed since the uprising against President
Bashar Al-Assad began in early 2011. The escalating
conflict has left more than four million people in
need of humanitarian assistance; an estimated 50 per
cent of those are children, according to the report. In
that connection, my delegation wishes to reiterate the
importance of accountability on the part of States in
order to end impunity and of thoroughly investigating
and holding accountable persons responsible for war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity.

My delegation acknowledges that there are
challenges to civilian protection owing to the
complexity of the operation, and those challenges
cannot be ignored. Perhaps the design of specific and
comprehensive strategies to address the challenges can
help, given that the success ofa peacekeeping operation
is measured by its ability to protect civilians. It is for
that reason that peacekeeping missions should put
protection of civilians at the core of their operations.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana's
commitment and unwavering support to the Council's
endeavours.

