Miss Durrant (Jamaica): I, too, wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this meeting to give us
the opportunity to hear Mr. Annabi. We wish to thank
him for his update and for introducing the Secretary-
General's report of 7 March on the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), which covers
recent political developments, the security situation,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, human
rights and humanitarian affairs.

We also wish to thank the Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom, Ambassador Greenstock, for
having shared with the Council his observations from his
recent visit to Sierra Leone.

Ambassador Greenstock's observations and Mr.
Annabi's briefing clearly indicate that there exists a strong
desire for peace on the part of the majority of the people
of Sierra Leone. This makes the continuation of atrocities
and abuses of human rights even more intolerable. Indeed,
only last week the Council highlighted this in its
statement to the press. It is clear that those atrocities must
cease if Sierra Leone is to rebuild the social fabric it
needs to ensure an effective State structure and a bright
future for its population.

My delegation notes with concern that there has
been little progress in the area of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants. We
remain concerned that the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) commanders in the east of the country continue to
prevent RUF and ex-army combatants from joining the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. We wish to emphasize that the low quality of
surrendered weapons and the ratio of collected weapons
to the number of ex-combatants - to which Mr. Annabi
has referred - is another source of concern to my
delegation.
We welcome the joint cooperation of UNAMSIL and
the National Commission on Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration in developing a
programme for the disposal of arms and ammunition. We
hope that it will be implemented as soon as possible.

Mr. Annabi's briefing on the report of the Secretary-
General noted several positive developments, which
include the establishment of the Commission for the
Consolidation of Peace and the setting up of the National
Electoral Commission. We look forward to continued
progress in the development of a strategic framework
approach for Sierra Leone and a military integration plan.
But we would like to ask Mr. Annabi whether there have
been any developments in the hearings for the

 

commissioners for the Commission for the Management of
Strategic Resources, National Reconstruction and
Development.

We have been heartened to note the sterling
contribution of UNAMSIL. In this regard, we wish to
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the civilian and military components of
UNAMSIL.

We have fully supported the expansion of UNAMSIL
forces in Sierra Leone, which has included the
incorporation of human rights training and monitoring,
police training and the protection of women, children and
other civilians. We believe the appointment of a senior
child human rights monitor is a step in the right direction,
but we would encourage further measures to be put in place
to address the critical problem of the protection of children.

We are also very concerned about the continuing
reports about the humanitarian situation. We have noted
that Mr. Annabi referred to the withdrawal from RUF-
controlled areas of Sierra Leone by two noted non-
governmental organizations, which had been the only
source of humanitarian relief for many people in Sierra
Leone. We strongly urge that the Security Council send a
strong message to the forces in Sierra Leone, calling on
them to cooperate with the humanitarian relief agencies.

It was also distressing to learn that despite
UNAMSIL's best intentions, resistance continues, and that
there is a lack of cooperation between the RUF and
UNAMSIL. We support the call for a strong statement from
the Council to RUF leaders, especially Mr. Foday Sankoh,
to cooperate with UNAMSIL and to refrain from making
statements that would inflame the present situation.
As far as the security situation is concerned, we have
also noted, in paragraph 21 of the Secretary-General's
report, that the willingness of police personnel to return to
former duty stations in the provinces has been affected by
the violence inflicted on officers and their families during
the conflict. We would like to hear further from Mr.
Annabi whether there has been any progress made in that
regard.

My delegation is encouraged by the continued positive
involvement of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS). As we have heard, the recently
concluded meetings held in Bamako under the auspices of
ECOWAS have given us some hope that there will be some
progress made in the further fulfilment of the Lome
Agreement. We wish to applaud the current leadership of
ECOWAS on its initiative, and to encourage action aimed
at putting further pressure on the parties involved to
comply with the Lome Agreement. We also wish to pay
tribute to those troops that have made up the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), particularly to the
Nigerian Government, which provided a smooth transition
from ECOMOG to UNAMSIL.

We further endorse the recommendations of the Joint
Implementation Committee aimed, inter alia, at
accelerating the implementation of the Lorne Agreement
regarding compliance with the disarmament process, the
ceasefire agreement and unhindered humanitarian access.

We have further noted, in paragraph 9 of the report,
that progress continues to be made towards developing
the strategic framework approach for Sierra Leone, and
that the United Nations country team has produced an
initial report outlining principles and policies guiding
United Nations actions and proposing appropriate
institutional and coordination arrangements to ensure
coherence among United Nations entities and partners.
We wish to highlight this because it is important that
once the security situation has been stabilized, attention
be paid to Sierra Leone's economic and social
development. In this regard, we wish to emphasize the
importance of support for the upcoming international
donor conference, to be held on 27 March under the
auspices of the United Kingdom, because we believe that
this will provide a useful forum through which tangible
expressions of support can be derived.

However, a lingering question is, where do we go
from here? Sierra Leone is a society in which women,
children and civilians at large face a future of insecurity,
terror and fear. We share the view that it is necessary to
ensure a credible peacekeeping presence throughout Sierra
Leone and to create a climate of confidence and security.
We therefore concur with the four steps outlined by the
Secretary-General in his report - the need for early
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants; the extension of State authority, including
law enforcement; the improvement of Sierra Leone's
capacity to ensure its own security; and national
reconciliation and democratization - because we agree
that all of these have to be in place if the election
timetable is to be fulfilled.

We believe these four pillars can effectively chart
the course for the viability of Sierra Leone. All of this
will hinge on the political will of the parties and the

 

support that the international community is prepared to
give. We therefore wish to support the proposal for the
press statement to be issued by the President at the
conclusion of our meeting and the elements outlined by the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom.

