Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): 1 thank the
presidency of the United Kingdom for organizing this
briefing on Somalia, which reminds us that this country
definitely merits the Council's focused attention. Ithank
all the briefers for their valuable inputs. Allow me to
express special thanks to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nicholas Kay, who established and
led the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) under exceptionally difficult conditions,
always with the interests of the Somali people at heart.
We warmly welcome Prime Minister Sharmarke's
presence in the Chamber this morning.

The recent positive developments in
Somalia - political stabilization, the declaration of
Vision 2016 and genuine steps towards federalization
of the country - encourage cautious optimism about
its future. The Somali leadership has come together
and agreed to inclusive and transparent consultations
regarding the 2016 electoral process. The regional
consultations will provide crucial input to the meeting
of the National Consultative Forum in December,
where a decision will be taken on Somalia's electoral
model. We understand that finding consensus will not
be easy, but it is what the Somali people need and the
international community expects.

While some may call for an extension of the
current political dispensation, that is not the way to go.
Somalia deserves a political transition in 2016, through
an electoral process that gives the Federal Parliament,
President and Government enhanced legitimacy with a
new mandate. We welcome Somalia's pledge to form
the final regional Interim Administration, consisting of
Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe, before the end of the year.
This will, by and large, complete Somalia's federal
map - an impressive achievement in itself. More
attention will be needed for a strengthened dialogue
and cooperation between the centre and the periphery.

Eradicating poverty and addressing the fragile
economy, the lack of alternative livelihoods and weak
governance structures must remain at the heart of the
Federal Government's efforts, as all those factors are
a major source of instability. Efforts need to continue
to lay the foundations for an inclusive and sustainable
economic recovery and development, as well for support
for livestock, agriculture and the fisheries sector.

The active involvement of young people and
women in the ongoing processes is essential. Women's
empowerment and their active involvement at all levels
is particularly important for sustaining the long-term
stability and development of the country.

With all the positive and promising developments
in Somalia, we cannot forget the serious and systematic
violations and abuses of human rights perpetrated
by Al-Shabaab and others against the civilian
population, including women, children, journalists,
parliamentarians, human rights defenders and
humanitarian workers. We are particularly alarmed
by the abuses against children. Other delegations have
spoken to this effect. Nearly 750 cases ofgrave violations
against children have been reported over a year's
time. All parties to the conflict have a responsibility
to protect civilians. All allegations of mass atrocity
crimes must be investigated and perpetrators must be
held to account. The same applies to the allegations of
sexual violence, exploitation and abuse. We must stand
firm with regard to the imperative of a zero-tolerance
policy concerning sexual abuse and violence. Again all
allegations to that effect must be investigated and the
perpetrators held to account.

This year the Committee to Protect Journalists put
Somalia at the top ofthe list of countries most dangerous
to journalists. They are targeted by Al-Shabaab
militants who have for years threatened and assaulted
journalists for their courageous coverage of the group's
murderous activities. Most recently, on 1 November
several journalists were wounded and one killed in an
attack against a hotel in central Mogadishu. We must
remember those who dare to expose the terrorists, also
at the expense of their own lives. They too deserve
justice.

Concerted international assistance has played a
crucial role in the progress that Somalia has achieved
so far. We welcome the conclusions of the review of
the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union Mission in Somalia, which notes that this unique
Mission was overstretched and no longer entirely fit for
its purpose. We hope that the newly established United
Nations Support Office in Somalia, with its well-
defined mandate and resources, will be able perform its
role as expected.

Continued adequate support for the African Union
Mission in Somalia, the Somali National Army and
UNSOM. is required. It is important that the long-
delayed and key force enablers, such as transport and
attack helicopters, be deployed, which would mark
a qualitative shift in the ongoing campaign against
Al-Shabaab and facilitate the permanent opening of the
main supply routes that are so critical to civilian traffic,
as well as humanitarian supplies.

We have 10 critical and sensitive months ahead of
us. We look forward to all Somali leaders and politicians
working together in good faith for the common good
of the Somali people and the Somali nation. Personal
interests should be put aside at this most critical
juncture, for the sake of continued progress towards
the fulfilment of Vision 2016. The continued and
well-coordinated assistance of Somalia's international
partners is also required, under the leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, to
provide Somalia with the political and financial support
that it needs.

