Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by thanking you, Sir, as well as
Ambassador Kumalo and the delegation of South
Africa, for organizing this debate. We welcome the
presence among us of the Secretary-General and of
high representatives of friendly countries. Today's
debate is an ideal opportunity to exchange views on
our shared responsibility.

International organizations are historical realities;
as such, they are changeable instruments. Fortunately,
they are better prepared today to prevent, manage and
resolve conflicts than they were several decades ago.
Unfortunately, however, we are also much more
vulnerable to conflict than we were even just a few
years ago. Natural and man-made disasters threaten the
future of coming generations. There is no doubt that
such phenomena as climate change, food crises, water
shortages and the large-scale migrations they would
entail augur poorly for the future with respect to
conflicts. There is also no doubt that Governments'
lack of legitimacy, historical resentments and conflicts
over natural resources, together with illicit trafficking
and terrorism, will fuel new and recurrent conflicts in
the future. We in the developing world cannot stop
warning that inequality on a global scale and the lack
of attention to the extreme poverty that affects one fifth
of humanity will also provide fertile ground for the
roots of conflict to take hold.

However, we are better prepared than ever before.
The international community has continued to advance
in the development of new concepts and instruments to
deal with conflicts and mitigate their destructive
effects.

The concept of the responsibility to protect is a
recent development that has turned what was once an
absolute right of sovereignty into something much
more complex: a right that encompasses the obligation
of the State to protect populations on its territory and
the subsidiary obligation of the international
community to protect those populations when a State is
unable to do so.

This contemporary system, which inextricably
links the actions of States, international organizations
and the international community, unavoidably imposes
the concept of shared responsibility in the face of
conflict. And facing that shared responsibility, we
should ask ourselves how we can work together to
prevent conflicts and how we can work together to
resolve them once they have begun.

From the perspective of the United Nations,
Security Council resolution 1625 (2005) is a real road
map by which to approach our responsibilities in
conflict prevention, particularly in Africa. Furthermore,
conflict prevention is the approach that should guide us
and towards which we should direct our greatest
efforts.

We will be less effective if we face conflicts and
their manifestations and forget, as we often do, their
root causes. In the words of the Secretary-General, "If
we do not deal with the root causes of conflict - and
offer sustainable solutions - we will be left with
humanitarian emergencies and peacekeeping operations
without end" (S/2008/I8, para. 62).

I would like to underline a fundamental concept
in the Secretary-General's comment, when he speaks of
the need to offer sustainable solutions. There may be
no better moment than this to state that there can be no
sustainable peace without sustainable development.
Those two concepts are inseparable, and now that our
Organization has matured to the point of not limiting
its tasks to peacekeeping and of assuming its
peacebuilding responsibility, we cannot set aside the
sustainability of the solutions we help to build.

However, there will be no sustainable solutions
without the legitimacy of Governments and
institutions. We understand the concept of cultural
diversity and we accept its consequences, but we know
very well that where populations do not recognize their
Governments as legitimate, there will be no sustainable
peace. We also know that where there is no legitimate
justice, there can be no sustainable peace either. We
know, finally, that attempts to conceal or manipulate
the will of the people do not provide a solid basis on
which to build a sustainable peace.

For that reason, we are concerned by the current
situation in Zimbabwe.

Another concept that Costa Rica would like to
emphasize on this important occasion is the shared
responsibility of the African Union and the United
Nations to build peace on strong foundations of justice.
Indeed, we underline the need to prevent conflict by
implementing a justice that provides security for the
population but that also puts an end to conflict by
punishing those guilty of human rights violations and
crimes against humanity. We will not be able to prevent
or permanently resolve conflict while impunity exists;
nor will we be able to build a sustainable peace on a
foundation of impunity.

We said before that today we are better prepared
to prevent and put an end to conflict. In this context,
the contribution of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) to the civilized world deserves special mention.
We welcome the trust that many African States have
placed in the Court, and we take this opportunity to
call for respect for its authority, particularly in the
Sudan, in connection with executing the arrest warrants
that have been issued by the ICC.

This meeting should help both organizations to
improve the basis of our cooperation. Africa occupies a
good part of United Nations peace efforts, even though
there are some situations in Africa to which the
international community is not properly attending.
Here I am referring in particular to Somalia.

In order to build more efficient cooperation
towards the attainment of our purposes, it is
fundamental to define responsibilities and mandates
more clearly. We also need to give regional
organizations the means necessary to properly fulfil
their responsibilities. We must also strengthen
communication between our respective Councils.

All of this seems particularly necessary in the
light of the experience, new to all of us, of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), the first of its kind. From UNAMID we
will certainly learn many lessons towards improving
our future cooperation.

Let me conclude by reiterating my country's firm
commitment to strengthening the Organization's
mechanisms for conflict prevention, which will
undoubtedly benefit Africa and the entire developing
world. I also reiterate my country's support for the
political and military efforts that we undertake to
resolve current conflicts and to resolve them in a way
that is lasting and sustainable.

