The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of

Egypt.

I address the Security Council today not only in
my capacity as a representative of a member State of
the Security Council, but also as an Arab and as an
Egyptian citizen who is tormented by the tragedy that
the Syrian people are facing owing to an armed conflict
that has been raging on for five years.

The Syrian popular movement started in March,
2011. It was a peaceful movement that sought change.
However, many factors led to an increase in protests,
confrontations and the killing of innocent people. The
situation has deteriorated over the past five years.
External interference in Syrian affairs has increased
in an unprecedented manner. Militias, foreign terrorist
fighters and weapons have been given access to Syria
to fight on behalf of external and internal parties.
The peaceful movement soon disappeared and the
situation deteriorated into a proxy armed conflict. The
Syrian territory became a safe haven for terrorism,
sectarianism and chaos.

Following long years of Syrian suffering, the
international community has recently been able, for
the first time, through the Security Council and the
International Syria Support Group, to reach consensus
on a political solution. It is important to stress that
the international consensus has been based on certain
parallel pillars, which are as follows: first, putting
an end to the hostilities in Syria in order to achieve
a nationwide ceasefire; secondly, achieving political
transition through negotiations between the Syrian
Government and the broadest possible spectrum of
the opposition, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex); thirdly,
improving the humanitarian situation and ensuring
humanitarian access to people in need in Syria,
including in besieged areas; and, fourthly, combating
terrorism and extremism.

Despite the clarity of the elements of the international

consensus and their compliance with humanitarian and
political law, and despite the positive developments on
the ground in Syria since the beginning of the cessation
of hostilities, we have been surprised once again by the
renewed heavy fighting in Aleppo and the deaths of
many civilians and innocent people. In that regard, I
would like to reiterate once again that Egypt condemns
the shelling of civilians, especially the shelling of
hospitals and the harrowing scenes resulting from the
shelling. I would also like to stress the need for all
parties in Syria to respect international humanitarian
law and to ensure access to humanitarian and medical
assistance. Egypt is committed to cooperating with its
partners in the Council to ensure respect for resolution
2286 (2016), on the protection of medical personnel and
medical facilities in time of war. The Council adopted
the resolution yesterday based on a draft resolution
submitted by Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Spain
and Uruguay.

Counter-terrorism remains one of the main pillars
to settle the Syrian crisis and to maintain international
peace and security. However, certain Powers continue to
be reluctant to take action, and that impedes a solution.
Some still believe that they are immune to the dangers
of terrorism and that they will be able to take advantage
of terrorism if they choose to neglect or support it. It
may be high time to be honest with ourselves and to
set matters straight. The Council and the members of
the International Syria Support Group have agreed on
excluding terrorist organizations from the ceasefire.
However, a noticeable reluctance in confronting this
danger and an inexplicable politicization have allowed
the Al-Nusra Front, or the Al-Qaida affiliate in Syria,
to take advantage of the cessation of hostilities to gain
more ground in the country, especially in Aleppo. The
Al-Nusra Front has been able to increase recruitment
into its ranks and to contain some of the armed factions
that have not been designated as terrorist organizations.
Those factions continue to ignore the de-escalation.
They insist on cooperating and coordinating with the
Al-Nusra Front even after two months of the start of the
cessation of hostilities and despite the pleas that they
distance themselves from those terrorist organizations.
That is unacceptable and should not go unnoticed.

I take this opportunity to call once again on
the International Syria Support Group, especially
the co-Chairs - the United States of America
and Russia - to put an end to that reluctance and
prevarication. The Al-Nusra Front and its allies are as
dangerous as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.
Neither the people of Syria nor the countries and the
peoples of the region will accept them as part of their
present or future.

The Syrian people is the sole party to bear the
brunt of the Syrian tragedy. Syrian blood has been shed
because ofthe interest of States and groups and because
of misleading facts. Children and women have suffered.
We need to thwart the narrow interests that have
controlled the fate of the Syrian people over the past few
years. If the situation continues, it will jeopardize the
future of the people of Syria. Therefore, I would like to
reiterate that the Geneva process, mediated by Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura, according to resolution 2254
(2015), which seeks to reach a political transition in
Syria, remains the only beacon ofhope for a settlement.
I call on all members of the international community to
stand behind the process and behind the Special Envoy
in good faith. I call on them to give the utmost priority
to the interests of the Syrian people, free from trying
to settle political scores and promoting other interests.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

