Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would also like to
thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his comprehensive briefing. We
support his five recommendations.

We have to acknowledge that the conflict in Syria
has resulted in violence and violations of international
law, including human rights law, and has brought
suffering to the civilian population of Syria on a
scale that is unique in today's world. Despite reaching
unanimity in previously adopted resolutions - for
example, resolution 2401 (2018) - we are still lacking
substantial change on the ground. We understand that
any solution is not entirely in our hands, but still we
should try to do our utmost to find a possible way to
provide life-saving aid.

The agreement between Russia and Turkey to
establish a demilitarized area in the Idlib de-escalation
zone allowed us to avoid risk of a humanitarian
catastrophe. However, civilians across Idlib and
surrounding areas have continued to face a range of
protection threats, and massive humanitarian needs
have persisted. The situation of the 3 million people in
Idlib is a cause for very serious concern. We consider
the agreement between Russia and Turkey a right move
towards avoiding a humanitarian catastrophe. However,
at the same time, we urge all parties to the conflict to
ensure the full implementation of the agreement.

We reiterate our call to all parties to the conflict
to implement the ceasefire to ensure unhindered and
safe humanitarian access for all humanitarian actors
to the whole territory of Syria, including cross-border
delivery of humanitarian assistance, in particular in the
Rukban area, as well as areas that have recently changed
control. In that context, Poland would again like to
strongly emphasize the need for full compliance by all
the parties with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

We also underline the obligation of all parties to the
conflict to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure.
The protection of civilians in armed conflicts should be
at the centre of our debate. We must put in place practical
measures to effectively prevent or minimize civilian
casualties and incidental damage to civilian objects.

Humanitarian assistance is by definition dependent
upon those who provide it, that is, humanitarian and
medical personnel. We must not forget that their safety
and security need to be prioritized. They must be
protected while performing their tasks.

We would like to reiterate our strong call to all
the parties with influence over the situation on the
ground, especially the Astana guarantors, to take all
the necessary actions to achieve a full cessation of
hostilities throughout the Syrian territory.

The scale of the Syrian crisis and humanitarian
needs remain enormous. In that regard, we are deeply
troubled by the severe situation of the most vulnerable
victims of this conflict - especially children, women,
members ofreligious minorities and internally displaced
persons. Those groups currently constitute half of the
current population of Idlib. If they are not protected, we
risk a humanitarian catastrophe that might also include
a serious threat of sexual violence.

Let me conclude by underlining that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A political
agreement remains the only way towards peace. In
that regard, I would like to emphasize the importance
of the establishment of the constitutional committee.
That requires a genuine political transition in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique,
(S/2012/522, annex), negotiated by the Syrian parties
within the United Nations-led Geneva process.
