Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's debate, for your own presence
and for the contribution of Chad to peacekeeping.

I know we all share both shock and repugnance at
the terrible murders in Pakistan, and the empathy of
all Australians is naturally with the people of Pakistan.

I thank the Secretary-General and High
Representative Buyoya for their briefings and their
efforts to strengthen the essential partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU) on
peace and security.

We stand at a critical juncture for peace operations
globally. The landscape has changed profoundly from
just a decade ago, with a record number of troops and
police deployed, mostly in Africa, with more robust
mandates, and with new and evolving threats, including
terrorism and asymmetric conflict. Peace operations
are under unprecedented strain, a reality recognized by
the Secretary-General when he commissioned his high-
level strategic review of peace operations. It is clear
today that the United Nations and AU need each other
more than ever.

Time and again the AU is stepping up, not only
to keep peace on the continent, but to enforce it. In
Somalia, troops of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and Somali troops have made
impressive gains in liberating territory from Al-Qaida-
affiliate Al-Shabaab. In Mali and the Central African
Republic, AU deployments have been vital to the
restoration of stability and formed the core of United
Nations missions that followed.

Such African leadership makes sense. The AU
has demonstrated repeatedly its unique comparative
advantages and strengths: knowledge of context, ability
to deploy quickly and, critically, willingness to act
robustly. But these situations have broader implications
and are the responsibility of all of us - of the whole
international community. We should ensure that the
AU has the support it needs when putting African lives
on the line to restore stability and protect civilians in
places no one else can or will.

I will focus on the four challenges defined in the
concept note (S/2014/879, annex).

The first is financing, which is a chronic challenge
that we have not yet resolved. We need to look for
innovative solutions that enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for the AU
missions authorized by the Council. The AMISOM
model - where the United Nations provided a
logistical support package funded from assessed
contributions - has worked well, but there is strong
resistance within the Council to repeating it. So we
need to be creative in seeking solutions, but to respond
to an obvious need. In the Central African Republic,
we employed an innovative model of authorizing
United Nations support to the AU mission in the lead-
up to transition. A dedicated United Nations support
team was deployed. This model should be replicated.
United Nations trust funds for AU operations failed in
Mali and the Central African Republic. But rather than
dismissing that option, we need to look hard at why
they failed. Would a standing trust fund, with clear,
pre-established processes for quick disbursement, iron
out problems?

Direct bilateral support will always be vital,
particularly with airlift, equipment and training. But
such assistance will not provide the required certainty,
uniformity and coordination of support. The long-term
solution lies in the AU enhancing its own ability to fund
its own operations. It has demonstrated its capacity
for innovation in raising funds to fight Ebola through
private-sector contributions and a text messaging, or
SMS, campaign.

My second point addresses managing the transition
of missions from the AU to the United Nations. We are
getting better at this, with a much smoother transition
in the Central African Republic than in Mali. We
consulted better on the mandate. Operational planning
and coordination on the ground was better. But grace
periods to bring personnel up to United Nations
standards were not met. And there have been mixed
results on deploying assets. The coordinated lessons
learned exercise on transitions in those two cases will
be an important resource. More generally, we need more
United Nations-AU joint assessments and field visits.

My third point addresses facilitating rapid
deployment. Speed of deployment is vital to protecting
civilians, stopping human rights violations and halting
descent into chaos. Days lost can be lives lost. Yet no
one has got this right, as we see in the United Nations
struggle to reach authorized strengths in South Sudan
and Mali. The AU has shown that, working with the
subregions, it can get personnel on the ground quickly.
But they need the kit to do their job and better command
and control. We note the potential of the African
Standby Force rapid deployment capacity, which we
must support, and the interim African Capacity for
Immediate Response to Crises.

My fourth point concerns enhancing institutional
collaboration. We very much agree with High
Representative Buyoya's comment this morning that
we need to anchor United Nations-AU engagement
much more strongly. It should be deepened at all levels:
strategic, operational and tactical. Nowhere is this more
important than between the executive bodies - the two
Councils - that mandate peace operations. We need to
be much more vigilant in following up the outcomes of
our annual joint consultative meetings.

And we need to do more ad hoc interaction. As
Council President last month, I held an extensive
discussion with my Peace and Security Council
counterpart on our respective programmes of work
before we took up our roles as President or Chair, so
that both of us had a sense of how we saw the agenda
we share and how to respond to it.

The relationship between the United Nations
and the AU goes far beyond questions of resourcing.
Exchange on such issues as the protection of civilians
and human rights, in which the United Nations has
built up experience over decades, is vital. We need to
deepen intervention on conflict prevention, mediation
and peacebuilding. Today's presidential statement
(S/PRST/20l4/27) calls for greater United Nations-
AU cooperation on policing, which is an area that is
too often overlooked. Police peacekeepers play a key
role in building capacity in the rule of law, which is
essential for the transition out of peace operations. The
adoption of resolution 2185 (2014) during Australia's
presidency last month highlighted the policing role.
The establishment of a formal AU counterpart to the
United Nations Police Adviser would facilitate greater
engagement, including in guidance and training.

We are confident that the Secretary-General's
current High-level Review Panel on Peacekeeping
Operations will look creatively, and with fresh eyes,
at the challenges being discussed today. The Panel
should engage closely with the AU and subregions and
make bold recommendations to strengthen the United
Nations-AU partnership on peace operations, which is
so decisive for peace and security in Africa.

