Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I congratulate Belgium on presiding over the Security Council in February. I also thank all members of the Council for their support, cooperation and guidance during our presidency last month. I would furthermore like to thank the two briefers for their insightful remarks today. Twenty years have passed since the Council first took up the issue of small arms and light weapons (SALW) (see S/PV.4048). Yet, according to the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/1011), in many places, illicit small arms and light weapons remain the main cause of human suffering, regional conflicts, humanitarian crises, terrorism and transnational crime and pose serious risks to peacekeepers and civilian personnel alike. Despite international efforts over the years, the illicit trade and misuse of small arms and light weapons continue to threaten many regions and countries, such as the Sahel and Libya, among others. Viet Nam supports international efforts, with the central role of the United Nations, to prevent and combat the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. But such efforts should be made on the basis of international law and the Charter of the United Nations, including full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and non-interference in their internal affairs. At the same time, they should not negatively affect Member States' legitimate right of self-defence. We welcome the efforts of States and international organizations to implement the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We also commend the Council's considerable efforts to continue to constructively and effectively address the issue of the illicit small arms trade in specific situations. We highly appreciate the work of the United Nations and its specialized agencies, including through the publishing of the relevant aide-memoires, including the aide-memoires for the consideration of issues pertaining to the protection of civilians in armed conflict and that on options for reflecting weapons and ammunition management in decisions of the Security Council. As for the way forward, we would like to stress the following. First, Members States bear the primary responsibility in combating the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. States should strictly implement the Programme of Action and the relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2220 (2015). Capacity-building and technical assistance should further be considered and provided, particularly for those countries most in need of dealing with SALW- related issues. Secondly, the Council should focus on improving the design and implementation of relevant mission mandates in specific situations. That activity could include assistance to the host country and ensuring the effectiveness of arms embargoes, but it should not excessively restrict the legitimate security needs of the Governments concerned. The desirable outcome should always be achieving immediate peace, long- term stability and strong Governments that are capable of combating the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. In that process, priority should be given to the protection of civilians, the security of peace operations and personnel, combating terrorism and organized crime and enhancing role of women as agents for peace. Thirdly, United Nations organs and agencies and international and regional organizations should work together in a cohesive manner to strengthen cooperation and complementarity in achieving their common goal. The importance of sharing good practices cannot be over-emphasized. In conclusion, we would like to stress Viet Nam's strong commitment to addressing the issue of the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. We are ready to cooperate with Member States, the United Nations system and regional organizations to move forward this very important agenda.
