The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mukongo
Ngay (Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a
seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council condemns the recent
CNDP offensive in the eastern region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and demands
that it bring its operations to an end. The Council
welcomes the announcement by Laurent Nkunda
of an immediate ceasefire and looks to Laurent
Nkunda to ensure its effective and durable
implementation, and the CNDP's re-engagement
in the Goma process. The Security Council
expresses its grave concern about the dramatic
humanitarian consequences of the recent fighting.
The Council urges all parties to respect fully their
obligations under international law to protect
civilians, to ensure access to the population in
need and to guarantee the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel. The Council affirms that
any attack against the civilian population,
including at major population centres, is totally
unacceptable.

"The Security Council urges all the
signatories to the Goma and Nairobi processes to
implement their commitments effectively and in
good faith. In this respect, the Security Council
calls on the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to take
concrete steps to defuse tensions and to restore
stability in the region. The Council strongly
supports the efforts of the Secretary-General to
facilitate the dialogue between the leaders of the
two countries and encourages him to send a
special envoy tasked with this mission as soon as
possible.

"The Security Council urges the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to take effective steps to ensure that there
is no cooperation between elements of the
FARDC and the FDLR. The Council also calls
upon the Governments of the region to cease all
support to the armed groups in the eastern region
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Security Council expresses its concern at the
reports of heavy weapons fire across the
Democratic Republic of the Congo-Rwanda
border. The Security Council reiterates its
determination to continue to monitor closely the
implementation of the arms embargo and other
measures as set out in its resolution 1807 (2008).

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for MONUC and condemns all attacks,
regardless of their perpetrators, launched against
MONUC in the past days. The Council calls on
MONUC to continue to implement fully its
mandate, in all its aspects, in particular by robust
actions to protect civilians at risk and to deter any
attempt to threaten the political process by any
armed group.

"The Security Council duly notes the
reinforcement of MONUC requested by the
Secretariat of the United Nations. The Security
Council will study expeditiously that request in
view of the developments of the situation on the
ground."

(spoke in Chinese)

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/40.
08-57669

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 8.20 pm.

