Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Mr. Mahiga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for his briefing and his contributions to furthering the
peace process in Somalia. I also welcome Prime
Minister Abdiweli Mohamed Ali of the Transitional
Federal Government and His Excellency Mr. Diarra,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union for Somalia, to this
meeting.

Progress has been made recently in the peace
process and security situation in Somalia, including the
signing of the Kampala Accord and the successful
consultative meeting convened in Mogadishu, as well
as in the transition process. Good intentions have been
shown by various parties in Somalia to build lasting
peace and identify the actions necessary to strengthen
the peace process in the country.

Military operations by the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the National Security Force
have resulted in important achievements and improved
the security situation in Somalia. China welcomes this
development and appreciates the contributions of
international and regional organizations, such as the
United Nations and the African Union, as well as the
contributions of the Governments of Uganda, Ethiopia
and Burundi.

It should be noted that the peace process in
Somalia still has a long way to go and faces arduous
tasks. The recent famine in Somalia has led to a severe
humanitarian crisis. Parties in Somalia and in the
international community should now focus on the
following efforts.

First, they should take advantage of the window
of opportunity to vigorously promote the peace
process. The concrete implementation of the road map
drafted at the consultative meeting on ending the
transition phase is the top priority for the next phase of
work. It also holds the key to achieving peace and
stability in Somalia. China hopes that the parties in
Somalia can make use of the current favourable
momentum to further strengthen unity, increase mutual
trust and strengthen capacity-building in order to
ensure the smooth implementation of the road map.
The international community should continue to assist
the Transitional Federal Institutions through enhanced
capacity-building and provide greater support to
Somalia's peace process.

Secondly, in order to support the efforts of the
African Union to resolve the question of Somalia, we
hope that the Security Council will attach great
importance to the requests and recommendations of the
African Union Peace and Security Council on resolving
the issue of Somalia and respond positively. AMISOM
plays a vital role in maintaining security and stability
in Somalia. China supports the extension of
AMISOM's mandate and calls on the international
community, in particular the United Nations, to
intensify its support to AMISON by providing greater
logistical, technical and financial support. At the same
time, we also support the Security Council in positively
considering the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation in Somalia at an appropriate time.

Thirdly, every effort must be made to help
Somalia address its humanitarian crisis. China is
deeply concerned with the increasing famine in
Somalia and welcomes the emergency aid efforts of
international humanitarian agencies. We urge the
parties in Somalia to fully cooperate with the aid
efforts of the international community. China has
donated $16 million to support the efforts of the World
Food Programme on the famine in Somalia. We call on
the international community to continue to provide
further assistance to Somalia.

