Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): Let me express my
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative
and convening today's open debate on the working
methods of the Security Council and for preparing an
excellent concept paper (S/2010/165, annex) to guide
our discussion, focusing on the implementation of
measures annexed to presidential note S/2006/507 of
19 July 2006. We believe it is both timely and
appropriate for the Council and the wider United
Nations membership to have this opportunity, since this
is only the third time in 16 years that the Council has
had a debate in an open format on this important issue.

We wish to express our appreciation for Japan's
continued leadership and for the efforts of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions that you, Mr. President, currently
chair. We also welcome and support the initiatives of
the group of five small countries in this regard.

The increasingly numerous activities undertaken
by the Security Council have brought with them an
enhanced impact on the membership at large.
Non-members of the Council should therefore be better
informed about the Council's work and should have an
opportunity to contribute to that work.

Further adapting the Security Council's working
methods is one of the most important areas of reform
of the Council, and one on which there is a broad sense
of agreement. Slovenia welcomes the progress that has
been made in recent years, in particular with regard to
increasing the Council's transparency and efficiency, as
well as its inclusiveness and interaction with non-
member States. We welcome the progress achieved
thus far with regard to regular briefings by the
presidency to non-members at the beginning of each
month, which provide a useful forecast of and
information on the monthly programme of work of the
Council. We also appreciate the consultations with
non-members that have been organized by Uganda and
Viet Nam during the past two years, before the
adoption of the annual report of the Security Council.

However there is a need for increased and
widened interaction and dialogue between the Security
Council and other United Nations Members,
particularly directly affected, concerned and interested
States, in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of the
Charter, and with relevant regional organizations.

Arria Formula meetings should be used more
frequently. We welcome recent innovative approaches,
such as informal interactive discussions and dialogue.
In debates on situation-specific issues, parties directly
affected or particularly interested should be allowed to
speak prior to Council members to present their Views.
The timing and quality of interaction with troop- and
police-contributing countries could be further
improved.

We would welcome a further increase in the
number of public meetings, in particular briefings by
United Nations officials, as well as regular and timely
briefings by Council members to non-members on the
work of the Council and its subsidiary bodies. We
welcome the holding of outcome-oriented thematic
debates and we support the inclusion of key provisions
of thematic resolutions in country-specific resolutions,
as appropriate.
Non-members of the Council would also benefit
if the President of the Security Council made draft
resolutions and draft presidential statements available
to non-member States as soon as they are introduced
within informal consultations of the whole.

The Security Council should emphasize the
importance of the rule of law in dealing with matters
on its agenda. This embraces references to upholding
and promoting international law and ensuring that its
own decisions are firmly rooted in that body of law,
including the Charter, general principles of law,
international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international criminal law.

We welcome further consideration of ways to
improve the transparency and the work of the sanctions
committees, such as establishing the listing and
de-listing procedures for individuals and entities and
establishing an independent office of an ombudsman.

We urge the permanent members to consider not
casting a non-concurring vote within the meaning of
Article 27, paragraph 3, of the Charter in the event of
genocide, crimes against humanity or serious violations
of international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, we support initiatives to improve
the efficiency of the Council's work and to improve its
daily conduct of business - for example, allowing full
participation of all members of the Council in the
preparation of decisions, et cetera, and enhancing the
capacity of newly elected members to fully discharge
their duties. Security Council working methods have
developed over the years. However they still remain a
work in progress and require regular review and
implementation to further increase the Council's
transparency, accountability and efficiency.
Involvement of the wider membership in the work of
the Security Council will remain key to better serving
the whole Organization.

