Mr. Jeremic' (Serbia): I would like to thank you
very much, Madame President, for convening this
meeting of the Security Council on Kosovo pursuant to
resolution 1244 (1999).

I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier. The United Nations remains a
crucial actor in the province. We believe it is critical
for all responsible stakeholders on the ground, together
with the Security Council, to reaffirm support for the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) as an indispensable pillar of peace
and stability.

At the outset of my remarks, I would like to
reaffirm my Government's position on the unilateral
declaration of independence by the ethnic-Albanian
authorities of our southern province of Kosovo and
Metohija. For us, it is null and void. We do not, and we
shall not, recognize Pristina's self-declared
independence, explicitly or implicitly. This is
mandated by the democratic will of the people of
Serbia and enshrined in our Constitution. A substantial
majority of United Nations Member States, and of
those seated on the Security Council, continue to
respect Serbia's sovereignty and territorial integrity, in
accordance with the basic principles of the United
Nations Charter and the Helsinki Final Act.

On behalf of my nation, I would like to reiterate
our deep gratitude for their support and solidarity. We
urge them to maintain their principled position with
regard to the separatists, thus ensuring that unilateral
attempts to impose outcomes to ethnic and territorial
1 1-23 603
disputes are not legitimized, and thereby preventing
Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence from
becoming a dangerous and destabilizing precedent for
the world community. It will also help to maintain a
healthy international environment within which the
long-awaited dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina,
which the world supported by acclamation last
September, can take place.

I want to emphasize that Serbia remains strongly
committed to those talks, despite delays in getting
them off the ground. We share the Secretary-General's
assessment contained in the report before the Council
today (S/2011/43) that the dialogue is a valuable
opportunity to resolve long-standing issues, which
would contribute significantly to the consolidation of
peace, stability and reconciliation in Kosovo and
throughout the region.

Last autumn, the Republic of Serbia announced
that it was ready to start the dialogue. We are still
waiting for Pristina. We hope that they too will be
ready soon. There will be many issues to discuss, and
some of them will be complicated. As we move
forward, we should strive to build trust and
understanding. Results will surely come, if the parties
demonstrate good faith and work hard to achieve
constructive arrangements that would benefit all the
residents of the territory. That could pave the way for
what the dialogue should ultimately produce, namely, a
transformative peace between Serbs and Albanians
throughout our region.

My country is dedicated to solving all differences
at the negotiating table. We welcome the opportunity
presented by the dialogue. We intend to make the most
of it, just as we reasonably expect other parties to do
the same. It is therefore critically important that no one
try to alter realities on the ground while discussions get
under way. Numerous reports by the Secretary-General
have warned us of that danger, including the one before
us today.

The province's ethnic-Albanian authorities
continue to encourage illegal construction of new, or
the expansion of existing, housing settlements ~ a
direct challenge to the authority of the UNMIK
Administration Mitrovica. They also seem to be intent
on extending the reach of the Pristina-based
institutions to North Kosovo, against the will of the
local population. Serbia remains deeply concerned by
these and other provocative actions, which cannot
contribute to peace and stability in North Kosovo and
which could dramatically, and perhaps fatally,
undermine the dialogue.

That is one of the many reasons that the United
Nations reporting function remains indispensable.
Serbia welcomes the Secretary-General's commitment,
as stated in today's report, to keep the Security Council
informed of all developments in the dialogue. The
Council's leading role in determining, and providing
legitimacy to, a comprehensive settlement is
indispensable, in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999) and the Council's primary responsibility
to maintain international peace and security, as
assigned to it by the Charter of the United Nations.

The United Nations status neutrality and that of
all organizations that operate under its overall
authority - such as the Kosovo Force (KFOR), the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Mission in Kosovo -
remain the only acceptable framework within which all
of us can work together to improve the lives of
ordinary people in Kosovo, irrespective of their
ethnicity.

UNMIK's principled commitment to the external
representation function for Kosovo - its obligation
under resolution 1244 (1999) - is highly appreciated.
We are deeply concerned, however, at the "lack of
enthusiasm" by the province's ethnic-Albanian
authorities on this issue. Today's report reconfirms that
Pristina refuses to attend a number of regional and
international meetings for which UNMIK's facilitation
is required. This includes sessions of the Regional
Cooperation Council, as well as the Central European
Free Trade Agreement, which UNMIK, as the signatory
to this free trade agreement on behalf of Pristina, is
slated to chair throughout 2011.

We hope that Pristina will come to embrace the
constructive approach offered by UNMIK. As the
report underlines, their current stance "will directly
affect Kosovo's economic and social development".
(5/2011/43, para. 47) It will also affect how seriously
rules are taken by the region's democracies. The
question of UNMIK's facilitation cannot be separated
from the necessity for all to adhere to the terms of
treaties and legally binding agreements. No one in the
Western Balkans - or, for that matter, in the wider
world - should be permitted simply to ignore
established procedures or attempt to unilaterally
impose new ones. For change to be legitimate,
agreement is required. Until one is established, the
consistent adherence to existing working arrangements
is the only way to ensure that regional cooperation
continues to improve and stability is strengthened.

The report before us draws attention to the small
number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) returns
by non-ethnic Albanians. For this reporting period, the
number of Kosovo Serbs exercising their right of
return is estimated to be around 120, out of the total
205,835 expelled since June 1999, according to the
figures of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The
consistently low number of returning IDPs is in line
with the September 2010 Amnesty International report
that states that Amnesty International, UNHCR and
other international organizations "do not consider that
conditions for the sustainable return for Serbs currently
exist in Kosovo". The same document concludes that
the situation at present, and for the long term, is both
unstable and uncertain. This represents a failure of
monumental proportions.

I would like to remind the Council that the
Republic of Serbia has repeatedly urged stakeholders
to focus on the central humanitarian issue of internally
displaced persons. I hope that a way can be found to
empower Kosovo Serb IDPs to exercise their right of
return immediately and unconditionally.

The Secretary-General's report underscores
recent developments in Serbian cultural and religious
heritage issues in the province. We appreciate
UNMIK's critical role in facilitating activities in
Kosovo of both UNESCO and the Council of Europe-
led Reconstruction and Implementation Commission.
The Commission was established in the wake of the
March 2004 pogrom, which resulted in the destruction
of 35 Serbian Orthodox Church holy sites over a three-
day period. Despite a number of successful projects,
the Commission has still not completed its work in the
province. We urge all potential donor countries to
contribute to the next round of funding for the
Commission, so that its valuable contribution to the
reconstruction of destroyed Serbian churches and
monasteries may be completed.

The report refers both to the 26 December
enthronement of His Grace Teodosije as Bishop of
Raska-Prizren and all of Kosovo and Metohija, as well
as to the fact that the Orthodox Christmas Day liturgy
took place in the same church less than a fortnight later.
On each of those occasions, held in the ancient Serbian
capital city of Prizren, representatives of other
religious communities in Kosovo were in attendance.
We welcome this and other inter-faith contacts, and we
appreciate UNMIK's continuing encouragement
thereof. We also appreciate the commitment of the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) to maintaining a static presence
at some of our most important holy sites, including the
Devic' Monastery, as well as the Visoki Deeani
Monastery and the Patriarchate of Peje/Pee, which both
remain on the UNESCO List of World Heritage in
Danger.

By noting the desecration of a number of Serbian
holy sites during the reporting period, the report once
more draws our attention to what can happen as KFOR
downsizes. Unfortunately, the report provides no
details of these hate crimes, nor does it indicate the
arrest of any perpetrators. The culture of impunity for
attacks on places that represent the core of Serbian
national identity continues unabated. We call on all
relevant authorities to make it a priority to investigate
these distressing incidents.

The roots of democracy have not taken hold in
Kosovo. Today's report presents the findings of the
United Nations Development Programme's 2010
democratization index for Kosovo, which concludes
that "democratic processes in Kosovo do not fulfil
democratic standards" (ibid., para. 10). This is
consistent with the results of the 2011 Map of Freedom
put out by Freedom House, which does not classify
Kosovo as an electoral democracy.

It is in that context that the controversial results
of the recently held elections by the ethnic-Albanian
authorities in Pristina should be examined. As the
report of the Secretary-General makes clear, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General "did
not call the elections, which were not organized within
the framework of resolution 1244 (1999), and will not
certify the results" (ibid., para. 4).

By all accounts, the election was deeply flawed,
in spite of the presence of an average of 14 observers
at each polling station, according to the report. Several
re-votes and recounts were required. The European
Parliament's election monitoring delegation to Kosovo
stated, according to today's report, that "serious
shortcomings underscored insufficient political will,
11-23603
including at the grass-roots level, to conduct a genuine
election in line with international standards and good
electoral practices" (ibid., para. 9).

The report also references the overall conclusion
of the European Network of Election Monitoring
Organizations: "a high number of irregularities during
the Kosovo Assembly elections have severely affected
the trust in the democratic process in Kosovo" (ibid., para. 9). That is all the more regrettable given the
higher standard of achievement in previous election
cycles - that is to say, when they were conducted with
the full support of all stakeholders and in line with
resolution 1244 (1999). The report expresses concern
that the security situation in Kosovo is potentially
volatile and that the

"number of murders, cases of unauthorized
possession of weapons, and shooting incidents
remained significant. Organized crime continued
to be of concern throughout Kosovo, mainly
involving smuggling and narcotics trafficking"
(ibid., para. 21).

The report does not provide details, however. Nor
does it focus on contemporary cases related to the
smuggling of human organs. Only Annex I of the
report mentions the multiple indictments handed down
in the Medicus case, which is an alleged organized
criminal conspiracy to source human organs for illicit
transplant. Some of those who are suspected of
involvement in this affair are also mentioned in a
deeply disturbing report approved by the Council of
Europe Parliamentary Assembly on 25 January, entitled
"Inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo". That report is based on a
number of testimonial accounts and what are
characterized as the compelling findings of a number
of European intelligence and law enforcement agencies,
together with analysis produced for NATO. It is
particularly disturbing that, as far back as 1999, to
quote from the report, "international actors chose to
turn a blind eye to the war crimes of the KLA, placing
a premium instead on achieving some degree of short-
term stability". The report concludes by saying that
"certain crimes committed by members of the KLA,
including some top KLA leaders, were effectively
concealed and have remained unpunished".

That report states that the so-called Kosovo
Liberation Army Drenica Group engaged in money-
laundering and the smuggling of drugs, cigarettes and
weapons, as well as human trafficking, and that it bears
primary responsibility for the fate of many hundreds of
kidnapped civilians. The report goes on to state that the
abductees were sent from Kosovo to secret detention
camps in Northern Albania, where many of them were
singled out for forced surgery before being murdered.
Their internal organs were extracted and sold on the
international black market. The report indicates that
those events took place before, during and after the
1999 armed conflict in Kosovo.

The report explicitly identifies Hashim Thaci,
Kosovo's sitting prime minister, as the group's leader,
and lists a number of prominent personalities,
including Xhavit Haliti, Azem Syla and Fatmir Limaj,
as having "played vital roles as co-conspirators in
various categories of criminal activity". It also
identifies one of Hashim Thaci's current close advisors,
Shaip Muja, as a leading co-conspirator in the
trafficking of human organs.

For justice to be done, a full and independent
criminal investigation of the reported allegations is
essential. Such an investigation must be internationally
mandated as well as internationally accountable. It
must also be able to provide an effective witness
protection and relocation programme to guarantee
credible testimony by all. This is an acute problem in
Kosovo, for, as the report authors highlighted, "fear,
often to the point of genuine terror" was observed "in
some of our informants as soon as the subject of our
inquiry was broached".

N0 existing institution on its own has the
mandate or the temporal and territorial jurisdiction to
carry out a serious investigation that would be
comprehensive in scope. This includes EULEX.

I want to be clear on the following point: the
contribution of EULEX to uncovering what took place
inside Kosovo itself will be crucial. That alone will not
be sufficient, however, because EULEX cannot operate
outside Kosovo, while the relevant allegations appear
to encompass not only that territory, but various United
Nations Member States in Europe, Asia and Africa. A
single authority must ultimately coordinate the
investigation process, manage the jurisdictional issues
and ensure the proper administration of justice.

It is the position of the Republic of Serbia that
the solution lies in establishing an ad hoc investigating
mechanism created by and accountable to the Security
Council. This has been the case in all previous
instances involving war crimes in the Balkans,
whichever side the perpetrators belonged to and
irrespective of their political role. It is only through the
action of the Security Council that we can prevent the
onset of a perception of double standards in the
administration of international justice. Maintaining a
coherent approach on the issue of war crimes is an
essential component in the common effort to
consolidate peace and stability in the Balkans.

The final words of the Council of Europe report
state that its sole aim today is to act on behalf of those
men and women who, regardless of their ethnic or
religious backgrounds, simply aspire to the truth and to
an end to scandalous impunity, with no greater wish
than to be able to live in peace. That statement serves
to frame what Serbia asks of the Security Council - to
ascertain the veracity of the allegations outlined in the
report and, should the evidence warrant it, bring all the
culprits to justice. We do not expect the discussion in
this Chamber to be concluded this afternoon. In our
view, today is the start of a shared effort to reach a
consensus on how to decisively address these heinous
contentions. Serbia intends to actively participate in
this process.

I want to make it clear that for us, the question of
human organs trafficking is an ethical and human
rights issue of the first order. We have to make sure it
is not portrayed as an attempt to assign communal
blame. There is no such thing as the guilt or innocence
of an entire nation. Guilt, like innocence, is not
collective, but personal.

We believe that the imperative to conduct a
proper investigation must neither be politicized, nor
linked to diplomatic disagreements over Kosovo. It
must be ultimately put in the service of truth and
reconciliation. Its successful completion is a
prerequisite for lasting peace and will represent the
final repudiation of the policies that promoted
extrajudicial killing, ethnic cleansing and the
criminalization of a society.

