Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate. My country attaches the
utmost importance to strengthening the rule of law as
an essential requirement for the achievement of peace
and security at both the national and international
levels, the latter of which occurs with the framework of
the Security Council.

With regard to conflict and post-conflict
situations, my country is of the view that, when
establishing mandates, the Security Council must give
due priority to the need to ensure the application of the
rule of law in conflict and post-conflict societies, in
particular by strengthening internal judicial machinery
and police systems, which also contribute to the
prevention of situations of that kind in the future. That
objective is directly linked to the role of the Security
Council and has been increasingly expressed in the
mandates approved by this organ.

With respect to situations of armed conflict, full
respect for international humanitarian law is essential
to ensuring the protection of civilians by parties to a
conflict and by United Nations forces. Parties to an
armed conflict are subject to the basic rule that
civilians must be protected against the effects of armed
conflict. With respect to peacekeeping operations, my
country is convinced that the inclusion of activities for
the protection of civilians in the mandates of United
Nations missions is important in order to ensure in
practice the effective provision of humanitarian
assistance. It is also essential to hold those responsible
for serious violations of human rights criminally
accountable.

Fortunately, the international community has
overcome the justice versus peace paradigm in post-
conflict and conflict situations, in which political
agreements put justice aside through de jure or de facto
amnesties. The present paradigm is one in which peace
and justice are not only compatible, but also
complementary, objectives.

Combating impunity must be a commitment of all
States Members of the United Nations. The
international community is witnessing a notable
evolution of international criminal justice. Such a
process progressed with the establishment by the
Council of the ad hoc Tribunals for Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia, and showed a clear recognition by
the Security Council of the close relationship between
peace and justice. The International Criminal Court
(ICC) is one of the most important institutions of the
multilateral system. In 1998, it was not expected that
the Rome Statute would enter into force in such a short
period, and much less that, in just under 10 years since
its adoption, the Court would be playing such a central
role in the fight against impunity.

Through resolution 1970 (2011), the Security
Council referred a new situation to the Prosecutor of
the Court. Argentina supports referrals by the Security
Council, which involves a power recognized by the
Rome Statute. However, there are two aspects
regarding which I would like to express the serious
concern of my country.

Paragraph 6 of resolution 1970 (2011) follows the
questionable precedent set by the referral of the

situation in Darfur to the ICC when it formulates an
exception to the jurisdiction of the Court that is not
provided for in the Rome Statute. That has an impact
on the integrity of the criminal justice system of the
Court. In addition, the resolution provides, in its
paragraph 8, that

"none of the expenses incurred in connection
with the referral shall be borne by the United
Nations [but] by the parties to the Rome Statute".

Such a provision is inconsistent with Article 115 of the
Rome Statute and with Article 13 of the Relationship
Agreement between the United Nations and the Court.

Argentina would also like to urge Member States
to fulfil their obligations to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court and to encourage
continued cooperation of the Security Council with the
Court, with the aim of putting an end to impunity.
Similarly, my country calls on States that have not yet
ratified the Rome Statute to ratify it as soon as
possible.

The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/634*) highlights the strengthening of the
normative framework for the right to justice, truth and
guarantees of non-recurrence. My country also stresses
that evolution, as they deal with the pillars for
combating impunity.

In that regard, it should be highlighted that,
during the most recent session of the Human Rights
Council, it was decided, at the insistence of my
country, among others, to establish a Special
Rapporteur of the United Nations for the promotion of
truth, justice, reparation and the guarantee of non-
recurrence in cases of serious violations of human
rights and of serious violations of international
humanitarian law. The establishment of that new
special procedure constitutes an important contribution
to the fight against impunity within the framework of
the United Nations.

A debate within the United Nations on the rule of
law cannot be conducted without a reference to the
importance of the peaceful settlement of international
disputes. The peaceful settlement of disputes is one of
the pillars of the international community, and clearly
the International Court of Justice plays a principal role
in that regard. But the peaceful settlement of disputes
also contemplates other methods, which are described
in Article 36 of the Charter. In that respect, my country
underscores the need for the parties to a controversy to
comply in good faith with the calls that the organs of
the United Nations, including the General Assembly,
make or have made with the aim of seeking a solution
to the dispute.

Among the means available to the Organization,
we would like to highlight the role played by the good
offices that the organs of the United Nations may
request the Secretary-General to undertake. For the
successful fulfilment of a mission of good offices of
the Secretary-General - and therefore for solving the
given dispute - the goodwill and good faith of the
parties to the dispute are also required.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that
international peace and security are of key importance
to the international community. That is a global interest
that we must defend, and the Security Council is the
international body with the primary responsibility for
doing so. Legitimacy, democracy and justice are values
to guide the action by the Security Council in conflict
and post-conflict situations, in order to build and
consolidate peace.

