Mr. Antonio: At the outset, I wish to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your delegation's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for August
and for inscribing this critical issue on the agenda of
the Council in order to reflect on this difficult chapter
in our nations' history, show our appreciation to all
stakeholders and reflect on how to better prepare
ourselves to counter any eventual epidemics.

I also thank the Nigerian presidency for inviting the
African Union (AU) to take part in this debate in order
to bring to bear its perspectives on lessons learned from
the Ebola epidemic, given the African Union's active
engagement in the continent's coordinated response
in the framework of the African Union support to the
Ebola Outbreak in West Africa (ASEOWA). That was
well underlined by Dr. Chan and Dr. Nabarro, whom
we thank both for their role in tackling this disease
and in coordinating the international effort, including
with the African Union. I look forward to listening to
Mr. Mosoka Fallah and Mr. Per Thoresson, as well as
to representatives of Council members and affected
countries.

It will be recalled that, following the World Health

Organization (WHO) declaration on 8 August 2014, the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union, at its
450th meeting held in Addis Ababa on 19 August 2014,
invoked article 6 (f) relating to aspects of its mandate
with regard to humanitarian action and disaster
management and decided,

"given the emergency situation caused by the Ebola
outbreak, to authorize the immediate deployment
of an AU-led military and civilian humanitarian
mission, comprising medical doctors, nurses and
other medical and paramedical personnel, as well as
military personnel, as required for the effectiveness
and protection of the Mission".

The Peace and Security Council mandate led to
the establishment of ASEOWA. The primary objective
was to contribute to the ongoing efforts to stop the
Ebola transmission in the affected countries, prevent
its international spread and contribute to rebuilding the
health systems. The Peace and Security Council twice
extended the mandate of ASEOWA, which will expire
on 31 December, although the epidemic is deemed
contained and under control.

The African Union Commission is currently
undertaking a comprehensive evaluation of the
ASEOWA mission with a view to identifying lessons
learned and experiences gained. Allow me, however, to
share with the Council nine of the key lessons learned,
among others.

Lesson one concerns a speedy response and
deployment of the urgently needed human resources for
health. It took less than four weeks for the AU support
to the Ebola Outbreak in West Africa to be deployed
following the adoption of the Peace and Security
Council mandate. ASEOWA was established following
the Peace And Security Council mandate of 19 August
and deployed to Liberia by 15 September. By October,
ASEOWA was deployed to the three affected countries.
That is unprecedented.

Once a decision was made in November 2015 to
initiate a surge, increasing the number of ASEOWA
volunteers from the initial 100, it took less than one
month to have close to 835 volunteers working in all
three affected countries. Again, the African Union
Commission moved rapidly, within the space of a
single month, from Lagos through Addis Ababa,
Kinshaha and Nairobi to mobilize health workers and
recruit and deploy volunteers from Nigeria, Ethiopia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Kenya.
In addition, ASEOWA recruited about 4,000 local
volunteers within the three affected countries.

Lesson two regards the underlying principle
and flexibility of ASEOWA. In the context of the
international community's response to Ebola, the
African Union has the largest deployment of the
much-needed human resources for health, but was
embedded within national ministries of health based on
their needs. ASEOWA's concept of operations clearly
defines its strategy; a central tenet is that the AU will
support but not dictate to the affected countries. Hence,
ASEOWA volunteers were placed at the disposal of
the countries to support and supplement their health
workers, whose ranks have been badly depleted by the
Ebola virus disease.

ASEOWA worked within the national incident
management system set up by each affected country.
ASEOWA teams were deployed on the ground by the
Governments' Ebola incident management system to
support the following six pillars of the response as
adopted by the countries: case management; logistics
management; surveillance and contact tracing;
communication and information; social mobilization;
and psychosocial care. The credibility of the ASEOWA
leadership and volunteers inspired trust in the affected
population, from the national leadership to communities,
which provided entry points into national coordination
structures. As a result, ASEOWA volunteers deployed
to the Ebola hottest spots and were instrumental in
drastically reducing Ebola cases by February 2015.

Lesson three regards collaboration with and
coordination among various actors. Although
coordination in the field was particularly challenging
because tasks assigned to some actors were not properly
coordinated, ASEOWA liaised and collaborated
effectively with the United Nations, WHO, the United
States Centre for Disease Control and Prevention,
Medecins Sans Frontieres, Red Cross and other
organizations, as well as with Cubans and the Chinese,
with whom the African Union managed and worked
together inside Ebola treatment units in the affected
countries.

ASEOWA remained the central coordinator for
Africa's response, working with member States and
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in the field and at the Strategic Emergency
Centre at the African Union Commission in Addis
Ababa to ensure daily coordination meetings in Addis
Ababa, bringing together member States, development
partners, United Nations and humanitarian agencies
and interdepartmental participation from within the
African Union Commission; coordination between
Addis Ababa and the capitals of the affected countries
and of key development partners; coordination among
medical, logistic and other emergency experts; and
coordination from headquarters to the field offices in
West Africa.

Lesson four concerns partnership, in particular
with the African private sector. ASEOWA received
financial and technical support from partner countries
and organizations, such as the United Nations, WHO,
the United States of America, China, Japan, Sweden,
Norway, the European Union, Turkey, Kazakhstan, and
the World Bank, among others. The African Private
Sector - through the Africa Against Ebola Solidarity
Trust Fund - remains the single-largest financial
contributor to the AU's Ebola response. In addition,
the African private sector leveraged its assets and
technology for the use of ASEOWA. Through a short
message service code campaign, the private sector
succeeded not only in mobilizing financial resources
for ASEOWA, but also in mobilizing ordinary Africans
to participate in the fight against Ebola. By joining
forces with the Commission in the Ebola response, and
with the commitment to support the African Centre
for Disease Control and Prevention - in the context
of medium to long-term post Ebola measure - the
African private sector has demonstrated the true spirit
of African solidarity: Africa helping Africa.

Lesson five is that technology and innovation
played an important role in the AU response to the Ebola
outbreak. ASEOWA field epidemiologists are equipped
with global positioning devices for contact tracing, and
they use mobile technology to transmit their data and
reports in real time. Software such as ArcGIS, Stata
and Epi Info were used to generate and analyse data.
On our part, the African Union Commission developed
its own process software to manage the recruitment
and processing of volunteers, which contributed
significantly to our ability to process - in two days"
time - and select from more than 500 potential
volunteers provided by each member State. The human
resources process involved verifying credentials,
background checks, medical clearance and insurance.
Technology and innovation are key in responding to
any future emergency.

Lesson six pertains to African solidarity, the spirit
of Africa helping Africans. ASEOWA was conceived
in the spirit of African solidarity, and supported by the
African Union's convening power, political leverage,
its continental reach and its networks in all regions
of Africa, including the diaspora. Technical expertise
came from 18 member States, African Humanitarian
Action, an African humanitarian non-governmental
organization, the Economic Community fo West African
Sates, Africans in the diaspora, as well as from affected
countries. The ASEOWA volunteers included doctors,
nurses, epidemiologists, lab scientists and technicians,
public health officers, social workers, psycho-social
experts, community mobilizers, communications
experts and survivors of EBOLA. They all promptly
responded to the call of the African Union Commission
for help.

Lesson seven has to do with the need to build Africa's
capacity to deal with future public health emergencies.
Another major lesson learned from the Ebola outbreak
is the need for the AU to put in place a medium- to long-
term programme to build Africa's capacity to deal with
public health emergencies and threats in future. Disease
surveillance and detection, emergency preparedness
for health and natural disasters and the proper
responses are vital. It is therefore imperative that the
capacities and systems most needed to prevent, detect
and respond to public health threats must be reinforced
in order to ensure that, in the medium- to long-term,
African countries meet all the International Health
Regulations and have in place the requisite capacities
and systems. It is in that context that the African Union
Commission reiterates its commitment to speed up the
establishment of the African Centre for Disease Control
and Prevention and to ensure that it is operational in
the next couple of months, as directed by the policy
organs of the African Union. The Centre will partner
with the World Health Organization and other relevant
stakeholders to assist member States in addressing gaps
with regard to compliance with International Health
Regulations, thereby complementing one another and
ensuring effectiveness.

Lesson eight has to do with a cost-effective
mission. ASEOWA deployed close to 850 medical
workers from 18 African countries, and recruited more
than 4,000 local volunteers - including survivors - to
work all over the affected countries. ASEOWA was
flexible enough to deploy its teams to where they
were needed the most and to support the people's
priorities. ASEOWA worked with national authorities
to restore critical maternal newborn and child health
care and other medical services in vital health-care
centres. ASEOWA worked with local organizations to
help revitalize hospitals and support strained medical
capacities in an infection-free environment. All that
was accomplished at a cost that was only a fraction of
what other aid interventions usually cost.

Lesson nine involves bridging the gap between
Geneva and New York in the event of public health
emergency of international concern, like Ebola.
Pursuant to article 12 of the International Health
Regulations, the Director-General of the World Health
Organization determines that an event constitutes a
public health emergency of international concern. As
we have witnessed, Ebola was a threat to international
peace and security, for which the Council has the
primary responsibility. Yet there is no role in the
International Health Regulations for the Security
Council. With the impending review of the International
Health Regulations, the African Union wishes to invite
members of the Security Council to consider how best
to address those lacunae, to coordinate with the World
Health Organization and to assess the role ofthe Council
once the latter determines that an event constitutes a
public health emergency of international concern.

In conclusion, I wish to highlight the fact that the
African Union, the regional economic communities
and national Governments are strengthening their
respective capacities to respond to emergencies and
disasters. Models for emergency response teams,
emergency medical teams and the African Capacity
for Immediate Response to Crises are being tested in
various crisis theatres. ASEOWA saved lives safely,
swiftly, inexpensively and effectively. The ASEOWA
model provides a working template and guidelines for
emergency responders in Africa, and perhaps in other
continents.

