Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal would like to thank the
Uruguayan presidency for taking the initiative to
organize today's important meeting on the situation in
South Sudan. I also wish to thank Mr. David Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan (UNMISS), for the quality of his briefing.

The humanitarian crisis in South Sudan, in
addition to the famine in several parts of the country,
calls for urgent action by the international community.
Indeed, human rights violations must be brought to an
end as soon as possible, and the civilian population,
including the numerous internally displaced persons
fleeing the fighting that has returned to several parts
of the country, must be protected. Efforts should also
be made to keep these same populations in need from
succumbing to famine.

This concern to put an end to the suffering of the
people of South Sudan must also motivate the different
parties to the conflict which must immediately stop
fighting and resume the dialogue in order to implement
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan. In this regard, we wish
to salute the unilateral ceasefire decided by President
Salva Kiir in order to create the conditions needed for
the process of national dialogue aimed at ending the
civil war. Indeed, this national dialogue, announced by
President Kiir last December, if it were to be inclusive,
free and transparent, could help the return of peace to
the country. We therefore hope that the ceasefire will
finally materialize on the ground so that the dialogue
process can start.

Furthermore, my delegation would like to encourage
all the initiatives announced by the countries of the
region for revitalizing the political process. Indeed, we
believe that regional actors, in particular the countries
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
have a clear role to play in the search for stability and
sustainable peace in South Sudan. That is why we
welcomed the recent visit to Juba made by President
Museveni. In this regard, we also believe that it is time
for the stalled peace process to be revived on the basis
of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan because we are convinced
that there can be no military solution to the crisis. But
if that is to occur, the different actors will have to show
real political will to put an end to a conflict that has
lasted for more than three years.

The Senegalese delegation welcomes the progress
made in the preparations for the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force, the first elements of which
have already arrived in Juba. However, we should note
that little progress has been made in the discussions
between UNMISS and the Government of South Sudan
regarding the distribution of tasks for the Regional
Force at Juba International Airport. We therefore
call for more cooperation from the South Sudanese
Transitional Government on the role of the Regional
Protection Force in Juba. Accordingly, we encourage the
South Sudanese authorities to take all necessary steps
for the deployment of the Force without further delay.

As for UNMISS itself, whose resolute and
courageous action we salute, we must admit that,
despite certain improvements, it continues to face a
number of recurring restrictions on the freedom of its
movements, which naturally continues to undermine its
ability to carry out swift actions in the event of an attack
on civilians, and this in a context of increasing ethnic
violence, in Violation of the status-of-forces agreement.
We therefore welcome the efforts of UNMISS, which,
despite all the difficulties encountered, continues to
operate in a hostile environment. We would also like
to pay tribute to the contributing countries for their
dedication to the cause of peace in South Sudan.

Unfortunately, targeted attacks and threats
against humanitarian workers are also continuing,
as are restrictions on humanitarian access to parts
of the country. We therefore call on all actors to stop
the hostilities immediately and allow UNMISS and
humanitarian workers to gain access to civilians
in need.

