Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation wishes to welcome
Mr. Nebojsa Covic', Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia
and Head of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/ Serbia
Coordinating Centre for Kosovo and Metohija. We
thank him for the detailed information he has provided
on the situation in Kosovo and the state of cooperation
with Mr. Steiner. My delegation would also like to
thank Mr. Steiner, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his detailed comprehensive
briefing to the Security Council on the latest
developments in the situation in its various aspects in
Kosovo. My delegation also welcomes the Secretary-
General's report on the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK).

We also welcome the positive developments that
have taken place recently in Kosovo, particularly the
setting up of a Government that includes
representatives of the Coalition for Serb Returnees to
Kosovo and its swearing in. We believe these are
positive results that represent significant progress made
since the information we had received in Mr. Steiner's
statement of 24 April 2002.

Allow me to commend the activities of UNMIK,
particularly the fact that it continues to cooperate with
the interim administration to transfer authority
according to the benchmarks set by Mr. Steiner. The
Mission is also working to ensure that any measures
taken by the interim administration are in keeping with
the rules and benchmarks, which in turn must be in
keeping with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
constitutional order.

We appreciate the efforts that have been and
continue to be made by the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to cooperate with the Mission,
particularly the current cooperation reflected in the
statement of Mr. Covie, Deputy Prime Minister of
Yugoslavia. My delegation also expresses its
appreciation to UNMIK for its efforts to restore calm
and stability to Kosovo by combating cross-border
smuggling and illegal border-crossing by smugglers.
We encourage cooperation with local police forces,
along the lines set forth by Mr. Steiner, to combat
crime and violence and to ensure respect for the rule of
law. We believe that combating regional crime requires
cooperation with neighbouring States in order to ensure
a global fight against such crime.

We appreciate the coordination on the economic
and monetary fronts. We encourage the efforts being
made to encourage the return of those who left Kosovo.
Such efforts will promote stability in the region,
particularly the reintegration of the returnees into the
local communities to ensure development, stability and
reconstruction. We look forward with confidence to the
municipal elections, which will be held in October
2002. We express the hope that all groups and ethnic
minorities in Kosovo will be represented in those
municipal elections and that all groups in Kosovo will
be able to participate in them.

Finally, I reiterate our appreciation to Mr. Steiner
for his efforts and the efforts of the Mission. I have two
questions for him. The first question is: Can he clarify
the issue of returnees with regard to what measures
will likely accelerate the return rate of refugees and
internally displaced persons? How can their rights be
guaranteed?

The second question is: What is the nature of the
efforts being made to tackle the issue of abducted and
missing persons? That issue is now before the Court at
The Hague.

In conclusion, I should like to thank Mr. Steiner
and all those who are working in UNMIK for their
efforts to guarantee stability and calm in Kosovo and in
the Balkans in general. We thank them for their
cooperation with the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

