Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): At the outset, I
would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her
presentation of the nineteenth report of her Office
to the Security Council. We have taken note of the
recent judicial activities undertaken by the Court in
relation to the continued monitoring of serious crimes
committed in Darfur and the status of cooperation by
the Government of the Sudan and other parties.

Our position on this debate has always been
consistent. It is now about nine years since the Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC. However,
those present might remember that since February
2009, African Heads of State and Government adopted
during different African Union Summits decisions to
request that the proceedings against President Omer
Hassan A. Al-Bashir be deferred in accordance with
article 16 of the Rome Statute. The African Union,
while reiterating its commitment to the fight against
impunity, has stressed that the search for justice
should be pursued in a way that does not impede or
jeopardize efforts aimed at promoting lasting peace.
Subsequently, it decided that all African countries that
received President Al-Bashir since his indictment were
in conformity with the decision of the African Union
Summit and were pursuing the same goal of peace
in the region. Therefore, we believe that reports of
non-cooperation by African States impede efforts of
the regional organization for peace in Darfur. In that
regard, we are convinced that a concerted approach
among the United Nations, the African Union and the
Government of the Sudan is the best way to ensure
accountability, while addressing the conflict in Darfur.
Indeed, peace and justice cannot be mutually exclusive.

On the security situation in Darfur, we are deeply
concerned about the ongoing hostilities that have
continued to increase the suffering of the Darfuri
people. It is particularly unacceptable for armed groups
to use civilians as human shields in their fight against
the Government.

Furthermore, Rwanda strongly condemns the
repeated attacks on peacekeepers of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), especially the recent incident of 24 May,
in which a Rwandan peacekeeper was killed and three
others were wounded.

We are very troubled by allegations of the
manipulation of UNAMID reports, with the intent
to cover up crimes committed against civilians
and peacekeepers. We hope that UNAMID and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations will provide
clarification on that issue.

A decade after the start of the conflict in Darfur,
the Government of the Sudan needs to do much more
in ensuring that those who committed human rights
violations and other crimes, including sexual and
gender-based violence and attacks on peacekeepers, are
held accountable.

We also need to emphasize the responsibility of the
Government of the Sudan in ensuring the protection of
its people. Similarly, it is important that the Government
takes concrete steps in addressing the root causes of
repeated inter-communal violence in Darfur.

The last 10 years of conflict in Darfur have proved
that there can be no military solution to the conflict.
Only a genuine political dialogue can bring peace
to Darfur. In that regard, we believe that the time
has come for all warring parties to the conflict to
understand that reality. In that respect, we commend
the efforts of Mohamed ibn Chambas, Joint Special
Representative for Operations and Management
in UNAMID, which are aimed at convincing the
non-signatory movements to join the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. Likewise, we commend his efforts
and those of President Thabo Mbeki, Chairperson of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, in
facilitating the national dialogue. It is important that
the international community redouble its efforts in
supporting all of those processes.

To conclude, let me state again that Rwanda - as
a member of the Security Council, State member of the
AfricanUnion andAfricanUnion-UnitedNations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur troop- and police-contributing
country - will continue to work towards sustainable
peace, genuine reconciliation and accountability for the
most serious crimes in Darfur.

