Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Mr. President, I
thank your delegation for organizing and preparing in a
very thorough manner for this open debate on the
occasion of the tenth anniversary of the first thematic
resolution adopted by the Security Council on this
topic. On the one hand, we have reason to celebrate.
We have achieved significant conceptual and
institutional progress in recent years with the
establishment of an Expert Group, the updating of the
aide-memoire (S/PRST/2009/l, annex) and the
inclusion of an annex on humanitarian access in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/277).
Furthermore, and most important, we have agreed on
our common responsibility to protect civilians both in
times of armed conflict and otherwise. On the other
hand, the glaring gap between the normative
framework and the realities on the ground remains;
compliance with the existing standards is still far from
satisfactory.
The protection of civilians is a complex area
covering a very wide range of topics, as reflected in the
resolution adopted this morning. Civilian protection
poses a central challenge to the Council. The manner in
which it responds to that challenge is an essential
yardstick by which its overall performance is
measured. The events in Rwanda and Srebrenica count
among those that have had the strongest and most
lasting impact on the public perception of the Council.
Thinking of new ways to enhance its role in the
protection of civilians is thus the most appropriate
contribution to a meaningful commemoration.

This year, we are also celebrating the sixtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions, the centrepiece of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. However, instead of steady
progress over the decades towards full compliance with
the existing standards of international humanitarian
law, we are witnessing the continued erosion of respect
for international humanitarian law. The report of the
Secretary-General before us rightly identifies the need
for stronger engagement with non-State actors as an
essential element for better compliance. An additional
element is the consistency with which this agenda is
addressed. The Council must make it very clear that the
relevant standards are applicable in any armed conflict,
under any circumstances and irrespective of the
background of military action.

Furthermore, compliance with international
humanitarian law will be enhanced if the parties to the
conflict know that violations will entail consequences.
In particular, the Council should consider such
consequences in cases in which civilian populations are
directly targeted or humanitarian access is deliberately
denied. It is our understanding that the reference in
resolution 1894 (2009) to appropriate measures at the
disposal of the Council includes targeted sanctions.

Where violations of international humanitarian
law go routinely unpunished, a climate of impunity
will prevail and lead to further violations.
Accountability is therefore the other key element for
ensuring compliance. We have made great strides in the
area of international criminal justice through the
establishment of international mechanisms and, most
important, the International Criminal Court. We thus
have the tools to effectively ensure accountability on a
permanent basis. Those mechanisms should be put to
good and consistent use.
09-60274
The Council has already recognized its role in
ensuring accountability and has done so again in
adopting today's resolution. That role is much broader
than considering the referral of situations to the
International Criminal Court. Much to the contrary, the
Council should demand accountability on a regular
basis where there are credible allegations that the most
serious crimes under international law have been
committed. And it should make clear that it is first and
foremost the responsibility of States to investigate and
prosecute, and should urge parties to conflicts to do so
where needed. There are numerous ways in which
United Nations bodies can assist States where there is a
need to build domestic capacities. But the Council
must also ensure accountability where there is no
willingness to investigate and prosecute on the part of
the States that have jurisdiction or other parties to the
conflict.

Today, there is largely clarity about the standards
applicable to the protection of civilians, thanks also to
the valuable work of the Secretariat. What we need for
the next ten years and beyond are concepts and
concrete measures to ensure implementation, as well as
a consistent approach to the protection agenda,
especially in cases in which that may seem difficult or
inconvenient.

We therefore welcome the joint study submitted
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, as well as the parts of the resolution
adopted today dealing with peacekeeping. We hope and
believe that they can lead to concrete improvements.
One of the key findings of the study is that the chain of
events required to support the protection of civilians
from the planning stages to practical implementation in
the field is broken - an alarming finding that we must
urgently address. Essential aspects for the future work
of the Council include clear guidance provided in
mandates and mission-wide protection strategies
involving the country team and the host State, as well
as, of course, the provision of the necessary resources.

In conclusion, we support the resolution as a
promise of better and more effective mandates
formulated by the Council, and we call for more
consistent consideration of protection issues as tangible
evidence of the Council's commitment to the
protection of civilians.
09-60274
