Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I
also thank Ambassador Moraes Cabral for setting the
scene for our discussion and for his energetic chairing
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.

We meet today to discuss how we conduct our
business and to listen to the ideas and views of the wider
membership. It is an important topic. However, when
we consider the question of working methods, Council
members must be careful not to give the impression
that they are more interested in the process than in
the product. The key test of the Security Council will
always be its effectiveness at preventing and resolving
conflict around the globe. What we do here in New
York is important as a forum for discussion and for
shaping response to events, but we must not forget that
our main responsibility is to make a difference on the
ground and to save innocent men, women and children
from suffering in conflict.
As the Council endeavours to carry out that solemn
duty, I think that two principles need to be balanced in
order to guide the methods by which the Council carries
out that work. First, the Council should be ruthless in its
pursuit of effectiveness. Speed can be crucial in dealing
with volatile situations of escalating conflict. We need
to be able to come together as a diverse group of nations
representing the world and arrive at swift and decisive
solutions that can make a difference on the ground.

The United Kingdom has championed several
working methods to improve the effectiveness of
the Council. We have advocated more use of video
teleconferences, which happily have become the new
standard in Council consultations. We have secured
time and space for the important work of the Council's
subsidiary organs, and we have argued that the Council
must exercise its responsibility for conflict prevention
as well as conflict management. That is why we
introduced monthly horizon-scanning sessions, which
in the case of Yemen, for example, encouraged the
Council to pay closer attention to the early warning
signs and provided us with the impetus to take decisive
action. I recognize that we have failed to convince all
other Council members of the value of that exercise,
but I am disappointed not to have heard alternative
ideas from the opponents for exercising our conflict
prevention responsibilities.

Secondly, the Council needs to be transparent and
therefore accountable to the United Nations membership
and the wider world. All United Nations Members have
a legitimate interest in what the Council is doing - or,
indeed, not doing. So it is right that the Council listens
to and engages with all other United Nations Members,
whether through open debates like this one today
or other formats, such as informal dialogues or the
Arria Formula meetings that we and other Council
members have championed. We also share the View of
those who think that the Council's official reporting
should be more expansive, more analytical and, where
appropriate, more self-critical.

We also need to keep the Council's agenda fresh and
up to date. As far as I am aware, not a single new item
has been introduced on the formal agenda in the past
18 months. Has the world really been so static during
that period? We are in the bizarre situation where the
list of items of which the Council is seized includes one
regional issue that has not been discussed since 1949
but does not include Syria or Yemen, both of which have
been major Council preoccupations during 2012. That
is not a good advertisement for the responsiveness and
transparency of our procedures. How can we properly
be accountable to our members if we cannot even be
frank about what is on our agenda?

According to George Bernard Shaw, the golden rule
is that there are no golden rules. In today's Council, our
rules, practice and precedent provide valuable guides to
our work, yet even as we respect the rules set out in the
Charter, we must avoid becoming hidebound by past
practice and we must be ready to innovate and adapt
our procedures to the modern world. That might mean
adapting to modern technology by using social media
and discarding the requirement to use fax machines.
But it also means that the Council must do more to
engage with the Members of the United Nations and the
people they represent in the Organization.

Finally and fundamentally, it is crucial that
the Security Council be as effective as possible in
addressing the problems faced by the world today. That
requires considering any methods of work that promote
well-considered and decisive action in the Security
Council.

