Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
the Chinese presidency for having arranged such an
important open debate. We would also like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his very important briefing
to the Security Council.

We echo the statement made by the representative
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, as well as the
statement delivered by the representative of Uzbekistan
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Today's periodic meeting is taking place at a time
when sad events have recently occurred. We have seen
an unfortunate escalation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly in Jerusalem - an escalation in
the situation that has served to raise awareness among
the international community. Given the will of Israel to
transform the conflict into a religious conflict and the
arbitrary and constrictive security measures that have
been imposed by the Israelis on the Al-Aqsa Mosque
compound, we declare those actions to constitute a
violation of international norms and standards. It goes
without saying that there will be further violence in the
future as long as the Palestinian cause remains without
a solution, given that the occupation continues. If the
Council does not end Israeli practices, then it is as
if we are encouraging Israel to continue its practices
and aggression.

The State of Kuwait roundly condemns Israel's
violations of international agreements as an occupying
Power in Jerusalem. Furthermore, my country
categorically rejects any policies or plans on the part
of Israel that aim to Judaize the holy city, including
isolating the city's environment and manipulating
the city's demographics. Those are violations of
international peace and security. That is why we
call on the international Community to take on its
responsibilities and face up to Israel's criminal actions
in Jerusalem, particularly under the relevant Security
Council resolutions, which reject any change in
Jerusalem. Furthermore, we call on the international
community to block any attempt by Israel at any time
to change the historic status quo of the holy sites. It
is necessary that we safeguard the religious status of
those religious sites, which would allow worshipers to
pray far free violence and provocations. Israel should
remove the difficulties and obstacles.

All the measures taken by the occupying Power
up to this point are not acceptable because they are
insufficient. Israel needs to take additional measures.
The practices of the occupying Power, Israel, on the
occupied Palestinian territories, including in East
Jerusalem, run counter to its legal commitments that
have been established through international agreements
and treaties, including the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949. We should condemn those practices in the
international community and through the Security
Council. We should reject what Israel is doing in its
closing of the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound and putting
obstacles in place that prevent the Palestinian people
from exercising their religion.

The Security Council should protect the Palestinian
people. Their fundamental rights have been violated by
the occupying Power. Palestinians are suffering from
religious terrorist attacks that are being carried out by
the settlers and others. There are measures attempting
to change the situation on the ground and impede the
search for a two-State solution. I want to reiterate that
peace should begin with the end of the occupation,
which is entering its fiftieth year. The peace should be
based on the legitimacy of international agreements
and the Arab Peace Initiative, which was adopted by
all Arab countries in at the Beirut Summit in 2002.
The Initiative calls for Israel's withdrawal from all
of the Palestinian territories that have been occupied
since 1967, which would guarantee the final status of
Palestine and allow the Palestinian people to exercise
their rights. It would allow for the creation of an
independent State with East Jerusalem as the capital. We
call on the international community to implement the
relevant resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016)
and those resolutions that condemn land-grabbing and
settlements and call for an end to Israeli occupation.

