Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, on behalf of my delegation and
on my own behalf, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your delegation on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December, which is our last month as a non-permanent
member of the Council. I would also like to thank and
congratulate Ambassador Cardi and the entire Italian
delegation for the excellent work that they carried out
during the month of November.

I would like to welcome the presence in the
Chamber of Her Excellency Ms. Kolinda Grabar-
Kitarovie, President of Croatia, as well as of Ms. Nela
Kuburovic', Minister of Justice of Serbia.

For me, it is a pleasure to welcome people with
whom we have been working over the past two years,
namely, President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, Judge Carmel Agius, President of
the International Residual Mechanism, Judge Theodor
Meron, as well as Prosecutor Serge Brammertz. I am
also grateful for the presentations of the briefers, which,
as usual, reflect the high quality ofthe work carried out
by both institutions.

With regard to the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, it is the last report see (S/2017/662)
prior to its closure. We believe that the Tribunal is
concluding its work in a very positive way. During its
24 years of operation, it has managed to judge a total
of 161 people and leave no fugitives behind. Since its
previous report (see S/2017/436), the Tribunal carried
out its judicial activities as planned and announced,
without delay, having issued its past two verdicts a
couple of days ago. Regrettably, a solution could not
be reached in relation to the arrest warrants of those
accused of contempt of court, namely, Petar Jojic', J ovo
Ostojie and Vjerica Radeta, who are today reduced to
just two following the death of the accused Jovo Ostojie
in June.

The Tribunal has continued to move forward with
its liquidation activities and in the transfer of activities
to the International Residual Mechanism. In its latest
report (see S/20l7/66l), the Mechanism states that it
is in a position to assume the remaining functions of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia at
the end of the year and operate with full autonomy for
the first time since its establishment by the Security
Council in 2010. That should undoubtedly be a source
of satisfaction.

We also note that the search and prosecution of
the eight people accused by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda who remain fugitives continues to
one of the major priorities of the International Residual
Mechanism. The measures adopted by the Office of the
Prosecutor reflect the efforts made to achieve that goal.

It is worth recalling that cooperation is still essential
for the Residual Mechanism to be able to continue
to comply with the mandate that has been conferred
upon it by the Security Council. Now that we are
approaching the closure of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, we appeal to the Security
Council and Member States to continue with and even
strengthen their cooperation with the International
Residual Mechanism.

Today's meeting has a special significance, as it
marks the closure of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, and with it the end of an important
stage in our contemporary history. I would like to
make some personal comments on the Tribunal, which
embodied an ideal and a model of fighting for justice
for almost quarter of a century.

The Tribunal imparted international justice for 24
years, bringing to court those responsible for having
committed crimes against humanity, war crimes and
crimes of genocide. That allowed the victims of such
atrocious crimes to be remembered, giving them their
due, necessary and deserved justice, which is a symbol
and reflection of the end of impunity.

The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia strengthened the rule of law, contributed to
the development of international law and was a pioneer
in new areas, such as international humanitarian law. It
defined armed conflict, contributed to the development
of the definition of the crime of genocide, as well as
other international crimes, and established important
jurisprudence in matters of sexual crimes and crimes
against cultural heritage. The Tribunal demonstrated
that sexual violence was used as a weapon of war
and that hundreds of religious and cultural sites were
destroyed in order to eliminate the culture of certain
ethnic groups. The Tribunal also contributed to the
development of the concept of command responsibility,
which is fundamental to fair accountability in the cases
in which it passed judgements.

The Tribunal was unequivocal in seeing thatjustice
would reach everyone equally, regardless of status as
Head of State or Government or leval as senior official,
which was never a reason for being exempt from
criminal liability or reducing a punishment.

By clarifying facts of the past and establishing
historical truth, the Tribunal contributed to the
reconciliation of the affected peoples and conveyed the
message that there can be neither justice without truth
nor peace without justice.

For those reasons, and fundamentally because of
the respect and homage that we owe to the victims,
the legacy of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia must remain alive. The Security Council
successfully created the Tribunal in 1993. Today, as it
approaches its closure, the Council should expressly
acknowledge the historic work that the Tribunal
carried out for almost a quarter of a century, as well
as its undeniable contribution to international law and
justice. We believe that such recognition deserves to
be reflected in at least a presidential statement of the
Security Council.

Uruguay had the privilege of chairing the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals over the
past two years.We are approaching the end of that
work with the conviction that it is such institutions that
inspire us to trust in the triumph of the rule of law and
international criminal justice. The officials present
here today deserve the greatest respect and gratitude.
We thank them and their closest colleagues for the
sincere, constructive and close relationship with which
they have honorued us during the past two years. Our
thanks are also directed to the women and men who,
through their work over the past 24 years, contributed
to the success of the work of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia.

We would also like to express our thanks for the
continued support of the Office of Legal Affairs and
the Secretariat for our work as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Criminal Tribunals.
In particular, allow us to convey our thanks to the
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, Mr. Miguel
de Serpa Soares, the Assistant Secretary-General
for Legal Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias, Ms. Ana
Peyro, Mr. Tiyanjana Mphepo, Mr. Hirofumi Goto
of the Secretariat, as well as all of the other staff of
both Offices.
In conclusion, I wish Peru every success through its
Permanent Representative, Ambassador Meza-Cuadra,
who will take over our role as chair of the Informal
Working Group.

