Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Over the past 15 years, a broad range of instruments
and initiatives - national, regional and global - have
been developed to prevent the illicit transfer, the
destabilizing accumulation and the misuse of small
arms and light weapons. Given the immense negative
effects of these arms, the international community
must redouble its efforts in that regard. My statement
will focus on three challenges.

In order to comprehensively respond to the impact
of illicit small arms and light weapons on peace,
security and development, a holistic approach that
takes into account both supply and demand for small
arms and light weapons is necessary.

On the demand side, addressing the nexus between
armed violence and development is particularly
important. In 2006, Switzerland, alongside the United
Nations Development Programme, launched the Geneva
Declaration on Armed Violence and Development. The
113 States that support the initiative are dedicated to
developing measures to reduce armed violence in order
to enhance sustainable development at the global,
regional and national levels. The current goal of the
Geneva Declaration is to ensure that the experience
gained is firmly anchored in the post-2015 development
agenda.

On the supply side, lifecycle management of
Government-owned weapons and ammunition should
be improved. In that regard, existing instruments, such
as the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines
and the International Small Arms Control Standards,
play an important role. On the one hand, they contribute
to preventing the diversion of State-owned weapons and
ammunition to civilians, criminals or armed groups; on
the other, they mitigate the risk of unplanned explosions
at munition sites.

The humanitarian and security implications of
poorly managed ammunition stockpiles are highly
alarming. Measures at the international level lack
cohesiveness. Switzerland will therefore organize
an international meeting, to be held in Geneva in
November, to identify the possible next steps to improve
the safety and security of stockpiles of conventional
ammunition. Furthermore, efforts addressing the
supply side of small arms and light weapons are
particularly relevant in post-conflict situations. For
that reason, Switzerland fully supports the inclusion in
United Nations peacekeeping operations mandates of a
standardized approach to the life-cycle management of
small arms and light weapons, including ammunition.

My delegation welcomes the fact that the
Secretary-General's report on small arms and light
weapons (S/2015/289) recognizes the gendered nature
of armed violence. Switzerland takes gender-specific
aspects into account in its programmes and projects
aimed at countering the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons.

Switzerland acknowledges the central role of
instruments such as the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
the International Tracing Instrument and the Firearms
Protocol. The entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT) was a milestone. Only its universalization and
its thorough implementation can seriously tackle illicit
trafficking and the excessive accumulation of small
arms and light weapons. Switzerland is dedicated to
those goals and therefore supports, inter alia, capacity-
building efforts and measures that promote the Treaty's
universality. In order to maintain its commitment to the
Arms Trade Treaty and to contribute to its inclusive
and efficient implementation, Switzerland has offered
to host the ATT secretariat in Geneva.

In conclusion, Switzerland, like other States present
in the Chamber today, encourages the Security Council
to adopt a draft resolution that would strengthen the
principles set out in resolution 2117 (2013).

