Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset and on behalf of the delegation
of the United Arab Emirates, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of
the Council for this month, wishing you every success
in leading its activities. I would also like to seize this
opportunity to thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Bulgaria, for his valuable efforts,
which certainly contributed to the success of the work
of the Council last month.

The holding of this open formal session on the
question of Iraq reflects the growing concern of the
international community in view of developments
related to this important and sensitive issue that
unfortunately has not found an appropriate solution in
the past 12 years.

As for the relation between Iraq and the Security
Council, it has become obvious today, more than ever
before, that the gap separating the two sides is
increasing, particularly with regard to the interpretation
of the articles of resolutions relevant to disarmament of
weapons of mass destruction and their implementation.
Of course, this increases the tension and affects the
political and security situation in the region and deeply
affects the economic, social and development
conditions of the countries and peoples of the region,
as well as international peace and security as a whole.

As far as the humanitarian condition of the Iraqi
people is concerned, the periodic reports issued by the
Secretary-General and other international humanitarian
organizations, such as UNICEF, FAO and WHO, and
other human rights organizations clearly indicate that
the living conditions of the Iraqi people are
deteriorating constantly, particularly the increase in the
mortality rates among children and women because of
malnutrition and deteriorating medical care. All this
goes to prove that the oil-for-food programme has not
been adequate in fulfilling the basic and urgent human
needs of the Iraqi people.

Moreover, this also reflects the fact that stalled
efforts to reach a settlement between Iraq and Kuwait
constitute one of the main reasons for the continuing
tension in the region.

The United Arab Emirates has, on all occasions,
encouraged the adoption of peaceful means and ways
to address this issue and is thus profoundly concerned
about the danger of escalation leading to war in the
region. We believe that more than ever before it is
incumbent upon the international community,
particularly the United Nations, to assume their legal
and political responsibilities and to promote the
preventive diplomacy which the Secretary-General has
more than once called for in order to avoid a third war
in the region, with its nefarious consequences.

We would like to reiterate that we welcome the
recent initiative of Iraq calling for the UNMOVIC
inspectors and the IAEA experts to Visit Iraq
unconditionally. We also welcome the recent Vienna
agreement on the arrangements for immediate
resumption of the mandate of the inspectors. We call
upon the Security Council and the influential members
therein to urgently and unconditionally respond to this
positive Iraqi initiative bearing in mind Iraq's concerns
about the repetition of mistakes which were committed
by UNSCOM. in the past. This is, in fact, a first step
towards Iraq's full commitment to comply with its
legal obligations in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. In this context we would
like to emphasize the following important issues; first,
the urgent need to reach a peaceful, just,
comprehensive and final settlement of all pending
issues relating to the agenda item concerning the
situation between Kuwait and Iraq, a settlement based
upon the principle of transparency without a double
standard in order to maintain the prestige and
credibility of the Security Council in accordance with
the United Nations Charter and the provisions of
international law.

Secondly, we would like to insure implementation
of all provisions of Security Council resolutions calling
for respect for the sovereignty of Iraq, its territorial
integrity and non-interference in its internal affairs. We
also reject all forms of escalation and confrontation
that might lead to a military strike against Iraq and
cause destruction of the people of Iraq and the Gulf, as
well as the entire region.

Thirdly, we demand that the Iraqi Government
immediately implement its obligations and
commitments as stipulated in Security Council
resolutions and by Arab League summit meetings, of
which the latest, the Beirut Summit, called for full
cooperation in order to solve the problem of Kuwaiti
prisoners and detainees and nationals of third countries,
and the restoration of Kuwaiti property detained by
Iraq since 1990. In this context, we also affirm the
importance of Iraq's respect for the territorial
sovereignty of Kuwait and non-interference in its
internal affairs.

Fourthly, we call for a positive response to efforts
calling for the immediate lifting of the international
sanctions imposed on the people of Iraq in order to
alleviate the tremendous suffering of the Iraqi people
that has resulted in the death of 1.7 million of its
people. We also call for assistance for Iraq to
reconstruct its infrastructure and its basic service
sectors.

Fifthly, we must ensure that paragraph 14 of
Security Council resolution 687 (1991) apply to all
countries of the region and not to be limited only to
Iraq. This requires that the international community
call on the Government of Israel, just as it is calling on
Iraq to destroy its arsenal of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction and to subject all its
nuclear facilities to the safeguards of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as a first step towards
establishing a zone free of all types of nuclear weapons
and weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.

In conclusion, we hope that this debate on the
question of Iraq will lead to a positive and effective
consensus, an agreement to find a just, comprehensive
and objective solution to this issue, which, in our
opinion, will definitely contribute to containing the
existing tension in the region and will assist in
strengthening international peace and security and
enhancing confidence-building and cooperation among
the countries of the region.

