Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President, for
holding today's important debate.

Allow me to reiterate Brazil's support for Africa,
a continent with which we have a unique historic and
cultural connection. It is also a region of strategic
importance for us. Today Brazil maintains 39 diplomatic
posts in Africa, which are a very important part of our
global network of Embassies.

Brazil has participated in United Nations efforts
to promote peace in Africa from the outset, having
contributed to the United Nations Emergency Force
in Suez from 1956 to 1967, and to the United Nations
Operation in the Congo from 1960 to 1964. Since then,
Brazil has actively taken part in several United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the continent. We have
contributed troops to the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique and to the third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission. More recently, from 2013 to
2015, a Brazilian army officer, General Carlos Alberto
dos Santos Cruz, was the Force Commander of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Today Brazil
contributes military observers and staff officers to
seven United Nations missions in Africa. We reiterate
our willingness to continue supporting United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa, now and in
the future.

In its capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Brazil also attaches great importance to
close coordination with other African countries and
institutions in supporting Guinea-Bissau in its efforts
to achieve peace and prosperity.

Bilaterally, Brazil is also involved in the
enhancement of African capabilities with regard to
peace and security. The Brazilian army now cooperates
with Cape Verde, Mozambique, Namibia, Sao Tome
and Principe, and South Africa. We are also starting a
project in the predeployment training of peacekeepers
with Ethiopia, while officers and other members of
the armed forces from the region have graduated from
Brazilian military academies. The Brazilian army is
also involved in the triangular partnership project to
train African military engineers to be deployed to
peacekeeping missions.

In Namibia, a Brazilian naval mission has
contributed to the training of more than 2,000 members
of the Namibian navy. In Cabo Verde, since 2013, and in
Sao Tome and Principe, since 2015, we have maintained
naval missions to identify possibilities for cooperation
with those countries and to help train members of their
navies. Brazil also conducts maritime exercises with
African countries aimed at improving cooperation
among participating nations.

Allow me also to recall the zone of peace and
cooperation in the South Atlantic, made up of 24
countries, including all of the countries situated on the
West African coast, from Cape Verde and Senegal to
South Africa, as well as Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay.
Members of that zone have agreed to consolidate the
region as one of peace and cooperation so as to ensure
that it remains free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction, as well as to respect
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of its countries.

An innovative project is under way in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Through the
practice of the Afro-Brazilian martial art of capoeira,
Brazil has facilitated, in partnership with UNICEF,
the United Nations Development Programme and civil
society, the social reintegration of children formerly
linked to armed groups.

We welcomed the adoption of resolution 2330
(2016) and look forward to the implementation of the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. We
support African Union initiatives aimed at dealing with
crises and instability in Africa. The role of the African
Union (AU) in Darfur, Mali, Somalia and the Central
African Republic demonstrates the possibility of the
positive impact of cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations.

In discussing the United Nations-AU partnership,
we should not avoid the question of adequate means
for the implementation of increasingly complex tasks.
On the one hand, peacekeeping mandates must be
accompanied by the necessary resources, while, on the
other hand, regional actors should spare no effort to
progressively bring their troops to the level of United
Nations principles and standards of performance. In
that regard, we take note with interest of the proposals
presented by Secretary-General Guterres concerning
authorization and support for African Union operations,
which deserve further discussion. We should concentrate
on prevention and the peaceful settlement of African
problems instead of focusing disproportionately on
peacekeeping and military operations once a conflict
has broken out. With regard to the provision of financial
support to the African Union missions authorized by
the Council, it is important that our discussions also be
carried out in depth in the General Assembly.

Brazil will continue to work closely with African
countries within the multilateral and regional
structures at its disposal for the promotion ofpeace and
development.

