Mr. Masila (Kenya): We wish at the outset to
acknowledge the presence here today of Mr. Marshall
Billingslea, President of the Financial Action Task
Force and Assistant Secretary of the United States
Department of the Treasury; the Under-Secretary-
General of the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism; and Ms. Mercy Buku, and to thank them for
their informative presentations.

Madam President, I wish to thank you for having
organized this important meeting and also to commend
you for the diplomatic skill and collegial manner with
which you have conducted the affairs of the Council
during your presidency. We take note with appreciation
of the comprehensive concept note (S/2019/239, annex)
that you circulated to guide today's debate.

I commend the Security Council for having
adopted resolution 2462 (2019) today on preventing and
combating the financing of terrorism, a resolution of
which we, too, were a sponsor. My delegation applauds
the leadership of France in fostering international
cooperation to combat the financing of terrorism,
particularly the Paris Agenda on "No Money for Terror".

Kenya, like many other countries, has suffered
the horrors of terrorism. The terrorist threat in Kenya
and, indeed, the region emanates from Al-Shabaab,
an affiliate of the Al-Qaida terror network. Kenya has
responded robustly to the terrorist threat by enhancing
its domestic capabilities and embracing deeper
international cooperation.

We have benchmarked best international practices,
integrated all international instruments against
terrorism into our domestic legislation and created
the relevant institutions and mechanisms to ensure the
balanced implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

Above all, we participate in the Security Council-
and African Union-mandated African Union Mission
in Somalia so as to degrade Al-Shabaab in support of
the Somalia political transition and also as part of our
contribution in the fight against international terrorism.

Kenya wishes to express its deep concern about the
continued threat of terrorism emanating from territories
controlled by terrorist groups and how this contributes
to terrorism financing. Currently, Al-Shabaab in
Somalia is tapping into humanitarian aid by extorting
taxes and enforcing payment for the free passage of
humanitarian aid within its so-called controlled areas.
In addition, that terrorist group maintains a deeply
entrenched and pervasive network that is involved in
activities ranging from illicit trade, foreign remittances
and other transnational criminal activities.

Proceeds from such crimes are used to finance
Al-Shabaab's activities, both locally and internationally,
as part of the Al-Qaida network. It is therefore obvious
that transnational crime and terrorism are closely
intertwined and mutually self-reinforcing. As a result,
humanitarian assistance ends up being used not only
to finance terrorism but also as a tool for recruitment
into violent extremism. We, the United Nations, must
therefore find ways to systematically deal with this
paradoxical situation in a holistic, uniform manner that
is devoid of double standards. We should never justify
or condone terrorism under any pretext, least of all that
of humanitarian assistance.

In effort to combat the financing of terrorism and
other crimes, Kenya has enacted various laws aimed
at stemming money laundering and curtailing the
proceeds of crime. The Prevention of Terrorism Act
of 2012, amended in 2014, mandates the Financial
Reporting Centre, a statutory institution, to assist
in the identification of the proceeds of crime and the
combating of money laundering. The Centre registers
and maintains a register of reporting institutions,
receives reports on suspicious activities or transactions
from reporting institutions, receives cash-transaction
reports that meet a given threshold from reporting
institutions, and receives reports on the cross-border
conveyancing of monetary instruments. As such, the
Centre coordinates the financial sector and the law-
enforcement sector in the prevention and countering of
the financing of terrorism in Kenya.

Tremendous progress has been achieved with the
putting in place of elaborate measures to detect and
report on suspicious transactions in Kenya's formal
financial sector. Elaborate measures are also in place to
deal with the informal sector.

International cooperation is vital in eradicating
money laundering and other finance-related crimes.
The full implementation by Member States of the
relevant international money-laundering standards and
instruments is thus crucial to achieving progress in
this area.

My delegation believes that the real fight against
the financing of terrorism should also focus on
enhancing the capacities of police and other law-
enforcement authorities to effectively police borders
and control illegal activities such as arms smuggling
and human trafficking. Increasing the capabilities of
local businesses to self-monitor and share information
with the authorities through appropriate community-
policing models would help curb the financing
of terrorism.

In conclusion, my delegation is convinced that
enhancing State effectiveness in the fight against
the financing of terrorism is crucial to success but
not sufficient on its own. We believe that the full
implementation of the resolution adopted today will
reinforce existing measures to curb the financing
of terrorism.

