Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal) (spoke in French): Portugal fully aligns itself with the statement
made on behalf of the European Union, and would like
to make a few additional remarks. To save time, I shall
limit myself to delivering an abridged version of my
statement, the full text of which will be distributed in
the Chamber.

Allow me first to congratulate the Dutch presidency
on having convened this open debate.

Peacekeeping operations are a concrete example

of our collective efforts and one of the most important
instruments in the implementation of Security Council
mandates. Today's challenges call for a quick response
from the United Nations. It is therefore imperative to
strengthen and modernize peace operations by adapting
them to current challenges. Portugal supports the
United Nations system-wide reform process initiated
by the Secretary-General, and in particular its emphasis
on conflict prevention, the primacy of politics and the
use of diplomacy as the optimal tools for achieving
lasting peace.

In this context, peacekeeping operations must go
beyond the peacekeeping/peace enforcement binomial
and include early warning actions in order to prevent
the emergence and aggravation of conflicts. We
therefore advocate a comprehensive approach and, at
the same time, close cooperation with local, regional
and international partners, such as those developed with
the African Union and the European Union. Similarly,
gender balance is essential in the military, police and
civilian components of peacekeeping operations, not
only for a more equitable representation, but also
to improve mission capacities to serve all sectors of
the population.

Conscious of its responsibility for international
security, my country has always maintained a high
level of participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We are currently engaged in seven theatres
of operations. I would like to highlight our participation
in two of them: the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, which is one
of the most dangerous peace operations in Africa;
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
where we have deployed our largest contingent,
consisting of 160 military personnel and 1 police officer.
This translates into an operational, unrestricted and
unrestrained rapid reaction force in cases that require a
high level of mobility and rapid response, particularly
in addressing situations of unprotected civilians or in
deterring possible attacks.

This significant commitment on the part of my
country is also an answer to the call of a very close
European ally, France, on the heels of the terrible
attacks in Paris.

Lastly, it will be essential to ensure a greater
level of operationality and effectiveness among
contingents. We also attach particular importance to
training our Blue Helmets to maintain strict respect
for codes of conduct under human rights law and
international humanitarian law. And we stand ready
to provide training for contingents from other troop-
contributing countries with which we have joint
military assistance programmes and cooperation
agreements, as is the case within the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.

