Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are also grateful to the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. von der
Schulenburg, for his assessment of the work of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) and on the situation in Sierra
Leone. We are also grateful for the briefings by the
Chairman of the country configuration for Sierra
Leone, Mr. Majoor, and by the Permanent
Representative of Sierra Leone, Mr. Touray.

We are pleased to note that the preservation of
political stability is allowing Sierra Leone to move
steadily forward on the path of post-conflict
reconstruction. It is important that the security
situation, both inside the country and on the borders
with neighbouring States, is remaining generally calm.
There is no doubt that to a large extent that was
possible thanks to a competent policy aimed at solving
acute problems conducted by the leadership of the
country and its President, Mr. Koroma, and thanks to
the constructive interaction of the main political forces
of the country.

In spite of positive developments in the country,
Sierra Leone nevertheless continues to face tremendous
transitional challenges, the successful handling of which
will greatly determine its long-term stability. First and
foremost, we would make reference to the cluster of
socio-economic issues mentioned by the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General. Today, their
resolution is unfortunately complicated by new
challenges, such as the global financial and food crises.

Considerable threats to security are ongoing.
Among the most severe, we would mention the
problem of transnational organized crime. Of particular
concern is the growing threat of the use of the territory
of Sierra Leone as a trans-shipment point for the illicit
narcotics trade, noted in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/59). It is necessary to note that this
problem is inherent not only to Sierra Leone but the
entire region of West Africa. The most vulnerable
countries in the subregion are becoming a springboard
for trade in illicit drugs and trafficking in people and
small arms and light weapons.

In order to confront this challenge, we need not
only national efforts to strengthen the relevant State
institutions, first and foremost, security institutions and
the judiciary, but also the active participation in a
common regional approach, in particular, by
implementing the relevant plan of action of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) that was adopted at the Abuja summit on
19 December 2008.

We are also very concerned by reports on the
more frequent instances of piracy off the shores of
Sierra Leone. The ongoing complex challenges in
strengthening peace in Sierra Leone confirm the need
for further support to this country by the international
community. Of great significance is the coordinating
work to be done by UNIPSIL. In countering the
emerging challenges to security, it is important,
especially in the cross-border dimension, to maintain a
regular useful interaction between UNIPSIL in Sierra
Leone and the United Nations Office for West Africa.

We deeply appreciate the results of the initial
period of the work of UNIPSIL and look forward to its
maintaining its initial momentum, focusing on
implementing the joint United Nations system concept
for Sierra Leone to help implement the leadership's
three-year reform programme. We welcome the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission in Sierra Leone, the
holding of the first semi-annual review of the
peacebuilding strategy last December, which confirmed
the urgency of interaction between the Government of
Sierra Leone and the Peacebuilding Commission in the
priority areas of peacebuilding. We are also pleased to
note progress in implementing peacebuilding projects
financed by the Peacebuilding Fund.

