The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Under-Secretaries-General for their statements and for
their participation in today's debate.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
statement of its President of 5 August 2009
(S/PRST/2009/24) and its continued commitment
to enhance further the overall effectiveness of
United Nation peacekeeping.

"The Security Council stresses in particular
its commitment 'regularly to assess in
consultation with other stakeholders, the strength,
mandate and composition of peacekeeping
operations with a view to making the necessary
adjustments where appropriate, according to
progress achieved or changing circumstances on
the ground'. The Council stresses that the
overarching objective should be to achieve
success through creating the conditions for
sustainable peace on the ground, thereby allowing
for reconfiguration or withdrawal of the United
Nation peacekeeping mission.

"The Security Council underlines that an
advanced peace process is an important factor in
achieving successful transition from a
peacekeeping operation to other configurations of
United Nations presence. It also highlights the
importance of a host State protecting its
population, managing political disputes peaceably
and providing for basic services and long-term
development.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of supporting political processes and
national institutions, in particular for rule of law,
security and peacebuilding assistance at the
earliest stage. In this regard, the Council
reiterates the urgency of improving United
Nations peacebuilding efforts and achieving a
coordinated United Nations approach in country
as highlighted in the statement of its President of
22 July 2009 (S/PRST/2009/23) and in the
Secretary-General's report on peacebuilding
(S/2009/304).

"The Council underlines the importance of
national ownership, constructive dialogue and
partnership between national authorities and the
international community in helping to address
priority peacebuilding needs and the underlying
causes of recurring instability. Further
improvement can be made in Security Council
practice, supported by the Secretariat, to ensure
successful transitions, by developing clear,
credible and achievable mandates, to be matched
by appropriate resources.

The Security Council

"undertakes, whenever possible, to
include in peacekeeping mandates a desired
outcome of the implementation of mandated
tasks and a clear prioritization of tasks to
achieve it, reflecting the need to create
favourable conditions for sustainable peace;

"stresses the importance of an
appropriate level of military expertise for
Security Council decisions;

"stresses the need for precise and clear
recommendations to be made available by
the Secretariat at least a month before
mandate renewals, on the content of the
mandate and any necessary adjustments,
taking into account developments on the
ground and the views of the host country,
relevant troop- and police-contributing
countries, and other parties as appropriate;

"requests the Secretariat to plan
military, police and other peacebuilding
tasks in phases with clear objectives and
taking into account local conditions that
should be attained to allow mission success
and transition from a peacekeeping
operation, taking also into account the
recent lessons learned from transitions to
integrated peacebuilding offices;

"recognizes the utility of strategic
workplans and will consider extending their
use in peacekeeping operations. Progress in
achieving priority tasks laid down in
Security Council resolutions should be
measured, as appropriate, through
benchmarks that can be easily monitored by
the Council;

"recognizes the importance of
ensuring that mandated peacebuilding tasks
20

are implemented as early as possible in a
peacekeeping operation in coordination with
the United Nations country team and with
due respect for security concerns and the
priorities of the host Government, taking
into account pre-existing programmes and
policies implemented before the inception
of the operation. In this regard, the Council
reaffirms the need to fully implement the
Integrated Mission Planning Process, and
also notes the importance of the Integrated
Strategic Frameworks. The Council also
notes the importance of the civilian
capacities review now being undertaken by
the Peacebuilding Support Office;

"undertakes to enhance coordination
with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and looks forward to the 2010 review of the
PBC and the recommendations on how its
role can continue to be enhanced;

"welcomes the adoption by the
Security Council's Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations of its programme
of work, and commends in particular its
decision to address key lessons learned
from past and current missions about the
successful implementation of transition
strategies, with a view to improving Council
practice;

"recalls the necessity to take into
account the protection of civilians in
situations of armed conflict, as and when
mandated, throughout the lifecycle of
United Nations peacekeeping and other
relevant missions, in line with Security
Council resolution 1894 (2009).

"The Security Council commits to regularly
monitoring progress and achievement of the
different stages of a given peacekeeping
operation. The Council stresses the importance to
maintain an efficient reporting and information
collection system.

"The Security Council reaffirms its belief
that United Nations peacekeeping is a unique
global partnership that draws together the
contributions and commitment of the entire United
Nations system. The Council is committed to
strengthening this partnership and acknowledges the
key role of the General Assembly's Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the
General Assembly's Fifth Committee in that
regard. The Security Council recognizes the need
for continuous review of the Secretariat's military
planning, police, judicial, rule of law, and
institution-building capabilities to ensure their
effective utilization and coordination.

"The Security Council recognizes the
contribution of regional and subregional
organizations to transition. The Security Council
calls upon all Member States and regional,
subregional and international partners to promote
coherence and coordination of their
peacebuilding plans and programmes with those
of the United Nations peacekeeping operation and
the wider United Nations presence on the ground.

"The Security Council undertakes to
provide the political support necessary to ensure
the effective implementation of peace processes,
in order to promote the success of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

"The Council stresses the importance of
considering early peacebuilding in its own
deliberations and of ensuring coherence between
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding to
achieve effective transition strategies. The
Council looks forward to further discussing the
implementation of this integrated approach and
requests the Secretary-General to intensify his
efforts in this regard.

"The Security Council remains committed
to improving further the overall effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping, including through
the recognition and enhancement of linkages with
wider peacebuilding efforts, and will conduct a
further review of progress in this regard in late
2010."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/2.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded its work.

The meeting rose at 5 p.m.
