Mr. Balarezo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate of
the Security Council on a matter that is vital to the
United Nations. This matter ultimately determines
whether or not this Organization can promote and
maintain peace. Accordingly, it requires deep political
thinking on our part, rather than simply a technocratic
approach.

The United Nations was founded to avert
international conflicts among Member States. Its big
problem today is that most armed conflicts are not
international, but rather are domestic, armed conflicts,
intra-State conflicts. Since the end of the cold war,
more than 33 civil conflicts have emerged in the
developing world, leaving more than 5 million dead
and almost 17 million refugees. Those conflicts are
truly domestic infernos where respect for the basic
principles of humanity vanishes and civil war becomes
tantamount to mass crime. These are the most common
types of situations that United Nations peacekeeping
operations face today.

In the face of the enormous proliferation of
domestic conflicts and crimes against humanity, the
Organization has confined itself to launching
humanitarian interventions. Instead of intervening
militarily to protect civilians and disarm rival groups,
the Blue Helmets provided access for humanitarian
assistance. They protected humanitarian assistance, but
they did not protect people against massacres. In other
words, in a rather surrealistic manner, they were

providing food, medicine and blankets to potential
corpses.

The cases of Somalia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the recent Rwandan genocide are
clear examples of the United Nations inability to settle
domestic conflicts. That situation is being corrected.
The Security Council has organized peacekeeping
operations in many countries where United Nations
forces not only defend people, but where in many
instances they are also mandated to intervene with
force to avoid ethnic cleansing, mass human rights
violations and genocide.

Today we must embark on reform that
consolidates and systematizes this tendency in
peacekeeping operations. The strategic
recommendations in the Brahimi report (S/2000/809)
represent progress in that direction, but strong political
measures must also be taken. In that regard, the five
permanent members of the Security Council with the
right to veto could agree, as part of a code of conduct,
not to use the veto on matters related to peacekeeping
operations, where there is a danger of genocide and
crimes against humanity. As a counterpart to that code
of conduct and to add substance, it would be agreed
that the deployment of a peacekeeping mission would
be requested by the Secretary-General at the request of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, of
representative regional organizations or of a large
group of countries. The idea is for the permanent
members of the Council to cooperate in response to a
request of the international community by not
exercising their right to veto military interventions that
could save thousands of lives.

Often debates and negotiations in the Security
Council delay the establishment of peacekeeping
operations. Moreover, once they are approved,
deployment can sometimes takes months. If we want
the United Nations to really be able to take action
quickly and avoid new tragedies, then we must move
beyond the Brahimi recommendations. For that, troop-
contributing countries should have units standing by,
available to the Organization without conditions and
with a pre-established mandate, to be immediately
deployed. As Sir Brian Urquhart, a former United
Nations Under-Secretary-General, has said many times,
without these effective, voluntary standby units, the
United Nations cannot realistically deal with a world
where peace is being destroyed not because of wars
between States, but because of real domestic infernos
that are exploding in poor countries, where nation-
States collapse and become chaotic non-governmental
entities, turning into real factories of crimes against
humanity.

In this regard, we must also support regional and
subregional organizations in preventing conflicts and
in carrying out peacekeeping operations. The
experience of the United Nations should be made
available to regional and subregional organizations and
this link should be prioritized in the deployment of
standby volunteer units.

Following the rapid deployment force should be a
process of peace-building and rebuilding the State, in
cases where it has collapsed. Reconciliation in such
societies is a long and complex process of restoring the
political and social fabric. This includes, most
fundamentally, the creation of truly democratic
institutions and the elimination of the scourge of social
exclusion. Without tolerance and democracy and, most
important, if social exclusion persists, poor societies
will continue to harbour the seeds of conflict.

Therefore, peacekeeping missions must not leave
conflict situations prematurely. Missions must include
multidimensional nation-building programmes and
must remain in States until the foundations are laid for
programmes that, at the least, ensure the following.
First, they must ensure sustainable good governance, as
agreed in political agreements that bring together the
parties to the conflict. Secondly, they must build a
legal system that restores the rule of law, guarantees
access to justice and protects human rights. And
thirdly, they must establish conditions of security in
order to ensure public order and make it possible for
economic activity to be carried out.

These tasks certainly lie outside the scope of this
debate. Yet they are factors that are being
incorporated- and must be reinforced - in the
mandate of peacekeeping missions. The United Nations
and its peacekeeping operations are an indispensable
mechanism for peace-building and for rebuilding States
that have collapsed. The developed countries, the only
ones able to provide significant financing for
peacekeeping operations and their components, must
also remember that it is better to invest in averting the
collapse of States or in rebuilding States than in
confronting global threats that are fed by these internal
conflicts.

For more than three decades, Peru has been
participating in peacekeeping operations and is fully
convinced that they are useful and needed. Our
commitment was reinforced in November 2003 with
the memorandum of understanding signed at Lima by
the President of our republic and the Secretary-General
on 11 November 2003. We also hope to contribute to
the peacekeeping operation recently undertaken in
Haiti. Ultimately, our contribution to this debate seeks
to help ensure the success of these operations.

Therefore, to sum up, we propose the following: a
code of conduct whereby, faced with the threat of
genocide or crimes against humanity, permanent
members of the Security Council would not exercise
their right of veto to prevent intervention. Secondly, we
propose that the United Nations have volunteer standby
rapid deployment units to restore peace and prevent
these domestic conflicts from becoming the setting for
the most savage violations of human dignity.

