Mrs. Detaille (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this emergency
public meeting of the Security Council, and I thank the
Secretary-General for his presence.

Belgium is extremely concerned at the
unprecedented escalation of violence in Gaza and
southern Israel. It is a serious threat to regional
stability, having already caused hundreds of deaths,
and is accompanied by a grave humanitarian crisis
linked to the specific context caused by the blockade of
Gaza in recent months.

Belgium condemns the breaking of the truce by
Hamas and the resumption of rocket attacks on
southern Israel. Belgium recalls that Israel's right to
defend itself does not give it the right to respond
disproportionately and without regard for the effects of
its actions on civilian populations.

In any event, neither of the parties has anything
to gain from the current escalation. There is no
possible military solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, either in Gaza or anywhere else. That is why
Belgium, together with the entire European Union,
calls on the two parties to display responsibility
towards the civilian populations concerned by
undertaking a full and immediate ceasefire.

We also call for the normal and permanent
reopening of all crossings into Gaza, as envisaged in
the 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access. Both
parties must allow and facilitate immediate
humanitarian action by permitting the urgent provision
of food and medical aid, fuel and electricity to Gaza as
well as the evacuation of the wounded and unhindered
access for humanitarian workers.
Finally, Belgium calls for an intensification of the
peace process, as requested in Security Council
resolution 1850 (2008), so as to attain, in accordance
with the Annapolis process, the objective recognized

by all: the establishment of an independent, democratic
and viable Palestinian State, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security. We must work to find a
comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Arab conflict
based on elements including the Arab Peace Initiative.
We also encourage inter-Palestinian reconciliation and
support mediation efforts to that end.

