Mr. Jinga (Romania): Before I begin my
statement, allow me, on behalf of Romania, to convey
our heartfelt condolences to the American people and
the Government of the United States on the passing of
former President George H. W. Bush.

(spoke in French)

I wish to commend C6te d'Ivoire for having taken
the initiative to organize this open debate on the role of
States, regional organizations and the United Nations
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.

Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would now
like to make a few remarks in my national capacity.

Prevention is a pivotal instrument for the
maintenance of international peace and security, a
concept that lies at the heart of the Charter of the United
Nations. Prevention is also a quiet and often overlooked
strategy, as media attention most often focuses on
the conflicts that have erupted and not on those that
have been averted. In this connection, I wish to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his
commitment to making conflict prevention one of his
priorities and thereby giving it the visibility it deserves.

Romania has 100 years of experience in multilateral
diplomacy. My country was a founding member of the
League ofNations in 1919 and, since joining the United
Nations in 1955, has invested heavily in preventive
diplomacy, conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
mediation. Over the past 27 years, Romania has
contributed more than 12,500 police officers, military
and close protection officers to 25 United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Today, Romania is among
the European Union's highest contributors of police
officers under the flag of the United Nations and is the
sole State Member of the United Nations to provide
close protection units for senior dignitaries in high-risk
areas.

The particular importance that my country attaches
to the subject we are discussing today is also reflected
in the fact that Romania chairs the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as in our priorities as Chair. These
include promoting a regional approach in the work of
the Commission and strengthening partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations - particularly
the African Union - and with international financial
institutions such as the World Bank and the African
Development Bank, as well as with civil-society
organizations. Equally important is the implementation
of peacebuilding and peacekeeping by lending support
to conflict-affected countries throughout the entire
conflict cycle 4 from prevention to reconstruction and
development. Here I would add that prevention not only
saves lives but also constitutes a cost-effective strategy.

As Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Romania has consistently supported the efforts of the
Secretary-General and all actions aimed at reforming
and improving the peacebuilding and peacekeeping
architecture to ensure better coordination among
the pillars, from the conflict-prevention stage to the
peacebuilding stage. Romania has also promoted a
more visible role for the Peacebuilding Commission
as a liaison between the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. It
has also striven to improve cooperation among these
three United Nations organs to ensure more coherent
peacebuilding efforts.

Above all, we believe that preventive diplomacy
requires inclusion. In this context and in terms of cross-
cutting issues, we wish to highlight the importance
of the participation of women and young people in
mediation processes. No progress can be made without
their involvement.

We are also pleased that Cote d'lvoire is drawing
attention to the subject of cooperation with regional
organizations, as Romania submitted the first draft
resolution on cooperation with regional organizations,
namely, resolution 1631 (2005), which was adopted
under the Romanian presidency of the Security Council.
This resolution was based on our firm belief that the
creation of complementarity and subsidiarity between
the United Nations and regional undertakings would
lead to their mutual strengthening.

As Romania prepares to assume the presidency of
the Council of the European Union from 1 January 2019,
we remain convinced of the need for the promotion of
cooperation with regional organizations.

Finally, I would like to reiterate the commitment of
Romania, as a candidate country for a non-permanent
seat on the Security Council for the period 2020-2021,
to preventive diplomacy in all its aspects.

