Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to welcome Vice-President
Oscar Naranjo of Colombia to the Chamber today and
to thank Special Representative Jean Arnault for his
informative briefing.

The Security Council has met today to discuss
the situation in Colombia a year after the adoption of
resolution 2366 (2017) (see S/PV.7997), which heralded
the completion ofthe process ofthe laying down of arms
by former combatants and the country's embarking on
a new, peaceful phase. The United Nations Verification
Mission established by the resolution was mandated to
monitor the Colombian Government's fulfilment of its
part of the commitments under the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, which brought to an end hostilities that had
lasted for decades.

We have seen a number of positive changes in the
country this year. The former guerrilla movement has
been transformed into a political party, parliamentary
and presidential elections have been held with record
turnouts and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
mechanism has been launched. Despite the problems
of which we are all aware, these are all unquestionable
signs of an improvement in the situation. It will be
important to ensure that this progress continues, with
the support of society. We sincerely wish Colombia's
newly elected President Ivan Duque and his Government
every success on this path.

Mr. Arnault's briefing confirmed Colombians'
resolve to work to advance the peace process, although
there is still a great deal to be done. Long-standing
disagreements are still hampering the consolidation
of sustainable peace, which is why we wholeheartedly
support the assistance provided to the Colombians
by the United Nations presence under Mr. Arnault's
leadership. We are grateful to the Verification Mission
for monitoring the situation in the country. We are
seriously concerned about the disturbing reports of the
ongoing murders of former combatants and community
leaders, seizures of liberated lands and problems with
the political and socioeconomic reintegration of former
combatants and the transitional justice system. All of
these require urgent solutions for which a responsible
approach on the part of the country's leadership is clearly
essential, along with support from all sectors of society
and an overall commitment to the peace that was so
hard-won. The continued attention of the international
community - which sees Colombia as a good example
of post-conflict recovery - is also important, not to
mention a particular focus on developments with regard
to the National Liberation Army.

We will continue to emphasize that the Colombians'
demonstration of responsibility as a nation and their
desire to seek politically sustainable solutions made
possible the signing of the 2016 Peace Agreement,
which enabled the Security Council and the Secretary-
General to support the peace process and must therefore
be upheld exactly as it is by all parties. For our part,
we once again affirm our willingness to continue to
support the people and the Government of Colombia
in their work of building a lasting peace and post-
conflict development.

