Mr. Berger (Germany): At the outset, let me
thank the Secretary-General for his presentation and
for his comprehensive report of October 2011 on the
rule of law and transitional justice (S/2011/634*). We
are also pleased that today's open debate is taking
place under the presidency of South Africa, a country
that has set an historic example in the field of
transitional justice through its own process of truth and
reconciliation.

Germany, which aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the European Union,
reaffirms its firm commitment to an international order
based on international law and the rule of law with the
United Nations at its core. Our own history has shown
us the disastrous consequences of disregarding even
the most basic rules without which societies are
relegated to a state of lawlessness and moral
destitution. Today, strengthening the rule of law is a
priority area within our international cooperation
activities, and we are currently providing targeted rule
of law assistance to partner countries worldwide.

Both the United Nations Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognize the
relevance of the rule of law to lasting international
peace and security. The issue cuts deeply through the
entire spectrum of activities undertaken by the United
Nations in general, and by the Council in particular.
The presence or non-presence of the rule of law
ultimately determines success or failure. This applies
just as equally to the protection of civilians as it does
to children in armed conflict, or to women, peace and
security, to name but a few key areas.

In this context, we welcome the establishment of
and activities undertaken by the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group, chaired by the
Deputy Secretary-General and supported by the Rule of
Law Unit. However, we call upon all participating
agencies in the Group to redouble their efforts to define
and implement a unified and comprehensive approach
to strengthening the rule of law worldwide, and to
address relevant gaps in their programme activities.

We note with satisfaction that the Security
Council, in exercising its mandate, has been playing an
increasingly crucial role in the promotion of the rule of
law. This is most notable in the more than 160
references to rule of law and transitional justice made
since 2004 in its thematic and country-specific
resolutions. In the same period, the Council has
3
included support for the rule of law in the mandates of
at least 14 peacekeeping and special political missions
worldwide. In this context, we appreciate the
achievements of, inter alia, the United Nations Mission
in Liberia and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, as well as the
fact that the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan has made the strengthening of the rule of
law in South Sudan a key priority. The United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) also has a critical
role to play in this regard. The promotion of justice and
the rule of law has become an integral part of
peacebuilding strategies for countries on the PBC's
agenda, such as Liberia and Sierra Leone.

Furthermore, the Security Council has recently
been further integrating the rule of law as a basis for its
own work, as is evident from the establishment of the
post of Ombudsperson under the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime, through resolution 1989 (2011), and the
ongoing discussions by the Council of its working
methods. In that regard, we fully recognize the scope
for expanding that basis as outlined in the Secretary-
General's report. For example, more frequent use could
indeed be made of Article 36 of the Charter, which
allows the Council to recommend to States to refer
legal aspects of international disputes to the
International Court of Justice. Also, the acceptance by
more States of the Court's jurisdiction as compulsory
would greatly contribute to further anchoring the rule
of law, both within the Security Council and in
international relations. From among the current
members of the Council, only five States have
deposited such a declaration. We therefore call upon
those Council members, as well as non-Council
members, that have not yet done so to consider taking
that important step.

Given the importance of accountability to the rule
of law, combating impunity becomes, by definition, an
obligation. The Nuremberg Declaration on Peace and
Justice of 2007 therefore correctly states that

"The most serious crimes of concern to the
international community, notably genocide, war
crimes, and crimes against humanity, must not go
unpunished and their effective prosecution must
be ensured.

"As a minimal application of this principle,
amnesties must not be granted to those bearing
the greatest responsibility for such crimes and
violations of international humanitarian law."
(A/62/885, annex, III (2))

Those objectives were recently further served by the
Council when it established the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, through resolution
1966 (2010), and when it referred the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
through resolution 1970 (2011). In that context, let me
reiterate my country's continuing support for the ICC
and its invaluable contribution to the strengthening of
the rule of law.

Germany recognizes the importance of
transitional justice as an essential component of efforts
to strengthen the rule of law and as a viable
contribution to peace and security. We therefore fully
support the call for a comprehensive transitional justice
policy in countries emerging from conflict that
involves criminal persecution, institutional reform,
redress for victims and the establishment of truth and
reconciliation commissions. In that context, the focus
of the international community in the area of the rule
of law should be on broadening and deepening civilian
capacity within countries emerging from conflict.

In the wake of the historic changes symbolized by
the fall of the Berlin Wall, in 1989, many countries
have undergone the transition to democracy, and in
other cases new nations have emerged. Since last year,
we have observed momentous change in the Middle
East and North Africa, where the Arab Spring
continues to unfold. While the hopes and specific
challenges connected to those developments might
differ in each and every case, the establishment of the
rule of law remains a common benchmark for success
at all levels - be it the realization of a people's
political aspirations, the enhancement of prosperity or
the creation of sustainable economic development. To
strengthen the rule of law, whether at the national or
international level and whether through conflict
prevention or peacebuilding, is an investment that
pays.

