Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2351
(2017) and is happy to see that the Council has found
unity on this matter. We thank the United States for its
efforts as penholder, which helped bring the members
of the Security Council together.

The text we have adopted today has extended
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) for one
year. I would like to pay tribute to the excellent work
that MINURSO undertakes in an unstable security
context. As soon as it is fully functional again, which
we welcome, it is important that it have the necessary
resources to tackle the challenges on the ground.

The negotiations also served to resolve the crisis in
Guerguerat following the withdrawal of the Polisario
Front, which has just been confirmed by MINURSO.
The joint efforts of the Secretary-General, who called
for a withdrawal from the buffer strip on 25 February,
and of the Council have produced desired results. We
pleased about the fact that we can turn the page on this
crisis. It is important that the ceasefire be upheld now
in all circumstances and in a lasting manner.

I take this opportunity to thank the Personal Envoy
Mr. Christopher Ross for his engagement and efforts.

Finally, the resolution clearly demonstrates the
importance of relaunching the political process. The
Council's support for the resumption of the political
process was unambiguously expressed in terms of a
new positive dynamism, which is already visible thanks
to the Secretary-General, whose personal dedication I
would like to pay tribute to once again. His outstanding
report (S/2017/307) has set the tone. The goal of a fair,
lasting and mutually acceptable political solution - one
which is guided by the United Nations and is in line
with relevant Security Council resolutions - is not
unattainable. The role of neighbouring countries will
be crucial, as emphasized by this resolution.

France continues to see the autonomy initiative
presented by Morocco in 2007 as a credible and serious
basis for a negotiated solution. The resolution of the
conflict will allow for a return of security, stability
and economic prosperity in the region. We reiterate
our full support for the work of the United Nations
and MINURSO. It is France's hope that the unanimous
adoption of the resolution will allow us to be resolutely
forward looking in order to promote the current political
trends and begin together a new chapter in the history
of the region that would benefit everyone.

