Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
Today's meeting of the Security Council, the convening of
which was supported by France, must, in our View, pursue
an essential aim: to support the peace process in the Middle
East.

We can all see that this process is passing through a
very difficult period, marked by the recent attacks that took
place in Israel. These attacks have led the international
community to mobilize. The States which met at Sharm El
Sheikh expressed both their condemnation of terrorism and
their determination to continue to build peace.

We understand the anguish of the Israeli authorities
and their firm determination to ensure the safety of the
population and to reassure it after the trauma of recent
months. It is, however, essential that the scope and duration
of the measures taken do not penalize the Palestinians to
such an extent that their confidence in rapprochement and
peace may be shattered for some time to come.

The peace process cannot coexist with Violence and
insecurity, and this is the reasoning, no doubt, of the
terrorists who try to interrupt it. It cannot be pursued unless
both populations, Israeli and Palestinian, believe that the
process will enable them to coexist in peace. It is the
progress of the Palestinian identity which will allow for the
final elimination of terrorist threats which feed on isolation,
bitterness and frustration. Security can be born only of
mutual recognition and of a gradual building of trust.
France has unreservedly condemned the terrorist acts
recently committed in Israel. It calls on the Palestinian
Authority to pursue its efforts to fight those who commit
such acts. It regrets that some of the measures taken by
Israel, particularly because of the drastic restrictions on
freedom of movement and the destabilizing effects on the
Palestinian Authority's budget, have created a very
difficult economic and humanitarian situation in the
Palestinian territories. It notes that some of these
measures disregard the spirit, and at times, the letter of
the Interim Agreement of 28 September 1995. These
measures give rise to reactions of a lack of understanding,
of discouragement, of rancour. One must know how to
regain the path of trust.

Otherwise, the well-known, hateful cycle of violence,
repression and terrorism will commence. And this chain
of events is felt well beyond a given act or the initial
situation. Today we see a daunting example of this in the
successive acts of violence levelled alternately against the
populations of northern Israel and of Lebanon, whose
population is now being sorely tried by the current
confrontation.

France deplores this cycle of violence and suffering.
It calls on all parties to exercise restraint. It reiterates its
conviction that a just and lasting peace guaranteeing the
security of Israel and the sovereignty of Lebanon must
involve the implementation of resolution 425 (1978). In
the interim, all acts of violence and retaliation must cease.

For the goal shared by all the parties, and which the
international community should encourage, is to resume,
without delay, the process leading to a just and global
peace. This requires a restoration of trust. France
therefore hopes that security measures, which are
necessary, will be modified so that the Palestinian
population is not collectively punished and so that it will
return to the path of the peace process.

As the President of the French Republic very
recently recalled, addressing a group of students at Cairo
University:

"The commitments which have been reached
must be fulfilled; the timetable that has been set
must be observed; the peace process cannot stop
midway".

