We commend the Security Council for holding this important debate and thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres (annex 1), Under-Secretary-General Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka and the other speakers for their briefings. Ukraine aligns itself with the statements submitted by the European Union (annex 38) and by the Group of Friends of resolution 1325 (2000) (annex 27). As a State that participated in the drafting and the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) during its membership of the Security Council in 2000-2001, Ukraine has committed to promoting the women and peace and security agenda. For us, this issue gained new importance after 2014 with the beginning of an armed aggression against my country. Today's anniversary provides us with a good opportunity to consider future steps to better implement the women and peace and security agenda. Maintaining and seeking the avenues for strengthening our commitments, enshrined in resolution 1325 (2000) and other pertinent documents, will be the centrepiece of our efforts to that end. Against the backdrop of crimes committed by the Russian occupation forces and their proxies in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine, the conflict- related provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) gain special significance for our country. We are convinced that a commemorative recommitment throughout the women and peace and security agenda should be developed into an action-oriented follow-up, in particular with regard to the calls on all parties to armed conflict to respect international law applicable to the rights and protection of women and girls and take special measures to protect women and girls from gender-based violence, as well as to the need to exclude the crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes from amnesty provisions. Women and girls remain among the most vulnerable groups in the occupied Donbas. Those whom the occupation forces suspect of supporting Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity face intimidation, detention and ill-treatment, as well as physical and sexual violence. The occupied territories have become a home for discriminative cultural practices, cherishing gender inequality. Oppressive policies against Crimean Tatar women, in particular activists, lawyers and those whose relatives have been illegally detained, constitute another dire consequence of the Russian aggression against Ukraine. Nevertheless, Ukraine remains committed to the four pillars of resolution 1325 (2000), aimed at ensuring the equal participation of women in the maintenance and promotion of peace and security, providing protection for women during and after conflicts and giving them an important role in conflict prevention, as well as addressing gender-specific needs in delivering humanitarian aid and relief. We continue to implement resolution 1325 (2000) in accordance with the national action plan for the period from 2021 to 2025, which was adopted just on the eve of this meeting. The national action plan is aimed, inter alia, at achieving the greater participation of women in decision-making, in particular in the areas of national security and defence, and peacemaking, as well as ensuring the protection of women and girls, including the prevention of and response to conflict and gender- based violence. Ukraine continues to work on ensuring an equal gender approach and guaranteeing the proper conditions for all women serving their country in the armed forces. The active integration of gender equality into the activities of the Armed Forces of Ukraine fostered changes to the list of military specialties and positions open to women candidates. It speaks volumes that the number of women serving in the Ukrainian army has been increased by more than 15 times since 2008, from 1,800 to 29,760, with 900 of them being senior officers. Women are also among the peacekeepers who represent Ukraine in six peacekeeping operations throughout the globe. Commemorating the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), Ukraine reiterates its commitment to continuing efforts aimed at promoting the women and peace and security agenda and strengthening its implementation, at both the national and the international levels, including within the United Nations.
