Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to speak before the
Security Council. Allow me also to thank you, Sir, for
your dedicated, committed and successful work during
the month of January.

I also endorse the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union earlier today.

I join others in commending the initiative of the
presidency in holding this open debate and in sharing
its concerns regarding the durability of peace and the
need to achieve more in the field of reconciliation,
especially through the strengthening of capabilities
that could support reconciliation processes, when such
support is requested or needed. The United Nations has
already achieved much in building such capabilities,
including through efforts aimed at developing mediation
processes.

Slovenia, as a Central European and Mediterranean
nation and member of the European Union, has had the
bitter experience of three wars in the past 100 years
and would agree that reconciliation means finding a
way of achieving a common life that enables a common
vision of the future, the rebuilding of relationships
and coming to terms with past acts and enemies. It is
a society-wide, long-term process of deep cooperation
and change. It is a process of acknowledging,
remembering and learning from the past. It should
take place spontaneously through the recognition of
the benefits of cooperation, and it cannot be imposed.
As we approach the one hundredth anniversary of the
First World War, it is worth remembering that it took
another world war before the European leaders took
the courageous decision of linking the reconciliation
process with European integration.

From that point of View, I would like to highlight
three important messages related to the questions
raised in the President's invitation to this debate
(S/2014/30, annex). First, in order to avoid what is
referred to as shallow peace, Slovenia - remembering
the unspeakable, horrendous war of the 1990s in the
Balkans - is working on the Brdo process, which
includes efforts to achieve reintegration by seeking
to overcome economic, social and infrastructural
weaknesses. Also, face-to-face contact among high-
level dignitaries of the respective countries could
contribute to positive results for all.

Secondly, the European Union has served as a
positive example over the past six decades. We would
strongly advise the development of further effective
regional cooperation efforts aimed at every region in
need ofreconciliation and reconstruction. Neighbouring
countries are usually the first to take an interest in a
stable and prosperous environment.

A final point is that a successful reconciliation
process depends on many factors. It requires democratic
governance, respect for human rights for all and the
rule of law. It demands that the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes be brought to justice, including through
the International Criminal Court, according to the
principle of complementarity. And it entails promoting
the value of peaceful coexistence through education
and the engagement of youth and civil society.

We need to emphasize, however, that in order to
achieve sustainable peace and stability, our work in
conflict prevention, early warning and mediation has to
be expanded. That is why Slovenia, in the framework of
the initiative on mediation in the Mediterranean region,
will organize a seminar on promoting a culture of
mediation and prevention in the Mediterranean region,
in the symbolic site of Brdo, Slovenia, on 11 March.

