Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for having initiated this
discussion on strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations to assist Member States in securing their
borders against illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement. I should also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing, which set out what the United
Nations system is doing to address these issues and the
challenges which it faces.

In this age of globalization, it is increasingly
important to ensure that borders are managed
effectively. The threats all of us face from the illicit
movement of goods and people are real and are felt on
both a national and a global scale. The benefits of an
interconnected world and developments in technology
are many, but they are also available to those who seek
to cause harm. The international community needs to
work collectively to identify and tackle those threats in
a coordinated way. At the same time, it needs to ensure
that through effective border management and the
facilitation of legitimate flows of people and trade, the
global economy is given space and encouragement to
grow and develop. I believe that it is possible to
balance both of those goals.

Control over borders is one of the attributes of
sovereignty, and it is obviously a matter for individual
States to decide how best to defend their own. But
there are many parallels between different systems, and
we can learn from one another. Maintaining a secure
border involves detection, interruption, disruption and
prevention as far upstream in the process as possible. It
is about making sure that the right people are in the
right place at the right time, with the right information.

Living on a proud collection of islands at the
north-western edge of Europe, we have long
recognized that our borders cannot effectively be
secured in isolation. As well as a strong visa regime,
robust information technology systems and a
professional border force, the United Kingdom's
border controls rely heavily on collaborative working
partnerships to target illicit flows - partnerships
which we have developed with other countries, the
European Union, the United Nations and other
organizations. The United Kingdom is looking to build
on those partnerships, using an intelligence-led,
multidisciplinary approach to identify and target key
threats and to increase our sharing of best practices.

It is clear that the work of the Security Council in
the maintenance of international peace and security
often includes the need to take measures to address
illicit flows across borders. These can involve the array
of restrictive measures put in place in specific country
regimes, for example, arms embargoes and targeted
asset freezes. But they also include more wide-ranging
thematic measures aimed at addressing global threats
from terrorism or weapons of mass destruction.

The Council also needs to look at evolving
threats and challenges such as the narcotics trade,
people trafficking and transnational organized crime,
as it has done in relevant situations in the past.

In ensuring the implementation of any sanctions
measures it has imposed, the Council has created
mechanisms to facilitate and assist. These range from
standing bodies such as the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate to the country-
specific panels or groups of experts that assist
sanctions committees in their work.

Madam President, looking at the concept note
(S/2012/195) that you circulated for this debate, it is
clear that there is a host of other United Nations
entities and agencies that are active in this field. Better
coordination of all United Nations bodies involved in
the fight against illicit flows, working in partnership
with the European Union and other partner
organizations, can only bring benefits.

A lot of good work is going on, but there is also
room for review and constructive assessment.
Dissatisfaction is normally a concomitant of ambition,
so it is right that the Council will, in the presidential
statement that we will adopt shortly, set out the need
for an ambitious report which surveys the United
Nations system and thereby provides the Council with
assessments on the basis of which we can consider
further steps to improve United Nations assistance to
Member States in this area.

