Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the President of the Portuguese Republic
and the Secretary-General for having participated in
this debate. I also thank all other speakers for their
presentations.

I associate myself with the statement that will be
made on behalf of the European Union.

The protection of civilians is at the heart of the
mandate of United Nations peacekeeping operations. In
that framework our Organization, on a daily basis,
must fulfil that mission. It is up to us to give it the
means and to help it deal with this challenge.

The responsibility to protect civilians belongs
first, we all know, to national Governments. But when
they do not fulfil that duty, and when serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights -
war crimes, crimes against humanity - are planned or
committed, it is then the duty of the Security Council
to intervene to protect civilian populations. There is no
other choice when these atrocities are committed by
Governments against their own populations.

When civilians die, to think about how to protect
them is good, but to protect them is much better. That
is why in the case of Libya the Council first adopted a
wide range of sanctions. Later it authorized the
coalition forces to protect civilians being bombed on
the order of their own leaders. By permitting strikes on
Qadhafi's forces at the entrance to Benghazi, the
Security Council was able to prevent a massacre.

France is proud that it did not fail to meet that
rendezvous with history. To abstain would have been to
turn our eyes away from the suffering of the Libyan
people. To abstain would have been to join the half-
hearted who deplore evil but do nothing to reduce it.

Today it is in Syria that we must protect civilians.
No one here can deny the recourse to force there. The
tragic situation in which the Syrian people have found

themselves since February - in which there have
already been 3,500 deaths and which is characterized
by brutality and intolerable cruelty - creates an

obligation for the international community to act to
make these atrocities stop and to prosecute the
perpetrators of these crimes.

However, the Council has abdicated its
responsibilities. Some have vetoed even limited action
on the part of the Council. Others chose to abstain -
in other words, to show their indifference. While the
Syrian Government continues to shoot at its
population, besiege it, arbitrarily arrest thousands of
people and engage in forced disappearances and
torture, the Security Council has not played its role
with regard to the protection of civilians. It is a serious
failing by the Council, whether in humanitarian or
political terms.

Today the Syrian Government must implement
the plan of the Arab League, but it must also cooperate
with the commission of inquiry established by the
Human Rights Council. We await their report; we must
draw from it all the consequences. France will continue
to work with determination so that the Council -
which has been able to see the cost of its inaction -
finally plays its role.

We spoke here yesterday about the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We could mention many other
countries where the security of the civilian population
should constitute a major concern for the Security
Council - the Sudan, for example, where violence
continues against civilians in Darfur, Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile. The Security Council, which
was able to take bold measures in 2005, should act in
that respect.

I should like also to revert to the issue of the fight
against impunity for those responsible for atrocities. In
2005, the Security Council referred the atrocities
committed in Darfur to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). This year, it unanimously referred to it
the acts of violence committed in Libya. It is clear that
in the absence ofjustice, there cannot be lasting peace,
a reweaving of the social fabric or reconciliation
among communities.

To choose between justice and peace is to choose
the short term over the long term. Thus States must
bring to justice and punish those responsible for
violating international humanitarian law and human
rights law, which requires impartial and independent
investigations. However, in cases where the national
authorities are not themselves able to carry out such
investigations or refuse to do so, the international
community must act to support them, or in their stead.
Thus in situations where serious violations of human
rights or of international humanitarian law are
suspected to have occurred, an international
commission of inquiry, such as the one that exists for
Syria today, makes it possible, by gathering evidence
and testimony, to open the way for national or
international judicial proceedings. The Security
Council must not hesitate to mandate such
commissions and must follow up on their conclusions.

In addition, France calls for full cooperation with
the ICC. The Court, by alerting us, through its
preliminary inquiries, to the imminent commission of
massive crimes, by ensuring that the perpetrators of
serious Violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law are brought to justice, and even by
dissuading perpetrators from committing fresh acts of
violence, plays a role in the protection of civilians.

Finally, I should like to reiterate our support for
Ms. Wahlstrom and Ms. Coomaraswamy and commend
their commitment and the high quality of their work. In
that respect, the Security Council must systematically
consider including sexual violence as grounds for
sanctions when establishing or reviewing the mandates
of sanctions committees.

With regard to children, experience has shown
that bringing pressure to bear yields results. I would
recall that the Council, in coming months, will be
working on this issue, and we must no longer hesitate
to assume our responsibilities and adopt strong,
targeted sanctions against those responsible for acts of
violence against children.

My country has suffered too much from war to
lightly involve ourselves in military action, but there
are exceptional times in history where respect for
international law gives us a clear choice between, one
the one hand, the comfort of words and a good
conscience and, on the other, the difficult decision to
assume our responsibilities. That is what France did in
Libya. It did so with seriousness and determination,
and the joy of the Libyan people today is both its
reward and justification.

