Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Argentina associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Peru on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti, and would like to make the
following brief additional comments.

We thank Special Representative Sandra Honore
for her presentation of the latest report of the Secretary-
General pursuant to resolution 2350 (2017) (S/2017/840).
As the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) draws to a close, we
are grateful for her commitment and professionalism
at its helm and for her work to ensure the stability of
Haiti. We also welcome the Permanent Representative
of Haiti, Ambassador Denis Regis, and want to
highlight the joint efforts of the Haitian authorities
and MINUSTAH to build lasting stability and a better
future for the country.

Argentina pays tribute to the personnel of the various
countries that have deployed troops to MINUSTAH
during the 13 years of its existence - men and women,
civilians, military and police - as their contribution
to the fulfilment of the Mission's mandate. We wish
to highlight the invaluable efforts of the nearly 13,000
Argentine army troops deployed since 2004, including
an army battalion, an air-force unit and a mobile field
hospital, which recently left the country, as well as
the 900 officers of the Argentine National Police who
participated in the Mission. We especially remember all
who gave their lives to the service of peacekeeping and
security in Haiti, including four from Argentina.

We agree with the assessment of the Mission's
legacy in the Secretary-General's report, highlighting
its significant achievements despite the enormous
difficulties it has faced, which included one earthquake
and six devastating hurricanes. After 13 years and
despite many persistent challenges, MINUSTAH leaves
behind a relatively stable country with a democratically
elected President, three functioning branches of
Government and a window of opportunity for making
progress towards sustainable development. During
that time, among other things, the Mission supported
the efforts of the Haitian Government to strengthen its
rule-of-law institutions - the police and the justice
system in particular - and to implement the various
human rights mechanisms. It also helped 6 million
Haitians through violence-reduction programmes and
7 million through quick-impact projects, in line with
priorities identified by the Haitian authorities.

Argentina supports the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy on cases of sexual abuse and
exploitation in Haiti, as well as the Organization's new
approach to cholera in that country, with the hope that
the United Nations Mission in Support of Justice in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) will contribute to implementing
and monitoring those policies, in close collaboration
with the Haitian authorities. In that regard, my
country recently signed the Voluntary Compact on the
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse and has
made a voluntary contribution to the United Nations
Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund.

Argentina notes the continuing progress that has
been made in closing MINUSTAH and establishing
MINUJUSTH, in particular as it relates to the future
implementation of the new Mission's important
mandate to assist in consolidating the country's rule-of-
law institutions, strengthening and professionalizing
the Haitian National Police (HNP) and promoting and
protecting human rights. In that regard, and in addition
to continuing our bilateral cooperation with Haiti, we
will continue to contribute trained police personnel
to the new Mission, in accordance with our ability to
do so and the specific requirements set forth in the
new police advisory and oversight programme, in
the framework of the Secretary-General's transition
plan, as well as the Haitian National Police's 2017-
2021 strategic development plan. In that connection,
notwithstanding any sovereign decisions that may
be taken by Haiti on issues related to its security and
defence, we are confident that the planned development
of the armed forces in the country will not interfere
with the effective implementation of the HNP's
strategic development plan or involve funds originally
earmarked for development.

In line with the Secretary-General's latest report,
we welcome Haiti's involvement with international
human rights mechanisms and encourage State
institutions, human rights institutions and civil
society to cooperate extensively with the human rights
component of MINUJUSTH.

I would like to conclude by once again reiterating
Argentina's commitment to the Haitian people and
acknowledging the work of Ms. Sandra Honore and all
the military, police and civil personnel of MINUSTAH.
We also honour the memory of those who gave their
lives in fulfilling their noble mission to help Haiti
make progress on its path to sustainable peace
and development.

