Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Allow me again
to express my great satisfaction, Sir, at seeing you
presiding over a meeting of the Security Council. I also
thank Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen for his very interesting and
comprehensive briefing to the Council this morning.

I would like to start by clearly stating our position
on this situation. Angola maintains good relations
with the State of Israel, as well as with the Palestinian
authorities. Our relations with Israel are based on the
universal principles of international law and the mutual
interests of both sides. Rather fruitful cooperation
with Israel has evolved over the years in several
sectors, in particular in agriculture, health, aviation,
construction, fishing and telecommunication, among
others. Likewise, Angola has very friendly historical
relations with Palestine. For a long time, we hosted the
diplomatic representation of Palestine in our capital.
Those relations reflect Angola's solidarity with the
Palestinian people in their quest to fulfil their legitimate
national aspirations to self-determination in a free and
independent State.

We strongly believe that the peaceful settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would be a far-reaching
step for the achievement of stability in the whole of the
Middle East. Being fully aware of the complexities of
the issue, we are of the view that a two-State solution is
the only viable option for comprehensive peace between
the Israelis and the Palestinians, for which both sides
need to make significant compromises. We furthermore
believe that there should be an end to the occupation of
the Palestinian territories, so as to allow the Palestinian
people to exercise their full right to self-determination
towards peace and sustainable development.

At this point, we would like to address of Israel's
ongoing settlement activity. We all agree that it has
been consistently stated by the international community
that settlement activity constitutes a violation of
international law, that it is counterproductive for a two-
State solution and that it serves as incitement to violence,
as reflected in the recent events in Jerusalem. We hereby
appeal to the Government of Israel to consider a new
policy approach as a demonstration of its willingness to
compromise and cooperate constructively with a view
to attaining a peaceful settlement.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza is especially
worrying. Although a temporary Gaza reconstruction
mechanism is in place, urgent funding is required to
rebuild critical services, including important electricity
and water supply infrastructure. In this connection,
we are pleased that the international community has
pledged $5.4 billion for the reconstruction of Gaza,
and commend Egypt and Norway for spearheading that
effort, which is urgently needed to improve the living
conditions of the Palestinians and to see fundamental
changes in the dynamics of the conflict.

It is also crucial that the Palestinians unite in an
effective governing structure, and we are pleased to
note the critical steps that have been taken recently
to create a unity Government. The Government of
National Consensus needs to be consolidated and
assume its responsibilities for the effective management
of security and public services and become a viable
counterpart in effective, result-oriented negotiations
with Israel. The two-State solution cannot and should
not continue to be a mere refrain. It has to be clear and
objective, with an aim reachable through positive and
productive negotiations.

Indeed, the political situation in the Middle East is
extremely worrying. Continued conflict in Syria and
its appalling humanitarian consequences, persistent
instability in Iraq and its exacerbation of ethnic
and religious divisions, and the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Gaza need to be forcefully
addressed by the Security Council. There are factors
that have been feeding the rise of extremism, with
radical groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and the Al-Nusra Front in the Middle East,
as well as Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab in Africa,
spreading a message of intolerance and hatred in the
name of religion. The challenges in dealing with these
trends are immense, and we must all join forces to
find appropriate solutions through dialogue among
civilizations and respect for cultures.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that we
strive to contribute to the establishment of a forum for
dialogue and productive discussion. At the recent march
in Paris, we saw various world leaders, in particular
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu,
marching together for the same objective of combatting
terrorism and achieving peace. That was a ray of hope
that we hope to preserve. We deeply hope that the
international community will continue to help efforts
to reach a peace settlement between the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples, easing tensions in the entire region
and contributing meaningfully to a world of peace and
security.

