Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his briefing. We have
also listened attentively to the statements made by the
observer of the Observer State of Palestine and the
representative of Israel.

At present, the situation in the Middle East
remains complex and fragile. The Palestinian-Israeli
issue is at the core of concerns in the Middle East,
bearing on the overall situation in the region, to which
dialogue and negotiation represent the only viable
solution. Recently, thanks to the efforts of all parties, a
significant opportunity exists for direct talks between
Palestine and Israel. China welcomes the prospects ofa
resumption of peace talks and appreciates the parties'
efforts in that direction. It is our hope that Palestine and
Israel will overcome difficulties, move closer towards
each other and try to achieve substantive progress as
soon as possible.

China has consistently maintained that, through
peace talks between Palestine and Israel, an
independent State of Palestine can be established with
complete sovereignty, based on the pre-1967 borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital, whereby the two
States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace
and security, can facilitate peace and stability in the
Middle East. A step-by-step solution to the Palestinian-
Israeli issue is needed. The immediate priority is to
take effective measures to halt all settlement activities,
stop acts of violence targeting innocent civilians, lift
the Gaza blockade and properly address the issue of
Palestinian detainees.

Meanwhile, the international community needs to
scale up its support for Palestine in order to facilitate its
economic development and job creation. That will help
ease the suffering ofthe Palestinian people and enhance
their confidence in the peace process. China supports
a greater role for the United Nations, especially the
Security Council, in facilitating the unanimous support
of the international community for the peace process in
the Middle East.

China firmly supports the Palestinian people in
their just cause for the restoration of their legitimate
national rights and has been actively promoting the
peace process. Last May, China invited leaders of both
Palestine and Israel to visit China with a focus on peace
facilitation. China put forward a four-point proposal on
the solution to the question of Palestine, emphasizing:
the need to maintain the right direction of independent
statehood for Palestine, living side by side in peace
with Israel; the need to regard peace negotiations as
the only viable way out for peace; the need to adhere
to the principle of land for peace; and the need for the
international community to provide guarantees for
taking the peace process forward.

To implement that four-point proposal, the Chinese
Government hosted the United Nations International
Meeting in Support of the Israeli-Palestinian Peace
Process last year in Beijing, whereby the efforts of
the international community to facilitate the peace
process gathered momentum. China stands ready to
continue to work with the international community to
play a constructive role for the early achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

A political solution is the only way out of the
Syrian conflict. China welcomes all initiatives and
efforts that will help stop the violence in Syria and
facilitate a political solution to the Syrian conflict.
We call on the Syrian parties to implement the Geneva
communique of the Action Group, achieve a ceasefire
and halt violence without delay, actively respond to the
initiative for a Geneva conference on Syria and start a
political dialogue as soon as possible.

