Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the Republic
of France and to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this important meeting at which the new
resolution 2462 (2019) was adopted. My country
welcomes this resolution as a new and important step
in preventing and combating the financing ofterrorism.
I would also like to thank Equatorial Guinea for its
efforts during its presidency of the Security Council
last month. I thank as well Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
Under-Secretary-General, United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Marshall Billingslea, President
of the Financial Action Task Force, and Ms. Mercy
Buku, expert on money laundering, for their briefings
this morning.

The Government of my country reaffirms its
condemnation of the terrorist attack against the two
mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand, which led
to the death of many worshippers. We commend the
Government of New Zealand for its wise measures
against terrorism in all its forms and whatever its source.

Despite the military victory against the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) terrorist group by
all the units of the Iraqi forces, with the support of
the international coalition and friendly countries, that
victory is not enough to eliminate that group. In order
to do that, we must adopt a comprehensive, structured
and incremental approach, including by promoting the
necessary measures to prevent and combat the financing
of terrorism. The newly adopted resolution 2462 (2019)
represents an important and practical step towards
preventing and combating the financing of terrorism.

The Government of my country does its utmost to
combat terrorism, particularly to prevent its financing.
In cooperation with the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, we have launched four important
projects, including one on measures to be taken to
combat and prevent the financing of terrorism. We
have also agreed on appointing a special adviser for
those four projects. In addition, we have adopted and
developed a national counter-terrorism strategy.

A United Nations team visited Baghdad recently to
take part in a national workshop, held on 4 February,
to facilitate the implementation of those four counter-
terrorism projects.

My Government has taken a number of actions
and measures to limit the financing of terrorist Da'esh,
including, first, breaking the link between financial
institutions in Iraq and the international financial
institutions, especially those under the control of
terrorist Da'esh or present in territories controlled by
Da'esh or near its areas of control. Secondly, we have
created a blacklist of financial institutions that are
managed by the terrorist group Da'esh or involved in its
financing, which we share with the 70 countries taking
part in the international coalition to combat ISIL and
other terrorist groups. Thirdly, we have signed a number
of memoranda of understanding with international
financial intelligence units in order to exchange
information on the practices used by the terrorist group
Da'esh in financial transactions. Fourthly, we have
created a high-level committee in the secretariat of our
Cabinet with the aim of freezing terrorist funds. The
committee issues internal decisions, to be implemented
locally, on freezing the funds of internationally
designated individuals and entities included in the
lists contained in decisions adopted by the Security
Council's sanctions committees. Lastly, we have
developed a media strategy to raise awareness among
practitioners of the ways and means that the terrorist
group Da'esh uses to transfer money, with the aim of
ensuring that those practitioners can avoid becoming
involved in such activities.

