Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): It is an honour for me to
address the Security Council once again on an issue of
great significance to international peace and security as well
as of great moral responsibility. I should like to begin by
expressing my profound appreciation and respect for the
work undertaken by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, who has travelled extensively, meeting
with representatives of many countries, to discuss the
situation of children in armed conflict and underscoring the
need to respect the rights of children and to take resolute
action to ensure that those rights are fully respected.
Indeed, the international community should undertake to
pursue such respect with all determination and
perseverance, both in words and through action.

The nature of armed conflict has clearly changed over
the past years, as civilian populations have become targets.
Now approximately 90 per cent of casualties of war are
civilians, mainly women and children. The number of
civilian casualties in any given conflict is astounding, and
this compels a response from the international community.
One of the most alarming trends relating to children in
armed conflicts is their participation as active soldiers.
Children as young as eight years of age are being forcibly
recruited, coerced and induced to become combatants.
Manipulated by adults, children have been drawn into
Violence that they are too young to resist, with
consequences they cannot imagine.

Child soldiers are recruited in many different ways.
Some are conscripted, others are press-ganged or kidnapped
and still others are forced to join armed groups to defend
their families. Sometimes children become soldiers simply
in order to survive. Indeed, a military unit can be
something of a refuge, serving as a kind of surrogate
family. Children may join if they believe that that is the
only way to guarantee regular meals, clothing or medical
attention.

In this regard, Indonesia believes that the international
community must commit itself to undertaking the necessary
effective measures for the prevention of armed conflict.
This essentially calls for a serious and sustained
commitment to address the socio-economic factors which
in the first instance prompt armed conflict and exacerbate
ethnic and other social divisions.

In those instances where the international community
has proved unsuccessful in preventing violence and armed
conflict from erupting, all nations should commit
themselves to strengthening international efforts to ensure
that the rights of children, as guaranteed under various
international commitments and humanitarian law, are fully
respected. We should be clear in understanding that the
protection of children is the responsibility of each
Government. At the same time, we must recognize that it
is also a legitimate concern of the international
community.

We see fit, therefore, to incorporate the aspect of
children in armed conflict in peacekeeping, peace-building
and humanitarian undertakings. In this context, the
situation of children should be better addressed in the
establishment and implementation of peace agreements
and in relief and protection measures. All peace
agreements should include specific measures to
demobilize and reintegrate child soldiers into society.
There is an urgent need for the international community
to support programmes, including advocacy and social
services, for the demobilization and community
reintegration of child soldiers. However, Indonesia would
caution that we must avoid politicization for extraneous
motives in international endeavours to protect children,
which would jeopardize effective action on their behalf.

At the national level, the conscription of children as
actors in war should be condemned, and the immediate
demobilization of children ensured. To that end,
Governments should enact legislation to prohibit the
recruitment of minors in armed conflict and together
launch a global campaign that would bring an end to such
practices and rehabilitate and reintegrate children into
society.

Though near universal ratification of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child has been achieved, we
nevertheless should continue to call on all States to
become parties and for all States parties to implement the
Convention fully, to cooperate closely with the Committee
on the Rights of the Child and to comply in a timely
manner with their reporting obligations under the
Convention. I would underline that when implementing
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, special

 

attention should be given to policies for health, nutrition,
education, the improvement of family income and the
creation of employment. Thus, we can simultaneously
address the root causes which hamper the genuine
enjoyment of rights, namely poverty, economic constraints
and underdevelopment.

I would recall that the Commission on Human Rights,
inter alia, urged all Governments to promote gender- and
age-appropriate mine-awareness programmes and child-
centred rehabilitation, which would reduce the numbers and
mitigate the plight of child victims. Today, children in at
least 68 countries live amid the threat of more than 110
million landmines still lodged in the ground, awaiting an
unwary step. Added to this are millions of pieces of
unexploded ordnance - bombs, shells and grenades that
failed to detonate. Like landmines, these types of ordnance
are indiscriminate weapons that are triggered by innocent
and unsuspecting passers-by. I would therefore like to
encourage the United Nations Mine Action service to
continue to take into account the specific situation of
children and child victims. In this connection, Governments
should immediately enact comprehensive national
legislation to ban the production, use, trade and stockpiling
of landmines and support the campaign for a worldwide
ban.

Indonesia believes that States should contribute
constructively in the negotiations on an optional protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, with a View to
strengthening that Convention. As the landmark report
prepared by Ms. Graca Machel so pointedly illustrated, for
too long the consequences for children have been tolerated
as an unfortunate side-effect of war, whereas the reality has
become that children are increasingly targets and not
incidental victims. The specific recommendations made in
that report on sexual exploitation and gender-based violence
should be realized. For its part, the Security Council has a
specific responsibility to address issues pertaining to the
protection of civilian populations, and in particular children
in armed conflict. Likewise, refugee and displaced persons
camps, sought as havens from conflict and strife, should be
made secure and designed to improve the security of
women and girls in particular.

The Security Council is in a good position to address
this fundamental challenge to the response of the
Organization to situations of armed conflict by endorsing
the recommendations made in the report issued by Graca
Machel; by extending its full support to the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict; and by
committing itself to incorporating the concerns of children
in all future resolutions on situations of armed conflict.

In so doing, the Security Council would lend force
and meaningful action to the moral voice of the United
Nations, while at the same time moving in furtherance of
its noble goals, namely the maintenance of international
peace and security.

