The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my capacity as representative
of Belgium.

I, too, would like to thank the Special
Representative, Ambassador Qazi, for his statement, as
well as Ambassador Khalilzad for his statement on
behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I).

Once again, I welcome the presence of His
Excellency Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, and convey to him our Government's
firm condemnation of the attacks that took place today
against the shrines of the Imams Ali Al-Hadi and
Al-Hassan Al-Askari in Samarra, which are aimed at
fomenting additional sectarian Violence.

During our prior discussions, Belgium had shared
the concern expressed by the Secretary-General about
the danger that violence in Iraq poses to a society,
institutions and a political process that remain fragile.
While there is no clear improvement in the security and
humanitarian situation in the country, we note the first
signs of a growing awareness of the situation in Iraq in
the region and in the international community as a
whole.

When one adds the daily casualties of sectarian
and terrorist violence to the more than 4 million
refugees in and outside of Iraq, it becomes clear that
this crisis involves not only Iraq; its consequences
affect us all.

At the political level, Iraq's neighbours and the
rest of the international community, after being deeply
divided on the Iraqi issue, saw that no solution was
possible in the absence of a unified and sustained
commitment involving the Iraqi authorities. No actor
alone can resolve the problems currently facing Iraq. It
is only by overcoming the sectarian, regional and
international divisions that the Iraqi people can achieve
the peace and security that they so richly deserve.

In the past few months, this greater awareness has
resulted in a number of initiatives, which Belgium
welcomes and in which it participated directly or
through the European Union. In April the Geneva
Conference on displaced persons was held, organized
by the High Commissioner for Refugees. In early May,
the International Compact was launched at Sharm
el-Sheikh, immediately followed by the ministerial
conference bringing together Iraq, its neighbours and a
number of major international stakeholders.

The holding of those conferences bears witness to
the re-involvement of regional and international actors
in support of a process of reconciliation and
reconstruction in Iraq. The long-term success of the
efforts undertaken at those meetings and of the current
momentum depends, however, on developing follow-
up mechanisms to those conferences. The United
Nations, the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative have played key roles in these various
processes. Mindful of the very unfavourable security
conditions prevailing in Iraq, Belgium deems it crucial
that the political and consultation role played by the
United Nations and hopes to see it strengthened and
expanded.

Moreover, we support the ongoing presence of
the MNF-I, as requested by the Iraqi Government and
called for in resolution 1723 (2006). Although their
support is vital, we must recall that the efforts of
neither the international community nor the United
Nations nor Iraq's neighbours can substitute for the
responsible actions of the Iraqis themselves. Belgium
would therefore encourage the Iraqi authorities to
intensify their efforts towards national reconciliation,
with particular attention paid to the constitutional
review process. We would also emphasize the need to
strengthen the rule of law, in particular by establishing
security forces loyal to the central Government and
independent of sectarian or partisan allegiances.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Qazi to respond
to comments made and questions raised.
