Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): I would first like to
congratulate China on organizing this timely debate.

The Republic of Cyprus aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union, and would like to make some
additional remarks in its national capacity.

This year marks the seventieth anniversary
of the founding of the United Nations, one of the
most remarkable achievements of the international
community, built on the ruins of a devastating war. For
countries like the Republic of Cyprus, its foundation
has been a source of inspiration in our endeavour to
achieve national independence within the context of
the anti-colonialist movement of the 1950s and 1960s.
Cyprus's independence, in 1960, followed a long series
of struggles on the part of our people, including their
contribution to the victory against Nazism during the
Second World War. Although Cyprus was a small
country under colonial rule at the time, 10 per cent of
its male population volunteered to serve in a British
regiment as well as in other Allied armies. Greek and
Turkish Cypriots fought and sacrificed together under
the flag of ecumenical values such as democracy and
humanism.

The principles enshrined in the Charter ofthe United
Nations have been further developed and enriched by
subsequent landmark conventions such as the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. In addition,
the Rome Statute and its corresponding Kampala
amendments, which my country fully supports, have
strengthened justice and accountability with regard to
atrocities and war crimes. The United Nations Charter
has also been complemented in areas such as maritime
jurisdiction via the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, the protection of the environment and
social and economic development. That in turn has led
to the advancement of the rule of law and the further
development of customary international law.
Regrettably, Cyprus constitutes a case in which
the principles of the United Nations Charter are still
being violated as a result of the continuing Turkish
occupation, which raises the question, to this body
and to the whole of the international community,
as to whether those principles are being adhered to
unreservedly and universally or whether they are being
diluted by mere declarations of good intentions and
selective application, only for the world to eventually
revert to a state of anarchy, double standards and the
perception that might is right.

Cyprus is not asking anyone to intervene in its
favour. We are simply invoking international law
and legality, because we believe that a key element
of our civilization is not primarily the pursuit of our
self-interests, but the support of legality. It would be
more appropriate if we said that our true collective
interest is to support legality and the rule of law on the
international stage.

