Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr.
Sevan for his briefing, and I want to express my
delegation's appreciation for his work and for his clear,
comprehensive and well-written report. Because this
programme must conclude on 21 November, we also
wish to congratulate the staff of the Office of the Iraq
Programme and United Nations agencies for their
immense efforts to facilitate the procedures for
liquidating outstanding contracts by that date.

I should like to share a couple of my delegation's
concerns. After the last meeting of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
661 (1990) concerning the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait, we were concerned that a number of contracts
that were approved with funds in due course had not
been prioritized on time. It is said that 19 or 20 per
cent of the contracts in that category could remain
unexecuted. This should be perfectly justified so that
frustration does not grow among suppliers.

We are also concerned at the pace of the
renegotiation of already prioritized contracts, which, to
date, total only 52 per cent. We want to warn of the
need to clarify the renegotiation mechanism after 21
November for prioritized contracts that could not be
renegotiated on time. The possibility that a large
number of contracts will not be able to be renegotiated
on time and will remain unexecuted is a matter of great
concern to many people. That is why - considering
that the Office has already said that even with every
possible effort, it would not be realistic to believe
everything will have been renegotiated before 21
November - we should like to know about the
mechanisms to be provided to continue renegotiation
after that date. We want the programme's termination
to enable those involved to know the mechanisms for
executing contracts in the future. Therefore, we wish to
obtain clarifications on merchandise authentication
mechanisms and payment methods beginning on 21
November.
I wish to reiterate my appreciation and thanks to
Mr. Sevan.

