The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Azerbaijan.

We thank Under-Secretary- General Jeffrey Feltman
for his comprehensive briefing. The past couple of weeks
have been remarkable in terms of the revitalization of
the Middle East peace process, and the continuation
of the direct talks between the parties. We welcome
the recent meeting of the Middle East Quartet, which
was held on the margins of the United Nations General
Assembly in New York on 27 September. We hope that
the parties will demonstrate continued dedication and
good faith to the quest for a lasting solution. Among
the necessary prerequisites for success is the need to
ensure that the process and all efforts are guided by
normative standards set by the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as by the objective of a comprehensive
settlement based on international law.

We have repeatedly stated that the lack of agreement
on political issues in situations of armed conflict and
military occupation cannot be used as a pretext for
failing to uphold international law and human rights.
Settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory
remains a matter of serious concern. No doubt, the
increase in new settlements in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem may adversely affect the delicate situation on
the ground. They constitute a serious threat to the peace
process and infringe upon the rights and freedoms of
the Palestinians.

Such practices are illegal under international
law, and they must be stopped immediately and
unconditionally, regardless of the course of negotiations
and their outcome. Pursuant to article 49 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, of 12 August 1949, "[t]he
Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its
own civilian population into the territory it occupies."
That both constitutes the basis of and explains the rule
of law prohibiting the establishment of settlements in
the occupied territories consisting of the population of
the occupying Power, or of persons encouraged by that
Power to settle in those territories with the intention,
expressed or otherwise, of changing the demographic
balance.

The Council must take all necessary measures
to ensure that international law, human rights and
fundamental freedoms are observed and respected at
all times and without preconditions.

The economic, financial and humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
requires the constant attention of the international
community. Further easing of restrictions on the
Palestinians' movement, the providing of access, and
the easing of financial restrictions are necessary. The
continued support of the international community for
a socioeconomic revival of the State of Palestine is
very important. We are convinced that there is no room
for religious or ethnic intolerance in the Middle East.
People must live together, hence they must seek ways
ofbuilding peace and good-neighbourly relations in the
region.
With regard to Syria, we welcome the efforts carried
out so far towards the fulfilment of the objectives laid
down in resolution 2118 (2013) and the relevant decision
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Executive Council. It is imperative that all
parties cease armed violence, engage constructively in
the political process and commit to the implementation
of the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex).

The convening ofthe "Geneva II" conference in the
coming weeks is necessary to bring about the parties'
engagement in dialogue and negotiation. In conclusion,
we would like once again to express our firm conviction
that peace and security in the Middle East is possible
through the dedication and hard work of all involved,
and with the indispensable support of the international
community.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Before I give the floor to the next speaker, I wish
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are requested to circulate their texts in
writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.

I also wish to inform all concerned that this open
debate will continue through the lunch hour as we have
a very large number of speakers.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.

Mr. Salam (Lebanon) 1 would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council in October. I would also like to commend the
Permanent Representative of Australia and his team for
their excellent work during their presidency last month.

When faced with challenges threatening the core of
their stability and security, countries explore all ways
and means to build partnerships, strengthen them, and
establish safety nets.

In that context, Lebanon reiterates its commitment
to the full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006),
unanimously adopted by this organ on 11 August 2006.
Likewise, over the past seven years, everyone present
here has been expressing their unwavering support
for the full implementation of the above-mentioned
resolution. Thus, we believe that this is an opportune
moment for the Council to translate its support into a
strong message urging Israel to completely withdraw
from the remaining Lebanese occupied territory, to end
its violations of Lebanese sovereignty by land, air and
sea and to refrain from taking unilateral action that
violates its obligations under international law.

Convinced of the importance of a stable Lebanon
for the maintenance of peace and security in the
region, the Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/9) on 11 July, renewing its support
for Lebanon's sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence, and endorsing Lebanon's disassociation
policy vis-a-vis the situation in Syria, as well as the
Baabda Declaration of 11 June 2012. Again, let me
reiterate my country's deep appreciation for that
message of political solidarity.

Capitalizing on the consensus articulated in the
aforementionedpresidential statement, on 25 September
the Secretary-General launched the International
Support Group for Lebanon, stressing the need for

"strong, coordinated international support for
Lebanon to help it continue to withstand the
multiple current challenges to its security and
stability" (S/PRST/2013/9, p. 3).

Lebanon looks forward to the enlargement of that group,
and the convening of follow-up meetings to address
its specific needs for coping with the humanitarian
crisis resulting from the influx of refugees from Syria,
to enhance the Lebanese army's capabilities and to
provide for Lebanon's economic and financial needs.

With the ongoing Syrian crisis, the number of
refugees from Syria has come to represent the equivalent
of one fourth of the population of my country. Over and
above the obvious humanitarian challenges, a recent
World Bank report has underlined the severe negative
socioeconomic impact of the Syrian crisis on Lebanon.
The report notes that

"the Lebanese growth is estimated to be down by
2.9% this year Government expenditures will
increase by an estimated $1.1 billion over the 2012
to 2014 period while its revenues will drop by
$1.5 billion. Unemployment could reach 20 per cent
over the same period. More than 170,000 Lebanese
will be pushed into poverty by 2014."

In his address to the General Assembly last month,
the President of the Republic of Lebanon, General
Michel Sleiman, warned that this grave situation
has begun to have an "existential dimension" for
my country. In his meeting in Beirut last week with
representatives of the members of the International
Support Group, he stressed that the financial burden-
sharing is still insufficient. He said the relocation of
refugees remains symbolic - 17 countries have hosted
only a few thousand refugees, while the international
community faces difficulties in providing them shelter
within Syria, notwithstanding that Syria is 18 times
larger than Lebanon.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2118
(2013), regarding the chemical weapons in Syria, and
the presidential statement of 2 October of this year on
the humanitarian situation there (S/PRST/2013/ 15).
Lebanon considers that those united actions by the
international community should lead to putting an end
to violence, provide for a safe and dignified gradual
return of Syrian refugees to their country and pave the
way to a political process that will fulfil the aspirations
of the Syrian people.

On 31 July, Palestinian-Israeli negotiations
resumed, owing to the efforts of the United States
Administration and with an initial time frame of nine
months to achieve progress. Like many other countries,
we commended the United States efforts in that regard
and were ready to see signs of hope in them.

However, three months into the set time frame,
and in spite of many rounds of talks, Israeli authorities
continue settlement expansion. The Peace Now
movement, along with other Israeli commentators and
human rights organizations, could see in that only a lack
on the part of their Government to a "genuine intention
to negotiate seriously". Moreover, empowered with a
sense of impunity, Israeli settlers multiply their assaults
on Palestinian civilians and their properties, attacking
elementary schools and terrorizing children, robbing
farmers of their livelihood by uprooting their olive
trees, and vandalizing churches and mosques. Clearly,
such actions threaten to undermine the prospects for
the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations. The Council must
condemn them in the strongest terms.

Finally, need we remind the Council that such
negotiations have to be part of a comprehensive and
inclusive approach if a durable and sustainable peace in
the Middle East is to be attained?

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of India.


