Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to express my thanks to you, Mr. President, and to
the members of the Security Council for acceding to
the request made by the Coordinating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned Movement to convene this open meeting.
I also have the pleasure of conveying my gratitude to
the delegation of South Africa for having requested the
convening of this meeting to hear the views of the
Member States of the United Nations as a whole, and
of the members of the Movement in particular, within
the framework of increased transparency and ideas and
views that may contribute to managing and peaceably
resolving the current crisis.

The United States of America and Britain are
continuing their feverish efforts to launch an
aggressive war against my country, which has been the
subject of an unjust comprehensive embargo for over
12 years. Their aim is to change the national
Government of Iraq and to impose American
hegemony over the region and its resources, as a first
step towards world domination through the use of
force. This is a dangerous precedent in international
relations that threatens the credibility of the United
Nations and exposes international and regional peace
and security to grave dangers.

Iraq's record of compliance with Security Council
resolutions is unprecedented in this international
Organization and in the history of international
relations. During 1991 and 1992, Iraq, along with the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
destroyed all the sites, facilities and materials related to
its previous programmes of weapons of mass
destruction. From 1992 to 1998, Iraq cooperated with
UNSCOM. and the IAEA to ascertain that Iraq was free
of any proscribed programmes. Ambassador Rolf
Ekeus, the former Chairman of UNSCOM, stated on 13
January 1993 that Iraq had met 95 per cent of its
disarmament obligations. He also repeated that
statement in an interview with Swedish radio on 7
September 2002.
When the Security Council decided to conduct a
comprehensive review of Iraq's compliance with
Council resolutions in order to lift the embargo
imposed on it after the Secretary-General's visit to Iraq
in 1998, the United States ordered Richard Butler, the
former Executive Chairman of UNSCOM, to withdraw
the inspectors in preparation for its aggression in
December 1998, dubbed "Operation Desert Fox".
During that operation, Iraq was bombed by hundreds of
missiles that killed thousands of Iraqis, and Iraq's
infrastructure was destroyed, having been rebuilt after
1991.

The whole world condemned that act of
aggression. The United Nations Secretary-General
considered it to be a dark day in United Nations
history. I would like to point out here that the United
States Government confirmed then, in 1998, that
Operation Desert Fox had destroyed all the weapons of
mass destruction that Iraq possessed. After the
aggression, the Security Council formed a panel headed
by Ambassador Amorim. The panel recommended that
the remaining disarmament questions could be dealt
with in the reinforced ongoing monitoring and
verification. Ambassador Amorim based his
recommendations on the former UNSCOM. report of
1997, which stated that there no longer remained much
more unknown about Iraq's remaining military
capabilities.

Security Council resolution 1284 (1999) adopted
the recommendations of the Amorim panel. Paragraph
2 of the resolution entrusted the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) with the establishment and operation of a
reinforced monitoring system that would resolve the
remaining disarmament issues. In its planning and
organizational structure, UNMOVIC has taken into
account the concept of integrating disarmament issues
with ongoing monitoring, as described in paragraph 13
of document S/2000/292.

In November of last year, Iraq agreed to the
return of the inspectors. The Secretary-General
conveyed Iraq's agreement in a letter to the Security
Council. The letter included two basic issues. The first
considered the return of inspectors as a step towards a
comprehensive review of the issue of Iraq, with a view
to lifting the embargo imposed on it. The second dealt
with the necessity of respecting Iraq's sovereignty and
independence. From what we see today, these two
issues are still awaiting implementation by the Security
Council.

During its three rounds of talks with the
Secretary-General last year, Iraq requested that no
threats be made to its sovereignty and security. It also
requested the initiation of technical talks with Mr. Blix
in order to agree on a mechanism to identify the most
important remaining issues and ways of solving them.
At that time, Mr. Blix said that identifying remaining
issues would be decided by the Security Council after
the submission of a work programme to the Council
two months after the start of work in Iraq. After Iraq
agreed to the return of the inspectors and its subsequent
agreement to resolution 1441 (2002), Iraq again put the
matter before Mr. Blix. However, be repeated that the
inspections would have to start first, for two months,
and then a work programme would be prepared,
followed by consultation with Iraq on the remaining
issues.

The United States has exploited this ambiguity to
transform the issue from a technical and scientific one
into a political one. It requested Iraq to prove that it is
free of the alleged weapons of mass destruction,
although what was originally requested was active
cooperation with the inspectors.

Nevertheless, Iraq has provided all sorts of active
and full cooperation, as follows. First, in record time,
Iraq submitted a full and comprehensive declaration of
its previous programmes of weapons of mass
destruction, in addition to submitting new documents
covering the period from 1998 to 2002. Secondly,
inspectors were granted immediate and unconditional
access to all sites they wished to visit, without
exempting private homes or the presidential sites,
which are a symbol of Iraq's sovereignty. Inspection
teams have conducted over 700 inspections to date,
covering 400 sites. The cooperation was not limited to
opening the doors; it also extended to answering all the
questions posed by the inspectors by providing the
requested documents, plans and explanations.

Thirdly, Iraq established two specialized
commissions to search for documents or materials
related to previous proscribed programmes in order to
expedite the work of the inspectors. Fourthly, Iraq has
allowed inspectors to use helicopters and aerial
surveillance in their work, including U-2, Mirage and
Antonov planes. The U-2 planes have started their
work in the last two days.

Fifthly, Iraq's cooperation is demonstrated by
facilitating interviews with scientists and persons the
inspectors may wish to see. Those persons were
encouraged to accept private interviews with the
inspectors, and this is precisely what is taking place
now. Sixthly, new methods were suggested to dispel
any doubts regarding remaining disarmament issues.
Any suggestions submitted by UNMOVIC to solve
these issues are welcome. It is only natural that the
proposals made by countries will also be equally
welcome.

Seventh, Iraq provided inspectors with logistical
support to overcome any obstacles that they may
encounter in their inspections, and this includes the
opening of regional offices for the inspectors
throughout Iraq, thus facilitating their use of technical
and scientific means for the immediate and effective
completion of their task.

We would like to reiterate here - in particular
with regard to the controversy surrounding the issue of
VX and anthrax, which were unilaterally destroyed by
Iraq - that Iraq submitted practical suggestions during
the recent technical talks with Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei in Baghdad on 8 and 9 February, with the
objective of clearing up what the former Special
Commission saw as remaining issues and vague points.
This can be done through measuring the dissolved
quantities of VX and anthrax in the unilateral
destruction sites, using chemical and physiological
analyses. Iraq submitted documents proving the
validity of this process, as well as the results it has
reached in conducting searches regarding other issues.

This active cooperation resulted in refuting all the
allegations emanating from the United States and the
United Kingdom. Those allegations started with the
statement delivered by the United States President at
the General Assembly. This was followed by reports
issued by the United States and the United Kingdom
Administrations, the last case being the presentation by
Mr. Powell before the Security Council on 5 February.

Reason and wisdom make it incumbent upon us
to ask if there is any justification for the United States
and the United Kingdom to launch war against Iraq
under the pretext of their concern about Iraq's
possession of weapons of mass destruction. Even at a
time when Iraq is under an ongoing monitoring and
verification system, is it to be rewarded with yet
another attack by the United States, which is
threatening to use weapons of mass destruction,
including nuclear weapons?

Through its journey of compliance with the
international Organization's resolutions over the last 12
years, Iraq has paid a dear price and has made
sacrifices. It has lost close to two million of its people.
It is now facing another threat of destruction and
killing. Therefore, from this rostrum, we call upon all
Member States to shoulder their responsibilities, in
particular the member States of the Security Council,
in accordance with the United Nations Charter, which
emphasizes peaceful solution. We call upon them to put
an end to the unjust embargo imposed on Iraq and to
eliminate the no-fly zones unilaterally imposed by the
United States and the United Kingdom.

We call upon all countries in the world to heed
the call of millions of people the world over, who
during the last few days rejected the idea of any
aggression or threat of war or war against Iraq. These
millions of people condemned the troops amassed as a
military threat to Iraq and the region and alerted the
world community to the dangers of military aggression
against Iraq, its people and its territorial integrity. We
warn against the serious consequences of a war in a
region that has suffered the agony of many wars, a
region that is still suffering from the continuation of
the policy of occupation and destruction by Israel
against the Palestinian people and their legitimate
rights. We also demand respect for Iraq's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political choice expressed by
the Iraqi people during the general popular referendum
to reaffirm Iraq's political leader and leadership.

The launching of an attack by the United States
and the United Kingdom against Iraq would be proof of
the failure of the entire international system. That
system must rely on the Charter of the United Nations
as its indispensable point of reference for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Such
an attack would undermine the credibility of the
Security Council.

In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm Iraq's
commitment to continuing full and active cooperation
with UNMOVIC and the IAEA. In that regard, the two
organizations have responded well in implementing
Security Council resolutions in a professional and
honest manner, in accordance with the Charter and
unaffected by political influence and pressure from the
United States and the United Kingdom.

We would like to reiterate to the world
community that if an aggression against Iraq takes
place, Iraq's people, famous for their struggle against
the British occupation in the 1920s, will defend their
country and will allow no encroachment upon Iraq's
sovereignty and independence.

