Mr. Mukerji (India): Since this is the first time
I am addressing you, Madam President, let me begin
by congratulating you on ably steering the Council
as the President for this month and by expressing our
appreciation for the convening pf this quarterly open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I should also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing
earlier today.

When the Council held its open debate on 22 July
on this agenda item (see S/PV.7222), we were faced
with the unfortunate situation of the resumption of the
tragic and steeply escalated conflict in Gaza, which
resulted in a large number of civilian casualties and
heavy damage to property. We in India, on our part, had
called upon both sides to exercise maximum restraint
and avoid taking actions that might further exacerbate
the situation and threaten the peace and security of the
region. We remain hopeful that the current ceasefire
will be sustainable and that both sides will resume the
peace process soon towards a comprehensive resolution
of the Palestinian issue.

India's deep association with and continuing
commitment to Palestine are rooted in our modern
history going back to our own struggle for independence.
We should also like to reiterate our support for a
negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue,
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map,
resulting in a sovereign, independent, viable and united
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living within secure and recognized borders, side by
side and at peace with Israel.

Apart from strong political support to the
Palestinian cause at the international, regional and
bilateral levels, India has been contributing economic
and development assistance to the Palestinian people.
In keeping with those efforts, India pledged $4 million
in response to the Palestinian National Early Recovery
and Reconstruction Plan for Gaza, presented by
Palestinian Authority during the recent International
Conference on Palestine, "Reconstructing Gaza", held
in Cairo on 12 October.

India remains firmly convinced that dialogue
remains the only viable option that can effectively
address the issues confronting the region and its people.
We hope that both sides will demonstrate the necessary
political will to return to the negotiating table and
resume dialogue.

We are also deeply concerned about the activities
of radicalized and extremist groups in the northern
parts of Iraq and Syria, with a dangerous exacerbation
of sectarian and extremist tensions critically impacting
the peace and stability of the region. Efforts must be
taken by all parties and stakeholders in the region to curb
those trends. We believe that consolidation of political
processes and solutions, while building durable State
institutions, will be an effective way of addressing such
extremism and radicalism in the region.

On Syria, we have consistently supported a Syrian-
led, comprehensive political solution to the ongoing
crisis, in alignment with the 2012 Geneva communique
(S/2012/523, annex). We continue to urge all parties
to demonstrate the requisite political will, exercise
restraint and commit to seeking common ground in
accommodating their differences.

