Ms. Blum (Columbia) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me first of all to express my
delegation's satisfaction at seeing you preside over this
important meeting of the Council. We would like to
thank Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and the Executive Director of
UNICEF, Ms. Ann Veneman, for their presentations.

It is with firm conviction that the Government of
Colombia continues to make progress in building
peace. Its democratic security policy has not only
allowed for the recovery of the presence of legitimate
institutions and law enforcement in all the
municipalities of the country, but also for the
strengthening of the rule of law. It has also led to
greater respect for and protection of human rights, and
to the implementation of social programmes aimed at
the most vulnerable sectors of the population.

Democracy in Colombia continues to be solid and
stable. Our Government recently started a second
mandate, thanks to the unprecedented backing it
received in free, transparent and democratic elections.
In recent years, nearly 43,000 members of illegal
armed groups have been demobilized, which has been
reflected in a clear reduction in the recruitment of
children. The Colombian State established by law the
obligation not to recruit or link children less than
18 years of age to the armed forces and has strictly
applied this prohibition. As the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2006/826) indicates, violent groups outside
the law are the only parties that are responsible for the
recruitment of children in Colombia.

Thanks to the democratic security policy, the
number of kidnappings has also been reduced and the
phenomenon of internal displacement has slowed
down. The number of newly displaced persons went
from 450,000 in 2002 to 169,000 in 2005 and is at
90,000 so far in 2006. From November 1999 until
September 2006, more than 3,000 children separated
from illegal armed groups have entered into special
care programmes established by the Colombian Family
06-63153

Welfare Institute. There, they are helped in different
stages, depending on their conditions and needs, with
the objective of reintegrating them with their families
and their social environment.

Faithfully applying the Ottawa Convention, the
armed forces of Colombia have destroyed their
stockpiles of anti-personnel landmines. Furthermore,
the Government is carrying out arduous and intensive
demining action, for which we have received the
support of several United Nations agencies such as
UNICEF and United Nations Development
Programme, as well as that of friendly countries,
among them some current members of the Security
Council.

The commitment of the Colombian State to
international law and international humanitarian law is
total. We will not relent in our determination to restore
peace to the civilian population. We will turn to the
international community for support whenever
necessary in order to bring affected communities
decent conditions for their social and economic
recovery. We will also turn to the international
community to call for its commitment and political will
to effectively tackle the global drug problem.

Each gram of cocaine consumed by addicts is a
gram that is transformed into financial resources for
illegal armed groups that recruit and use children in
Colombia. Each gram consumed is a potential cause of
death and serious injury. Each gram consumed leads to
the planting of anti-personnel mines that leave behind
hundreds of victims. The drugs consumed by addicts
and the money paid for them are transformed into illicit
arms trafficking, forced displacement, violation of the
rights of indigenous peoples and the destruction of our
forests. Vulnerable groups, and children in particular,
suffer directly from those consequences.

My country joins in the strong rejection of the
recruitment and use of children repeatedly expressed
by the international community. We do not hesitate also
to point out that dealing with this problem is the
primary responsibility of States, and that any action by
the international community must first have the full
consent of Governments.

From that point of View, we have reviewed the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General. In that connection, allow me to
respectfully set out some of my country's concerns.
First, the recommendation that the Council should give
3
equal attention to children affected by armed conflict
in all situations of concern is not appropriate. It could
be understood as an attempt to suppress the differences
between annex I and annex II of the report of the
Secretary-General. There are conditions particular to
each situation that led the Council to clearly
differentiate them in the two annexes.

The monitoring and reporting mechanism was
established a little over a year ago, and there has been
agreement on conclusions on only two situations.
Moreover, there must first be ample discussion of the
independent review requested by the Security Council
on the implementation of that mechanism, instead of
proposing changes to the established approach and
procedures. For all of those reasons, it is clear that
operative paragraph 3 of resolution 1612 (2005) must
be preserved in its entirety.

Secondly, nor is it appropriate to give other grave
violations affecting children the same weight given to
the recruitment and use of children. Those additional
grave violations must all be strongly condemned, but
they are not the reason why this issue was brought to
the Council. A change in emphasis would weaken the
main objective that is being sought: to put an end to the
recruitment and use of children as soldiers. The
Council must continue giving greater emphasis to the
achievement of that objective.

Thirdly, the recommendation that Council expand
to all situations of concern its call for the parties
involved to prepare action plans is equally
inappropriate. According to Security Council
resolution 1539 (2004), action plans must be based on
a process coordinated by a focal point designated by
the Secretary-General and charged with ensuring that
the parties engage in dialogue. In the case of Colombia,
this would entail interference in the role of the
Government and the State to address the actions of
groups outside the law.

Action plans must therefore continue to be
prepared only for those situations that are on the
agenda of the Council, in accordance with resolution
1539 (2004).

