Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov and Ms. Tania Hary for their briefings.

The Gaza Strip continues to be the scene of
persistent cycles of violence that is undermining the
right of both Israelis and Palestinians to live side by
side in peace and security. We condemn in the strongest
terms the firing of rockets into Israeli territory to target
populated areas as a response to an Israeli operation.
We welcome the ceasefire established thanks to the
efforts of the United Nations and Egypt and call on all
parties to exercise maximal restraint in order to ensure
that the ceasefire holds.

The obligations to protect civilians and respect
international humanitarian law, including its principles
of distinction and proportionality, must be respected.
We call on the Israeli authorities to conduct a thorough
investigation on the air strike that resulted in the deaths
of eight members of the Al-Sawarkah family. The cycle
of violence facing the Gaza Strip recalls the need to
take concrete steps to improve the economic and
humanitarian situation, including lifting the blockade
and fully opening the crossing points, while taking into
account the legitimate security concerns of Israel.

A political solution to the crisis also demands the
return of that territory to the control of the Palestinian
Authority. In that regard, we also reiterate our call
on Palestinian factions to engage in good faith in the
reconciliation process. We encourage Palestinian leaders
to work towards ensuring strong, inclusive, accountable
and democratic institutions, based on respect for the
rule of law and human rights. A credible electoral
process throughout the Palestinian territory - in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as well as in the
Gaza Strip - should contribute to meeting that goal.

Concerning developments on the ground in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, the ceaseless
pursuit of settlements, including related measures, is
fundamentally undermining, and will soon irrevocably
compromise, the two-State solution, which we support.
Settlements are illegal under international law, which
is unambiguous and not subject to interpretation.
Settlements constitute a flagrant violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), and international humanitarian law, in particular
the Fourth Geneva Convention. Settlement policy also
leads to increased tensions and violence on the ground
and undercuts the trust needed to achieve ajust, stable
and lasting peace. We call on the Israeli authorities to
end it immediately.

In that context, we also reiterate that we will
not recognize any changes to the pre-l967 borders,
including in Jerusalem, other than those agreed by
both sides. In anticipation of the December briefing
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), we
reiterate our request for a written report on the issue,
in accordance with the usual practices of the Security
Council, including presidential not S/2017/507.

Today we are celebrating World Children's Day. We
are deeply concerned about the impact this conflict is
having on children. The excessive use of force resulted
in the deaths of 16 Palestinian children in the first half
of 2019 alone, while violent attacks led to the deaths of
three Israeli children during the same period. Attacks on
schools are on the increase, as are arrests of children on
their way to school and their administrative detention.
We are also very concerned about the extremely
elevated and increasing number of refusals of, and
delays in obtaining, permits from the Israeli authorities
for children in need of medical care outside Gaza. We
expect all parties to act in full compliance with the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the thirtieth
anniversary of which we are currently commemorating
in the General Assembly Hall.

