Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for allowing me to speak at the
last minute. But as all the discussions have been about
peacebuilding, I would like to tell the Council a little
bit about what is happening in my country in terms of
the process that is taking place.

First, however, allow me, Madam President, to take
this opportunity to extend the appreciation of my
delegation for the convening of this meeting in
connection with the subject of post-conflict
peacebuilding. Papua New Guinea is one of the countries
that has experienced post-conflict peacebuilding on the
island of Bougainville, in Papua New Guinea, for more
than a decade now.

My delegation is pleased to report on the progress
in the peace process in Bougainville.

The island had been wrecked by a bloody civil
conflict. It is believed that about 20,000 people died in
the turmoil, while thousands more were injured.
However, major steps were taken towards a peaceful
solution following the signing of the Bougainville
Peace Agreement in August 2001 - one of the 26
agreements signed in the pursuit of peace, normalcy
and a political settlement on Bougainville since 1989.

A ceasefire agreement between the warring
parties - the Bougainville Revolutionary Army and
Papua New Guinea - was signed in 1998, followed
three years later by a peace agreement. During those
years, a regional group composed of representatives
from all over the Pacific region was sent to monitor the
peace in Bougainville - first a Truce Monitoring
Group, followed by a Peace Monitoring Group. The
Group was unarmed, unlike in other post-conflict
peacebuilding processes around the world.

Within the span of those years, the Peace Process
Consultative Committee was formed, which also
included the Bougainville Constitutional Commission
and the Interim Joint Supervisory Body, all in the name
of peace and normalcy.

Papua New Guinea remained committed to a
peaceful solution through every available means. My
Government therefore continued to give the people of
Bougainville every opportunity to participate fully in
the reconciliation process, which led to the Peace
Agreement signed in August 2001 and finally to the
election of the autonomous Bougainville Government,
which is continuing today.

The Agreement was then given the force of the
highest law in the land as a result of the Papua New
Guinea Parliament's decision to amend our national
Constitution by adding the new part XIV and passing
the Organic Law on Peacebuilding in Bougainville.
The deal guaranteed a referendum on independence in
10 to 15 years, promised more autonomy in the
interim, and set out a plan for weapons disposal.

In December 2004, the Papua New Guinea
Government approved the Bougainville Constitution,
laying the ground for elections. That decision, in many
respects, was the culmination of longstanding dreams
and of a commitment made real through years of
protracted struggle and negotiations leading up to the
Bougainville Peace Agreement.

The way in which that decision was made - on a
bipartisan basis, with overwhelming support and
without any votes against it - showed how important
issues and principles can bring together leaders and
people from all parts of a country - in our case, Papua
New Guinea - with otherwise diverse interests and
opinions.

The spirit and detailed provisions of the national
constitutional laws have been further developed
through the making and implementation of the
Constitution for the Autonomous Region of
Bougainville.

Like our national Constitution, the Bougainville
Constitution is also "homegrown" - made and adopted
by leaders following close consultations with people in all
parts of Bougainville, as well as Bougainvilleans in other
parts of Papua New Guinea, within the framework of our
national Constitution, as amended to give legal effect to
the Bougainville Peace Agreement.

The first general election for the Autonomous
Bougainville Government, to be established under the
Bougainville Constitution, is currently under way and
is the next critical stage in giving substance to the
Agreement. The election marks a new beginning for
the people of Bougainville as candidates compete for
public support, as the public takes part in voting and as
officials gear up for the inauguration of the first
Autonomous Bougainville Government next month.

Leaders now in the race for the province's top
post played many significant roles and risked their
lives in the search for peace and normalcy for the
people of Bougainville. Now that the conflict is over,
the Bougainville Peace Agreement has been completed
and given the force of law and arrangements for the
first elections are under way, Bougainvilleans are
keenly participating in choosing the leaders who will
be responsible for ensuring that normalcy returns and
for setting priorities for future development in
Bougainville. The general elections are under way
right at this moment.

We believe that the election is a good example of
a United Nations-brokered peace deal. I think that is
well reflected in the subject of today's meeting. The
people of Bougainville have been waiting patiently for
this opportunity and are now going out in their
numbers to polling stations to cast their votes for
candidates of their choice. The voting system is first-
past-the-post.

There is very high public enthusiasm to see the
Autonomous Bougainville Government take office in
the middle of June - next month. The atmosphere on
the ground is generally calm and strongly in favour of
the election. As might be expected, there have been
two incidents, but the situation is otherwise peaceful
and orderly. The electoral process is moving ahead
according to plan. The calm and purposeful way in
which the election is being held shows how thoroughly
preparations have been made. More importantly, it
underlines how eager people around Bougainville are
to play their part in choosing Bougainville's future
political leaders and to get on with their lives.

The Bougainville election should be seen as the
model for others who have been experiencing similar
conflicts. It took real commitment by the leaders and
people of Bougainville to achieve peace and to choose
the type of government that they believe will bring
about development and prosperity.

The election would not be running smoothly
without necessary and generous funding from friendly
nations. There have been a lot of friendly nations in
this Council Chamber over the last couple of years who
have helped us. The funds made possible the purchase
of communications equipment to link the three main
centres where votes will be counted when voting
concludes on June 2. The results will be officially
declared on 9 June. Our Prime Minister has been
invited to officially open the Bougainville House of
Representatives, which is scheduled to meet on
25 June.

The assistance provided demonstrates practical
support for the parties' commitment and the progress
being made in implementing the Bougainville Peace
Agreement and the laws that give it legal effect. The
assistance also signifies the interest the international
community is taking in the first general election for the
Autonomous Bougainville Government.

In conclusion, I wish to record here - and I will
record it again next month, when the mandate ends -
on behalf of my Government and the people of Papua
New Guinea our deep appreciation for the contribution
of the United Nations in ensuring that the peace
process was maintained and the weapons disposal
process completed before the election commenced on
20 May 2005. I thank all members for allowing me to
speak today.

