The President (spoke in French): | shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Belgium. Belgium welcomes the holding of the presidential elections, which took place without major incident and with a high level of participation. However, the political arena continues to be characterized by tensions and a climate of mistrust, which is worrisome. Let us not forget that political stability is essential for socioeconomic recovery and the fight against trafficking. The time has come for national political actors to play a positive and constructive role. As we await clarity on the final result of the presidential elections, Belgium calls for dialogue and restraint so as to avoid further tension in the situation. For that reason, the sanctions regime remains relevant, although certain adjustments could be envisaged in the near future. With regard to the future of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), we support the phased transition plan provided for in the resolutions adopted by the Security Council. However, it is important that the transition take place as calmly and as painlessly as possible for the country: the departure of UNIOGBIS should not imply any abandonment of Guinea-Bissau by the international community. That is why Belgium welcomes the increased engagement already undertaken by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel. Strengthening the country team and, in particular, the capacity of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is essential. I welcome the progress already made in that direction and hope that it will continue. In the immediate future, Belgium supports the coordinated action of UNIOGBIS and the group of five international partners on the ground. The monitoring of the situation by the Guinea- Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and the support of the Peacebuilding Fund are positive. It will be important that that support be continued in the new phase opening up in Guinea-Bissau. I will conclude by expressing the full support of Belgium for the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sori-Coulibaly, and of UNIOGBIS as a whole. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of Guinea- Bissau.
