The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bazel
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/ 145, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2006/175, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America.


The President (spoke in Spanish): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1662 (2006).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.10 a.m.

