Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom):
Today's debate is a welcome opportunity to highlight
again the importance of preventive diplomacy, and I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting this morning. I would also like to pay
tribute to Nigeria's contribution to the work of the
Security Council, including stewardship of the Council
this month. I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General and Sarah Cliffe for their insights earlier in
this debate.

I want to make three main points.

First, the United Kingdom believes that the
international community needs to give greater attention
to conflict prevention. Particularly in the Security
Council, with its unique responsibilities, we have a
duty to ensure that people do not suffer the devastation
that comes with violent conflict when it could have
been prevented.

Let us be clear: conflict prevention is an essential
part of maintaining international peace and security.
Indeed, arguably, it is the most important part.

Prevention is also cheaper than cure. But the
balance of resources seems to have settled
disproportionately in favour of peacekeeping rather
than preventive diplomacy - that is, responding to
conflict rather than preventing it. But powerful
preventive diplomacy is not just a question of more
resources. It is about making use of the full range of
tools available to the United Nations across different
stages of the conflict cycle. Recent experience in
Kenya and the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo has demonstrated that the rapid deployment of
mediation teams can be crucial for effective conflict
prevention. We have shown ourselves capable of
deploying forces preventatively to halt an escalation of
tension into armed conflict. A good example of this
was the deployment of preventative force in Macedonia
1995.

Effective peacebuilding is, after all, a key means
of preventing a relapse into conflict, and I thought that
Sarah Cliffe's statistics on the relapse into civil war
were very telling on this point. We need to be more
confident that we are directing our resources to the
places where they will have the greatest impact. This
means that, however difficult it may be, we must have
confidence that we can evaluate any efforts undertaken
to prevent conflict.
Secondly, the Security Council, along with the
rest of the United Nations system, needs to develop a
genuine culture of prevention. In our view, this is
largely, a question of political will. It will sometimes
involve difficult decisions about fast-moving situations
in countries that are not currently on the Security
Council's agenda. But if the Council is to meet its
responsibilities for maintaining international peace and
security, Council members must be prepared to take
those difficult decisions.

As a practical step, we should minimize the
obstacles to action by improving the information flow
between United Nations bodies, between the
Secretariat and the Security Council and between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.

The Security Council should hear, as a matter of
course, from the Secretary-General and his senior staff
when they have visited regions where potential conflict
is a concern. This is not to criticize their efforts to date.
We, the member States of the Council, must be ready to
draw on the Secretariat's early warning analysis and
reporting on emerging conflicts.

Linked to that, the Secretary-General should offer
regular advice to the Council on potential emerging
conflicts - a sort of horizon-scanning exercise. We
should encourage greater exchange of expertise and
information across the United Nations system on
potential precursors to conflict, and there needs to be a
mechanism within the United Nations for drawing
together the different strands of information and
analysis. We therefore welcome the work under way to
strengthen the United Nations early warning capacity.

We should also seek a stronger dialogue with
regional and subregional organizations on ways to
prevent conflict, including on issues that we know can
drive conflict, such as the illicit extraction of natural
resources.

Thirdly, the international community should
continue to support and help develop the capacity of
regional and subregional organizations. Timely
African-Union-facilitated mediation in areas such as
Madagascar, Kenya and Guinea played a vital role in
preventing escalation of conflict. The United Kingdom
welcomes the efforts by the United Nations and the
African Union together to create a mediation support
unit at the headquarters of the Economic Community
of West African States. Through the African Peace
Facility, the European Union has provided
€300 million in the last three years to support African-
led peacekeeping operations. There is still more that
could be done in this area.

As the British Foreign Secretary, William Hague,
recently said, we need a sharper focus on conflict
prevention and to support the capacity of regional
actors to take a leading role in promoting stability. We
hope that the presidential statement adopted today will
provide some measure of political support to those
ongoing efforts.

