Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the holding of today's open debate, which
is highly relevant in the context of the current state of
international relations.

Cuba aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Violating universally recognized principles of
international law threatens international peace and
security. The threat of the use of force and the unilateral
use of force against sovereign States, interventions and
actions aimed at imposing regime change and unilateral
coercive measures all undermine international law and
international peace and security. It is very regrettable
that the Security Council, owing to the repeated
obstruction of one of its members, has not been able to
guarantee respect for international law and international
humanitarian law in relation to the Palestinian
question, particularly the massacre committed by the
Israeli army against a peaceful political demonstration,
which left dozens dead and thousands wounded. It is
unacceptable that the Council should remain indifferent
when unilateral actions are taken, such as the attack
by the United States and some of its allies on military
and civilian installations in the Syrian Arab Republic
on 13 April. Furthermore, ignoring the commitments
it has made and showing profound disrespect for
international standards, the United States Government
has announced its withdrawal from international
agreements relevant to humankind.

As nations united, we are responsible for the
preservation and defence of international law.
Cuba reiterates its firm commitment to respecting
international law as enshrined in the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, such
as multilateralism and the international system that we
have built within the framework of the United Nations.
The principles of international law enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations 4 essentially, sovereign
equality among States; respect for national sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the political independence of
States; non-intervention in affairs that fall under the
domestic jurisdiction of States; refraining from the
threat or the use of force; and the peaceful settlement
of disputes, as set out in the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations 4 must continue to form
the basis of international law and at all times guide the
actions of States and the development of the rule of
law. Strict compliance with those principles and with
international obligations that have been undertaken is
the essence of the promotion of international law.

Cuba rejects attempts to apply concepts that are not
universally recognized and that some seek to establish
as principles of international law, such as limited
sovereignty, humanitarian intervention, preventive war
and the responsibility to protect in the face of atrocities,
which are used to further agendas of domination and to
whitewash aggressive actions and interventions.

The promotion and strengthening of international
law is based on the recognition of, and full respect for,
the sovereign right of peoples to choose their political,
economic, social and cultural systems and to create the
legal and democratic institutions that are best suited to
their sociopolitical and cultural interests, as well as the
recognition of those institutions by the international
community. Attempts to impose laws and institutions
by means of certain preconceived notions hatched in the
centres of power, the promulgation and application of
extraterritorial laws, the politically motivated exercise
of jurisdiction by national or international tribunals,
and distortion or double standards on issues of global
importance not only undermine existing laws, but make
them inapplicable.

Cuba condemns all attempts to supplant or replace
national authorities in their efforts to strengthen their
respective political, economic and legal systems and the
functioning of their institutions. Any United Nations
initiative aimed at strengthening national institutions
must respect the purposes and principles of the Charter,
abide by the framework of the approved mandate,
comply with the principles of neutrality, impartiality,
State consent, national ownership and should not
impose any preconditions or political pressure.

The reform of the United Nations, which is aimed
at building a truly democratic and participatory
Organization, with a transparent and democratic
Security Council and a revitalized General Assembly
playing a central role and occupying a pivotal position,
and which supports States in independently building
the future that each nation decides for itself, is an
essential ingredient in ensuring the preservation of
international law.

Both at the national and international levels, systems
of norms and institutions are needed to guarantee the
full participation of all peoples and every human being
in the adoption of decisions that affect them and in the
implementation of programmes and policies aimed at
promoting and strengthening equity and social justice,
as well as the enjoyment of all rights by all peoples
and individuals.

Cuba reiterates its unwavering commitment to
continuing to work with other Member States and
the United Nations to establish a democratic and
just international order that responds to the demand
for peace, development and justice of the peoples of
the world and that guarantees the preservation and
strengthening of international law.

We will continue to promote the Proclamation of
Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace,
which was signed in 2014 in Havana at the second Summit
of Heads of State and Government of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, and which
demands that the Member States of the international
community fully respect that Proclamation in their
relations with the member States of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States.

