Mr. Kryzhanivskyi (Ukraine): Allow me to
welcome you, Sir, as Security Council President for the
month of December.

I also welcome the presence of the President of
the Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic, and
the Prime Minister of Kosovo, His Excellency Mr.
Agim Ceku, in this Chamber.

I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2006/906) and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Joachim Riicker, for
his informative briefing.

I shall confine myself to several points of crucial
importance, as seen from the perspective of Ukraine.
The Secretary-General's report highlights certain
progress in the implementation of standards, now
aligned with the European Partnership Action Plan.
While welcoming these positive developments, we
believe that, as a critical prerequisite for Kosovo's
long-term unity and stability, the work needs to be
further continued and intensified.

The province's leadership should make particular
efforts to ensure that Kosovo remains multi-ethnic and
democratic in nature, with respect for civil liberties and
the rights of national and religious minorities. Further
attention is needed to solve the problems of
government decentralization and the protection of
minorities' cultural and inheritance rights. It is also of
paramount importance that the Kosovo government
reaches out to the Serb population and makes them
partners in the ongoing transformation, and that
Belgrade encourages such endeavours.

The Secretary-General report underlines the
increasing tension in Kosovo as the negotiations on the
future status move forward. We are disturbed by the
fact that ethnically and politically motivated crimes
continued during the reporting period, some of which
being obvious attempts to pressure the international
actors. We therefore fully share the clear message in
the Secretary-General's report that political
developments and timelines will not be dictated by the
streets and violence will not be tolerated.

As an active contributor to international and
regional peace and security, Ukraine will continue to
participate in the peaceful efforts of the international
community in Kosovo. We favour the conclusion of a
mutually acceptable compromise decision between
Belgrade and Pristina, under active international
mediation and in full compliance with relevant
Security Council decisions, including resolution 1244
(1999).

Ukraine strongly believes in the need to attain a
final settlement of the political, economic and security
situation in Kosovo through the creation of adequate
conditions for the return of the non-Albanian
population and through the guarantee of human rights,
including those of all ethnic groups.

My country cautions against any hasty or
unilateral steps that could destabilize the situation in
the region. We believe that current negotiations need to
be prolonged based on the recognized norms and
principles of international law. It is with particular
concern that we perceive declarations about the so-
called universal nature or precedence of a Kosovo
settlement. Such approaches may pose the risk that
some countries, particularly in international
organizations, could use their influence in the future to
advance analogous scenarios in other regions with
frozen conflicts, above all within the post-Soviet space.

The international magnitude of the Kosovo issue,
as well as the unstable situation in the region, certainly
require a continued civil and security presence of the
international community on the ground. At the same
time, Ukraine considers one possibility - the

European Union decision on the international mandate
over the territory of Kosovo for a certain period
time - to be a transitional measure.

