Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Muburi-Muita, for his
detailed briefing.

Today's meeting, as shown by the statements by
our colleagues, reaffirms the particular attention that
the Security Council continues to give to issues
pertaining to the settlement of crisis situations on the
African continent. It is extremely important that the
Security Council not be the only player in this field.

As other speakers have done, we too note with
satisfaction the fact that the African Union and
subregional African organizations are working
increasingly actively in resolving the continent's
problems. We should support in particular the
determination of the African Union and its member
States to take on responsibility for preventing conflicts
and for carrying out peacekeeping activities in Africa
while showing a flexible and diversified policy for
cooperation with other partners.

In that context, we note the significance of the
creation of the United Nations Office to the African
Union, which should help our universal Organization
to optimize the peacekeeping potential of the African
Union. The peacekeeping activities of the African
Union clearly illustrate the need for and validity of the
rational use of the potential of regional organizations
by the Security Council on the basis of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations.

We have no doubt that the peacekeeping capacity
of the African Union needs further strengthening,
including through the international community
providing appropriate support. A particular role in that
regard is played by the United Nations, both through
the dialogue between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union and
through cooperation between the United Nations
Secretariat and the African Union Commission.

In addition to peacekeeping, we would like to
highlight the need for attention to be paid to
strengthening the African Union's potential in
mediation and preventive diplomacy, which is very
necessary in today's world. Another priority is the
formation by the African Union of a multilevel
institution for collective security, to prevent and react
in a timely way to emerging crisis situations.

In terms of the provision of material, technical
and financial support for peacekeeping efforts by the
African Union from the United Nations, we support a
flexible approach. There is a need here for a detailed
analysis of the conditions of deployment and the needs
of specific peacekeeping operations, and for
comprehensive consultations between the African
Union and the United Nations on all aspects of
cooperation in terms of goals, parameters and duration.
In that regard, there is a need for maximum
cooperation.

The Russian Federation participates in
developing and implementing programmes for
international assistance to Africa, including by
strengthening the peacekeeping potential of the African
Union. We intend to continue this work in the future.
We would like to wish Mr. Muburi-Muita every
success in his future work in this area.

