Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): We thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their informative
briefings. We also welcome the appointment of
Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard and wish
him every success as Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and Head of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement.

We also join in congratulating the members of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee on making
progress in planning for the redeployment of forces,
in line with the Al-Hudaydah agreement, during their
fourth joint meeting, held in Al-Hudaydah city from
16 to 17 February. The meeting was a commendable
confidence-building measure by the parties, and
we congratulate them on agreeing on phase 1 of the
mutual redeployment of forces. We look forward to the
Committee convening again within a week to finalize
phase 2.

South Africa remains concerned about the serious
humanitarian and security situation in Yemen. We
reiterate that, in order to ensure a long-term solution
to the crisis in Yemen, it is necessary for all parties
to commit to a political process. We also welcome
the proposal made by the Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee to move forward in the
implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement. We
hope that this commitment will result in tangible process
that can bring peace and stability to the region. It is
imperative that all parties make every effort to adhere
to the ceasefire agreement and the full implementation
of the Al-Hudaydah agreement. We want to reiterate
that the conflict cannot be resolved through military
might. The parties must engage constructively and
in good faith in order to overcome the obstacles and
find a political solution that can end the conflict. That
includes the continued exchange of prisoners, which is
an important confidence-building measure that could
contribute to reaching a political solution.

The humanitarian situation in Yemen remains
dire. We call on all parties to ensure that the necessary
humanitarian aid can safely reach its intended
destinations. Most of Yemen's imports, including
food and humanitarian assistance, enter through
Al-Hudaydah port, which the ongoing fighting has
frequently put out of action. Any hindrance to the
delivery of this vital humanitarian aid after agreement
has been reached among all the parties concerned can
only exacerbate an already severe crisis. We reiterate
that the only sustainable solution is a Yemeni-led
negotiated political settlement that is inclusive and fair
and puts the interests and welfare of all the citizens of
Yemen first.

