Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like first of all to thank your friendly country,
Mr. President, for having organized this debate. Its
ongoing consideration provides us the opportunity to
take stock of progress made and best practices so as to
jointly identify the areas that require additional efforts
to ensure a better protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The opening of this debate by His Excellency
President Cavaco Silva demonstrates Portugal's active
commitment to the topic. It is an interest and
commitment that goes beyond Portugal's presence at
the centre of the Council.

I would also like to welcome the contributions of
Ms. Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. Also, the presence and
observations of the Secretary-General at our debate
shows his personal commitment to the topic.

To be effective, the protection of civilians in
armed conflict requires a comprehensive approach,
bringing together the legal, humanitarian and security
aspects. It is essential that the civilian and military
actors under this complex and multidimensional
mandate have a shared definition and a clear
distribution of the tasks entrusted to them.
Peacekeeping operations have certainly become more
complex given their broader mandates, which have
gone from strictly military to peacebuilding tasks,
combining a broad range of activities, be they electoral
assistance, capacity-building in the rule of law, security
sector reform or institutional support.

The complexity of these new functions calls for a
process to integrate the components of the
peacekeeping mission, requiring a clear definition of
mandated tasks and effective coordination among
actors.

This is particularly true for the protection of
civilians, when mandated. In that regard, we stress that
the tasks of peacekeeping operations are contingent
and do not replace those of the host country, which
bears the ultimate responsibility for the protection of
civilians. In that context, the Security Council,
entrusted with the maintenance of international peace
and security, must formulate realistic and clear
peacekeeping mandates, in particular with respect to
the protection of civilians.

Seven peacekeeping operations are now
mandated to protect civilians, and most have developed
civilian protection strategies. This significant
development should be bolstered by mainstreaming the
use of optimal protection of civilians practices in
mandated peacekeeping operations. An assessment of
the implementation of such strategies would also allow
valuable lessons to be drawn in order to improve their
effectiveness.

With regard to training, much progress has been
made, particularly in the development of protection of
civilians modules for Blue Helmets and the senior staff
of peacekeeping operations. These many conceptual
advances must nevertheless be reflected on the ground.
In that context, three primary challenges must be met.

The first is that of feasibility. Blue Helmets
cannot guarantee protection for all. A simple
consideration of the ratios of troop levels to civilian
populations should make that clear. The protection of
civilians also requires significant equipment and
logistical means that are often inadequate or not
available to missions. This situation gives rise to the
broader question of the calibration of mandates to
resources.
The second challenge is that of defining tasks and
a clear division of labour. Confusion continues to
prevail with respect to what is expected of the military,
police and civilian components of missions in the
protection of civilians. This confusion leads to
unrealistic expectations among locals and in
international public opinion that could undermine a
mission.

The third challenge is that of sustainability. Far
from being limited to civilians under imminent threat,
the protection of civilians requires the support and
capacity-building of the host State to ensure that the
latter can fully discharge that function after the
withdrawal of the United Nations peacekeeping
mission.

In order to better protect civilians and allay their
suffering, we must collectively strengthen respect for
international law, particularly international
humanitarian law and refugee law. At the normative
level, States have done a good job of strengthening the
lead role of the United Nations in the development of
international law. Nevertheless, much remains to be
done with respect to compliance and accountability.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict requires
the strict compliance of parties to a conflict with
international humanitarian law.

Clearly, in many situations the militarization of
refugee camps, counter to international law, prevents
humanitarian actors from carrying out their mission of
providing care and assistance to civilians. The control
of civilian populations by non-State actors, working in
complicity or unbeknownst to the authorities of a host
country, represents another considerable challenge that
the international community must meet. This grip on
civilian populations often extends to the refusal to
undertake the basic and natural tasks of census-taking
and registration.

Many are the challenges to the protection of
refugees, including the effective legal protection of that
vulnerable population. It falls to the host State and the
United Nations to apply international law consistently
to all situations.

As the need to protect civilians in armed conflict
has clearly become the very raison d'etre for the
United Nations presence on the ground, its
implementation must follow clear and simple rules that
will ensure effective protection. Today's debate will
contribute to that goal.

