We would like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for joining us today. We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador Skoog and Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve for their briefings. We welcome Mr. Michael Pompeo, Secretary of State of the United States, and Mr. Mohammad Javad Zarif, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iran, to today's meeting. Over recent months, we have witnessed with deep concern that tension and mistrust continue to build in the region with respect to the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015). More than ever, it is important that the current situation be defused so as to maintain peace and stability in the region. In this regard, we would highlight the following points. First, we take note of the ninth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2020/531). We stress that restriction and control measures under resolution 2231 (2015) are meant to promote full compliance and implementation of the JCPOA. Secondly, we would like to reaffirm our consistent position of supporting disarmament and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons. We also respect the right of countries to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in accordance with international law and their obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Thirdly, we support measures that are designed to resolve all issues through dialogue and negotiations, in accordance with international law. We therefore support the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), as it aims to promote the compliance with and implementation of the JCPOA. We call on relevant parties to continue dialogue and negotiations to resolve differences and fully implement resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. It is important for all parties to exercise restraint and refrain from actions that could exacerbate the situation, erode trust and escalate tensions. In conclusion, peace and security in the Middle East will reverberate far beyond the region. It is therefore necessary for the Security Council to carefully consider every issue related to resolution 2231 (2015). Members of the Council should be actively engaged in these discussions in order to create an environment conducive to cooperation and dialogue among the parties in the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. It is also necessary for all of us to maintain peace and stability, uphold international law and fulfil obligations for a safe and prosperous world for all. For its part, Viet Nam is willing to make positive contributions to this process.*
