The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Pakistan.

I would like, first of all, once again to welcome
the presence of the Secretary-General at this important
meeting.

During and after the Iraq conflict, the welfare and
security of the fraternal people of Iraq has remained a
fundamental concern for the people and the
Government of Pakistan. The Iraqi people have
suffered tremendously over the past few decades. Their
suffering must now come to an end.

Pakistan sincerely attempted to prevent another
conflict in the Gulf. We regretted the outbreak of the
conflict. Our position on this resolution has been
guided by the objectives of promoting the welfare of
the Iraqi people, of promoting peace and stability in the
region and of restoring the international rule of law in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

Pakistan has supported this resolution for several
reasons. First, the resolution specifically upholds the
principles of the United Nations Charter as they relate
to Iraq. It affirms the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Iraq. It stresses the right of the Iraqi people
to freely determine their own political future and to
control their own natural resources. It affirms the
imperative of respect for international law, especially
the Geneva Conventions and the Hague Regulations.

Secondly, this resolution lifts the sanctions long
enforced against the Iraqi people and opens the door to
the provision of relief and humanitarian assistance to
them, to the revival of the Iraqi economy, to Iraq's
reconstruction and to the installation of a representative
Government that can be recognized by the international
community and that can soon take its place here at the
United Nations in the comity of free nations.

Thirdly, this resolution accords an independent
and vital role to the United Nations and to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative in the
provision of humanitarian relief to the Iraqi people, in
the reconstruction of Iraq, in the management of its
resources and its economic revival and in facilitating
the process of bringing forth a representative
Government. Pakistan looks forward to the early
appointment of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative. We expect that the role of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General will become even
more central in Iraq in the coming months.

Fourthly, the resolution, especially in the
fourteenth and fifteenth preambular paragraphs and in
operative paragraph 1, opens the door to the friends of
Iraq to contribute to the welfare of the Iraqi people,
including to the creation of an environment of peace
and security in Iraq.

Pakistan, like several other members of the
Security Council, has agreed, due to the exigencies of
the circumstances, to the delegation of certain powers
by the Security Council to the occupying Powers,
represented by the Authority. It is our expectation that
the responsibilities entrusted to the Authority under
this resolution will be exercised transparently and
fairly and, above all, in the interests of the Iraqi people.

We welcome the continuing role that the United
Nations will play in the oversight functions. It is
necessary, in that context, to recall that under the
Charter the powers delegated by the Security Council
under this resolution are not open-ended or unqualified.
They should be exercised in ways that conform with
"the principles of justice and international law"
mentioned in Article 1 of the Charter, and especially in
conformity with the Geneva Conventions and the
Hague Regulations, besides the Charter itself.

The resolution, as has been noted by the
representative of the United Kingdom, is not an
omnibus resolution. There are several issues that will
have to be addressed by the Security Council in the
coming weeks and months. Those include, first, the
certification by the United Nations and the
International Atomic Energy Agency that Iraq is free of
weapons of mass destruction; secondly, the end of the
arms embargo against Iraq; thirdly, the clarification and
possible enlargement of the United Nations role in the
future; fourthly, specific measures for the recovery of
Iraq's looted archaeological heritage; and, fifthly,
resolution of the problem of Kuwaiti and third-country
missing nationals.

Pakistan welcomes the provisions in the
resolution relating to regular reporting to the Security
Council by the Secretary-General as well as by the
United States and the United Kingdom, representing
the Authority. It is Pakistan's earnest hope that
representative government will soon be restored and
that Iraq's sovereignty and political independence will
come about as soon as possible. A secure and stable
regional environment is imperative for the realization
of the fundamental objectives of this resolution.
Pakistan continues to hope that there will be parallel
progress in resolving the other outstanding conflicts
and disputes that bedevil this region.

I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General,
who desires to make a statement.

