Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his
thoughtful report (S/2010/394) examining the options
for prosecuting suspected pirates and imprisoning
convicted ones. We hope very much that this report
will help enlighten all concerned about the very real
challenges we all face in this area. We also commend
the Russian Federation for leading the call for this
report and drawing attention to this important issue.

Piracy is an old problem that has taken on
troubling modern form. It continues to affect us all
through increased risk to our citizens, the disruption of
global commercial shipping and damage to property
and goods. Ultimately, only security and stability in
Somalia will resolve the root causes of its current
piracy problem.

Even so, the States and international
organizations participating in the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, including the United
Nations, have made considerable contributions to the
effort to suppress piracy in this critical region. But
significant challenges remain. The United States
commends the efforts of individual States, the
European Union's Operation Atalanta, NATO's
Operations Allied Protector and Ocean Shield and the
Combined Maritime Forces Combined Task Force 151
to combat piracy and protect vulnerable ships making
their way through the waters off the Somali coast.

Still, those tremendous naval efforts will be of
limited effect if suspected pirates are captured and
released without judicial consequences when there is
sufficient evidence to support prosecution. As the
United Nations report notes, the prosecution of
suspected pirates and the imprisonment of convicted
ones are essential to end impunity for acts of piracy.
The Secretary-General's report provides a balanced,
thorough review of the pros and cons of seven distinct
options on the issue.

There are no easy answers in the exercise of
bringing pirates to justice, and we welcome all creative
ideas for tackling this thorny problem. Any long-term
solution will require political will and financial
resources from the international community and the
States in the region. The options in the Secretary-
General's report reflect discussions over the past two
years within the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia, particularly in its legal Working Group.
The United States has been pleased to play an active

role in the Contact Group, which is both an effective
means of coordinating counter-piracy initiatives and a
valuable and appropriate forum for building on the
observations in the United Nations report.

We are particularly grateful that the Secretary-
General's report discusses at length the vital issue of
imprisonment. We agree with the report's assessment
that having sufficient arrangements for imprisonment
in the region is just as important, if not more so, than
the mechanism for prosecution. In fact, if such
imprisonment arrangements can be identified, many
more States may be willing to prosecute suspects in
their national courts.

The United States welcomes the Secretary-
General's appointment of Jack Lang as the United
Nations Special Adviser on Piracy. We look forward to
working closely with him in coordinating our efforts.

Let us be clear on the underlying dynamics
involved. Ultimately, it has been said, the problem of
piracy off the Horn of Africa will not be solved until
Somalia is stabilized. To that end, the United States
continues to strongly support the Djibouti peace
process and the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG).

The tragic events that took place yesterday in
Mogadishu, which resulted in the death and injury of
innocent civilians, including members of the Somali
parliament, underscore the urgency with which we
must address the terror and hardship all Somalis face
on a daily basis. The United States joins our fellow
Council members and the Secretary-General in
condemning those murderous acts in the strongest
possible terms. We pledge our continuing support to
the African Union Mission in Somalia, the United
Nations and the TFG in their efforts to bring peace and
stability to this important country and hope for the
future of the Somali people.

