Mr. O'Brien: After five years of senseless and
brutal conflict, we all have been longing for a glimmer
of hope that the suffering of the Syrian people might
finally be coming to an end. The past few weeks have
brought such a glimmer, with far fewer civilians killed
and injured since the cessation of hostilities came into
effect one month ago. In some parts of the country at
least, it has given a respite to people, who have told us
loud and clear that all they want is to be safe and for
their families to be protected from violence.

There has also been progress on humanitarian
access, with the United Nations and partners reaching
some additional besieged and hard-to-reach areas,
some for the first time in many months or even years.
However, much more is required, and we must continue
to seek access to all those who need help. There remains
no substitute for the process of permissions and careful
negotiations with all parties for safe access to areas
where vulnerable people are in order to meet their
humanitarian needs.

I very much welcome the resumption of the
political talks last week, led by Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura. All of us must rally behind his tireless
efforts to find a political solution that brings an end
t0 the conflict and meets the aspirations of the Syrian
people. After a chronicle of missed opportunities, this
is the time for the various parties to come together and
put an end to this horrendous chapter in Syria's history.

I will focus this briefing on the latest information
on humanitarian access. I am pleased to report that
we have seen some signs of progress over the past few
weeks. Humanitarian access has opened up to some
besieged and hard-to-reach areas. Since the beginning
of the year, we have reached 150,000 people in 11 out
of the 18 besieged areas in Syria through inter-agency
convoys. Some ofthe places, such as Madaya, Zabadani,
Foah and Kefraya, collectively known as the four towns,
have been reached each month this year.

Efforts are also ongoing in order to safely reach the
200,000 people besieged in parts of Deir ez-Zor city
through high-altitude air drops led by the World Food
Programme (WFP). Furthermore, through inter-agency
convoys we have reached some 199,000 people in hard-
to-reach locations, including Al-Waer and Al-Houla
in Homs governorate and Bloudan in Rural Damascus
governorate, as well as around 50,000 people in other
priority cross-line locations where needs are dire. Since
mid-February, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East has
also been able to provide assistance to an estimated
19,000 Palestine refugees in Yalda, Babila and Beit
Sahem, including an estimated 6,000 civilians from the
besieged area of Yarmouk.

I also emphatically welcome the Government
of Syria's recent commitment to simplifying the
administrative procedures for cross-line convoys,
answering our requests within seven days of submission
and ensuring that the necessary facilitation letters
are issued in three days. I am pleased to report that
the Government of Syria provided a response to our
inter-agency convoy plan for April within the specified
time frame. Last year, more than 75 per cent of requests
were not answered at all. I also take note of the Syrian
authorities' recent approvals for reaching additional
hard-to-reach, besieged and other priority locations
across conflict lines. Based on approvals received
to date, the United Nations is currently working to
deliver assistance before the end of April to more than
800,000 people with acute needs in those locations.
In addition, assuming that the parties facilitate access
and that security conditions allow it, UNICEF and the
World Health Organization (WHO) aim to implement
a nationwide vaccination campaign that would target
about 1 million children.
Even as we acknowledge the recent progress on
humanitarian access, we must also recognize that it is
only a first step towards what is required. Iftruth be told,
we are a long way from the sustained, unconditional
and unimpeded access that is required of the parties
under international law and that the Council has
continued to demand in its resolutions. Humanitarian
conditions remain dire throughout the country, with
some 13.5 million people still in need, and we are still
facing daily obstacles to our ability to reach those who
need our help the most. We have shared details of those
obstacles with member States that have influence on
the parties in order to see what more they can do to
break the barricades to speedy, safe and unimpeded
access, relief and evacuations of the sick and wounded.

Many of the 4.6 million people who are in need in
besieged and hard-to-reach areas still remain beyond
our reach, owing to insecurity and to obstructions by
the parties. Even where we are now getting responses,
they are often not approved. So far in 2016, we have
reached only some 30 per cent of people in besieged
areas and less than 10 per cent of those in hard-to-
reach areas. Despite recent approvals for some, the
Syrian authorities continue not to give approval for
certain locations. From the recently submitted plan for
cross-line convoys in April, only six of 11 locations
were approved by the Syrian authorities, and for
some locations they specified delivery quantities that
would mean that we could cover only a portion of the
population in each area. We are still without approval for
three besieged areas that are mere minutes by car from
United Nations warehouses in Damascus - Duma, East
Harasta and Darayya. The situation in those areas is
dreadful, particularly in Darayya, where we continue to
receive reports of severe shortages of food, clean water,
medicines, electricity and basic commodities, with
people's food security and nutrition status believed to
be disastrous. There are even reports of people forced
to eat grass. The daily misery in those areas shames
us all.

The humanitarian situation in many hard-to-reach
areas also remains critical. For example, I continue to be
deeply troubled about the conditions for the more than
210,000 civilians in northern rural Homs, specifically
the towns of Rastan, Talbiseh, Al-Houla, Ter Mallah
and Taldo, as well as 15,000 people in the adjacent area
of Hirbnafsah and surrounding communities in rural
Hama. The people there have essentially no possibility
of moving in or out of the areas, and have diminishing
access to clean water, medical care and food. The recent
convoy to Al-Houla was vital, and approvals for convoys
to the other parts of northern rural Homs give hope that
we will be able to alleviate some of the suffering, but
we remain extremely concerned about the situation
facing civilians in those areas. Nor should we forget
the situation of the nearly 2 million people estimated
to be living under daily oppression and terror in areas
held by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We
have little or no access to them and continue to receive
reports of widespread human-rights abuses.

Even when we do gain access, serious concerns
remain about the ongoing exclusion and removal
of medical supplies and treatments from convoys.
More than 80,000 treatments have been excluded or
removed from convoys in 2016, the vast majority by the
Syrian authorities. The range of the items removed is
scandalous, from items for treating child malnutrition
to medicine for preventing bleeding after childbirth.
There can be no possible justification for removing
those or any other basic medical items. I call on all
parties, particularly the Syrian authorities, to enable
all necessary medical items and equipment, including
surgical items, to be allowed onto the convoys.

Nor are medical evacuations from besieged and
hard-to-reach areas being facilitated by the parties to
the extent that they should be. While the United Nations
and its partners continue to do their best to follow up
on individual cases, that is clearly not enough, and
people continue to die unnecessarily as a result. I
am not in a position to put a number on that, but it is
clearly unacceptable. Similarly, medical workers are
not getting the access they need to undertake proper
medical assessments and treat patients. Having a few
hours with patients on the day of a convoy is simply
not enough. We need regular access for medical and
humanitarian workers for as many follow-up visits as
are required.

While the situation is acute in besieged and hard-to
reach areas, we must remember that this is a conflict
that has affected nearly every Syrian. The destruction
of essential infrastructure, including schools and
hospitals, the devaluation of the currency, the impact
of sanctions, rising food prices, shortages of fuel and
electricity and a lack of clean water have exacted a high
toll on a majority of Syrian families and communities
throughout the country. We have to find ways of doing
better and reaching all people in need, and we have
to ensure that they have access to basic and essential
services wherever they live.

As the Council knows, our objective as
humanitarians is not political or military. It is about
providing emergency aid and protection to people in
desperate need and precarious circumstances wherever
they are in Syria. For that to become a reality, however,
the recent opening of access to some locations must be
only the start of a step-change in access. Access must
go beyond allowing more aid convoys to deliver limited
supplies. We must move beyond the notion that one-off,
ad hoc distributions ofassistance to aparticular besieged
or hard-to-reach location are somehow sufficient and
acceptable, because they are not and never will be. To
even begin to address the full range of humanitarian
and protection needs in those areas, what we need is a
permanent stop to the fighting, an end to the sieges and
safe, sustained, unconditional and unimpeded access,
so that we can meaningfully reach all those in need as
often as is required and by whatever route is necessary.
We also need civilians to be able to move freely in
and out of areas in order to access basic services and
assistance, and we need that now, before it is too late.

I want to pay tribute to the courageous humanitarian
organizations and workers who collectively come
together to help millions of people each month
through all available routes. In February, the World
Food Programme, for example, delivered food for
3.8 million people; UNICEF provided water, sanitation
and hygiene supplies for over 1.5 million people; WHO
delivered over 800,000 treatments; and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
delivered support for almost 500,000 people. Our
non-governmental organization partners also continue
to assist hundreds of thousands of people each month,
both from within Syria and across borders.

Over the past weeks, the United Nations and
partners have scaled up assistance to people in need,
including cross-border assistance from Turkey to meet
the needs of the over 60,000 people newly displaced
close to the Turkish border owing to the heavy fighting
and aerial bombardment in Aleppo governorate
throughout February, before the start of the cessation
of hostilities.

Our challenge now is to scale up assistance
further to reach the level required. We are ready to
take advantage of any opportunity to assist people
in need. On 15 March, five years into the conflict in
Syria, 102 humanitarian agencies called for immediate
and sustained access in Syria. I repeat that call today,
particularly for the parties to the conflict and Member
States with influence to guarantee full access for
humanitarian and medical workers to assess the well-
being of civilians in all communities and treat those
who are sick and injured without obstacle or restriction;
allow all humanitarian aid, as required by international
humanitarian law, to reach, unimpeded, those who
urgently need it - including medical supplies, surgical
equipment and nutritional necessities; and support an
urgently needed nationwide immunization campaign
for children. These are practical and immediate actions
that would mean the difference between life and death
for many people. All parties to the conflict can agree on
and implement them now.

The cessation of hostilities should also be the
catalyst that finally brings an end to the indiscriminate
use of weapons on civilians, residential areas, aid
supply routes and other civilian infrastructure
protected under international law. Already this year,
far too many civilians have been killed or injured in
direct or indiscriminate attacks by all parties, owing
to the continued use of explosive weapons in populated
areas, including through barrel bombs and other aerial
weapons, shelling and car bombs. It is time to say
enough is enough.

The lessons of history should tell us that peace
cannot wait any longer in Syria. The consequences of
failing to resolve the Syrian conflict in Syria, in the
region and beyond are now lamentably clear. The past
few weeks have shown, however, that when there is
the right amount of political will, the parties and the
international community can come together to find
ways to reduce the suffering of civilians and engage
in talks to bring an end to the conflict. It is the sincere
hope of all humanitarians that these talks will pave the
path to peace in Syria.

