Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
thanks the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan for its ongoing work in the country.
We also thank Special Representative Yamamoto,
Executive Director Fedotov and Under-Secretary-
General Voronkov for their very enlightening briefings.

Today I will address three main points: the
empowerment and rights of women and girls in
Afghanistan, the upcoming elections, and Canada's
commitment to the peace and reconciliation process.

(spoke in English)

First and foremost, Canada is committed to
advancing gender equality and empowering women
and girls in Afghanistan. In May, Canada's Minister
of Status of Women, Maryam Monsef, spoke via
video at the fifth Afghan Women Symposium about
our approach. I echo Minister Monsef in stating that
Afghanistan has made considerable progress on gender
equality. Canada welcomes the work of the Afghan
Government to ensure the full implementation of the
2009 Elimination of Violence against Women Law.

Still, there is much work to be done to enable the full
participation of women and girls in social and political
affairs. Canada directly supports education, health-
care and human rights programmes in Afghanistan. In
all of these programmes we place primacy on ensuring
that women's and girls' rights are advanced through
them. For example, we have established more than
9,200 community-based schools in rural and remote
areas of Afghanistan so as to increase girls' access to
basic education. More than 80 per cent of the 273,000
students in those schools are girls. In Afghanistan, it
is crucial that women and girls be included as equal
participants in all decision-making processes.

This brings me to my second point: the need for fair
and peaceful elections. Canada supports the meaningful
inclusion of women as both candidates and voters in
October's elections. However, we are deeply concerned
by the security situation and the effect it has on the
ability of citizens to exercise their democratic rights.
In many cases, election-related security incidents
are occurring at schools and mosques used for voter
registration. This is simply unacceptable.

The credibility ofthe elections process is dependent
on the ability of voters and candidates, regardless
of gender, to participate without being subjected to
violence and harassment. We ask that all parties to
this conflict respect the right of everyday citizens to
participate in the election process. Canada supports the
efforts of the Afghan Government and looks forward to
democratic, transparent and peaceful elections in the
coming months.

Finally, it is important to address the need for
peace and reconciliation, and the inclusion of women
in this process. I would particularly like to recognize
Uzbekistan's efforts to promote peace through the
Tashkent conference. Afghan-owned and Afghan-led
efforts towards peace that are bolstered by regional
support will benefit the stability and prosperity of us
all. Canada also applauds President Ghani's courageous
announcement on 16 June that the Afghan Government
intends to extend its ceasefire. We support the Afghan
Government's call to the Taliban to agree to another
ceasefire and to join peace talks.

Canada supports Afghan-led efforts towards peace
and regional stability. We commend Afghanistan and
its partners for their work to increase gender equality,
ensure fair and peaceful elections, and promote peace
and reconciliation initiatives.

