Mr. Orellana Zabalza (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): First, I would like to express our gratitude
to your delegation, Mr. President, for organizing this
open debate on an issue of high priority, as well as for
the concept note (S/2015/845, annex) that you have
prepared, which contains valuable guidance for our
deliberations today. We also wish to thank the other
speakers who have preceded us for their statements.

Before I continue, I would like to take this
opportunity to express our condemnation of the
multiple terrorist attacks perpetrated in recent days and
to express our solidarity with those friendly countries,
which have faced such difficult circumstances.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Iran on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. We wish to add some
additional thoughts.

For Guatemala, the commitment to multilateralism
and the United Nations is a cornerstone of its foreign
policy. Our strong multilateral vocation is based on
the conviction that global challenges, such as the
maintenance of peace and security, the battle against
poverty, the encouragement of sustainable development
and the promotion of the rule of law, can be addressed
effectively only within the framework of multilateralism
and the United Nations.

Less than two months ago, we adopted a new
development agenda, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), in
which Member States affirmed that, without peace
and security, we cannot achieve development. Goal 16
of the Sustainable Development Goals, for instance,
reflects the need to build peaceful, just and inclusive
societies and provide equal access to justice, based on
the respect for human rights and good governance. That
is why we believe it is necessary to ensure that all the
instruments available to the Council be proportionate to
the needs in the fight against crimes committed against
the civilian population and contain strong elements of
deterrence, accountability and justice. It is important
that the lessons learned from the worst failures and best
practices guide our future work. The Human Rights
Council, the International Criminal Court and the
specialized criminal courts have an important role to
play in this respect.

Over the years, we have all advocated a greater
commitment to conflict prevention rather than dealing
with threats to peace after the conflict has developed. In
conflict prevention, we must deal with the underlying
causes through an open and inclusive dialogue,
involving all the parties concerned, from the State and
civil society to the grass-roots level.

We reaffirm our commitment to fostering a culture
ofprevention ofarmed conflicts as a means ofaddressing
the interrelated problems of security and development
and of strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
to prevent armed conflicts. Guatemala, as a member of
the Peacebuilding Commission, considers it imperative
to provide the assistance needed by countries that
are emerging from conflict, and trying to restore
democratic institutions, in order to ensure inclusive
dialogue with all the parties concerned and guarantee
the necessary national reconciliation. It is only in that
way that we can we stay on the path of peace, stability
and development without risking regression.

The Commission is in a good position to promote
greater coherence and synergy in the policies and
actions implemented in the three peacebuilding
dimensions: political, security and development.
In that respect, we express our full support for
the recommendations included in the report of the
Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490).
We support the Peacebuilding Commission's advisory
role to the Security Council and the General Assembly.
That advisory role should encourage the integrated
strengthening and long-term commitment of both the
United Nations and other entities to countries emerging
from conflict. Our country shares a commitment to
the pursuit of sustainable development and peace in
countries emerging from conflict and recognizes the
value of the relationship between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission to better address
the conflicts and situations in those countries.

In conclusion and taking into account the various
conflicts, it is important to ask ourselves if we are
keeping the founding promise of the Organization to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
As stakeholders in the international system, that should
be our goal, and it can be achieved if we improve our
efforts to build and maintain peace. My delegation is
committed to that goal.

