Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing and for taking the time to be here; it is really nice to see him. I congratulate the Minister for Foreign Affairs on her new role; it is lovely to see her. We welcome the High Commissioner to the Council today. Three years after the signing of the peace agreement, Colombia is to be congratulated, not only for ending decades of conflict, which is important, but also for faithfully working to heal the woundsof the conflict. Although many challenges remain, Colombians are demonstrating their commitment to a future of peace, reconciliation and prosperity. That commitment was on full display when I travelled to Colombia in November and saw the staggering impact of the humanitarian and economic crisis in Venezuela on Colombia, which now hosts more than 1.6 million Venezuelan refugees and other displaced persons. What was especially remarkable to me was how the Colombians have responded to the plight of those less fortunate, embracing them as family despite the challenges that the Colombians are already facing. Their generosity is inspiring. The United States has hoped to mirror that example by responding to the crisis with over $650 million of aid, with almost $252 million directed towards the response inside Colombia, by far the highest aid package from any donor country. My visit was also an opportunity to learn about the challenges of the peace accord's implementation and the important work being carried out by President Duque Marquez and key stakeholders. The fact that Colombia's local and regional elections in October were the most peaceful and inclusive in its recent history is a credit to their commendable efforts. However, the United States remains deeply concerned by reports of violence against human rights defenders, social leaders and ex-combatants, as outlined in the Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2019/988). We support the Colombian Government's efforts to enhance protections for those groups, whose security is fundamental to a just and lasting peace. We applaud Colombia's progress on transitional justice, while recognizing that it those difficult decisions have not been made without controversy in Colombia. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the Truth Commission and the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed Missing in the Context of and Due to the Armed Conflict have made important progress, although their work is unfinished. The United States views the transitional justice mechanisms outlined in the accord as important mechanisms for peace and justice in Colombia. We also welcome actions to ensure that those who commit serious crimes post-accord are held accountable to the full extent of the law. We must be mindful, though, that the successful implementation of the peace accord is closely linked with two other challenges, namely, Colombia's narcotics problem and the crisis in Venezuela, which threatens to destabilize the region. The United States is committed to working with Colombia to pursue a whole-of-Government approach to counter-narcotics, rural development and rural security, including expanded manual eradication or the resumption of aerial eradication, when the requirements of Colombian law have been met. We share with Colombia the goal of reducing coca cultivation and cocaine production to half of 2017 levels by the end of 2023. Those efforts directly support peace implementation. More broadly, as I have previously noted, they boost economic development in areas with significant coca cultivation. The people of Colombia need viable economic alternatives to break out of a cycle that ultimately funds violence and impunity. Widespread and _ largely peaceful social mobilizations demonstrate that Colombians are paying attention to the peace process, and we applaud the national conversations launched by President Duque Marquez in response. We hope that those conversations will facilitate the Government's efforts to ensure the reintegration of former combatants, the extension of Government presence and services into areas where they are lacking and economic opportunities for all Colombians. Colombia has a friend in the United States, and we look forward to continuing our joint efforts to not only end the conflict in the country but also to mend the wounds that it causes.
