The President (Spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the co-leads of the Security Council
mission to the Sahel region from 19 to 22 October,
namely, Ethiopia, Italy and France.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of France.

At the outset, I should like to convey our deep
condolences to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the Government of Chad, following the attack on a
convoy that led to the loss of life of three Chadian Blue
Helmets today in northern Mali. The Security Council
paid its respects to the memory of the Blue Helmets
who died in the line of duty during its visit, and we do
so again today. We also convey the same condolences
to the Governments of the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), whose people and
security forces are regularly subjected to often deadly
terrorist attacks.

The Security Council conducted a field mission to
the Sahel from 19 to 22 October, during which it visited
Mali, Mauritania and Burkina Faso. The visit was
jointly led by France, Ethiopia and Italy and was part
of the Security Council's close monitoring of the issue
of the joint force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). One ofthe goals of the visit, which began the day
after the issuance of the report on the operationalization
of the Joint Force (S/2017/869), was to provide the
members of the Council with a first-hand assessment
of the situation on the ground and an opportunity
exchange views with the various actors on the ground
of the Secretary-General's recommendations aimed at
strengthening international support for the Joint Force.
We focused in particular on the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
in line with the Council's conviction that there can
be no lasting stability in the Sahel without effective,
comprehensive and inclusive implementation of the
provisions of the Agreement.

It should be noted that the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, which was officially
invited to participate in the visit, was unable to send
a representative because of its heavy workload at that
time. Nonetheless, the Chairperson of the Peace and
Security Council expressed his great appreciation for the
courtesy shown by the Security Council and indicated
the Peace and Security Council's full willingness to
participate in future visits. It seems to us that such a
practice should be encouraged.

In keeping with the division of labour that we
adhered to during the visit itself, I will provide an
update on the visit to Mali, before giving the floor
to my colleagues from Italy and Ethiopia, who will
provide briefings on the segments of the field visits
to Mauritania and Burkina Faso, respectively. We will
each conclude our briefings by sharing the main lessons
that we learned from the visit overall.

In Mali, the Security Council met with President
Ibrahim Boubacar Keita and several Government
ministers, all of whom unanimously reaffirmed their
country's commitment to making the Joint Force fully
operational as quickly as possible. The visit to the Joint
Force headquarters, located in Se'vare', in central Mali,
allowed us to see that it is up and running. Much has
been done in a short period of time in order to make
the Joint Force operational. I refer in particular to the
fact that the Joint Force has already achieved its initial
operational capability and that the command post for the
Central Sector in Niamey has been established, as well
as to the high quality of the G-5 officers in command,
not to mention the fact that it will be deploying its first
operational mission in the next few days.

Our discussions with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the MINUSMA Force
Commander allowed us to identify, from among the
elements contained in the options submitted by the
Secretary-General, those that could be achieved in the
short term and that would need to be preceded by a
strengthening of MINUSMA's capacity and therefore
could only be implemented further down the line.

Our discussions with the representatives of
the French Operation Barkhane and the European
operations - the European Union Training Mission
and European Union Capacity-building Mission in
Mali - allowed us to better understand the activities
of the other international security forces present in the
area and to assess their mutual complementarity. In
particular, it became apparent that the force generation
for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force was intended to enable
MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane to implement
their mandates.

With regard to the peace process in Mali, a
meeting with members of the Monitoring Committee
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali was an opportunity for the Malian authorities to
share the progress that had recently been made in the
implementation of the provisions of the Agreement. In a
joint document, the signatory groups deplored a lack of
consultation with them on the part of the Government
on this issue. In response to these statements, on behalf
of the entire Council, I reiterated the strong message
that we conveyed in our press statement on Mali issued
on 6 October (SC/13019) by stressing the Council's
expectation that concrete progress would be achieved
by the end of the year. This message was supported by
the Algerian presidency of the Monitoring Committee
and by the representative of the African Union.

We held two meetings with representatives of civil
society - one in Bamako and one in Mopti - that
allowed us to directly address the concerns of the Malian
population. They emphasized the desire of women
to be more involved in the practical implementation
of the peace agreement, and in particular to be
better represented in the institutions responsible for
monitoring its implementation, as well as the weariness
of the population in the centre of the country with
regard to the security threat it faces on a daily basis
and its wish that the influence of terrorist groups in the
region be combatted.

Finally, we also took part in a ceremony honouring
the 146 peacekeepers of MINUSMA who have died
while serving their mandate, which was held at the
MINUSMA memorial in Bamako. Regrettably, there
are now 149. It was an emotional time for the Mission
and the Council delegation, and it led us to conclude
that it was a good practice which should be observed
during each Council visit to a country hosting a
peacekeeping operation.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Ambassador Cardi.

