The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.

Allow me to first thank the High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, for
her briefing.

Poland is committed to all efforts aimed at the
preservation of effective arms-control and disarmament
arrangements, which are fundamental to international
security. However, to be effective, the commitments
must be verifiable and observed by all sides in
good faith.

The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF)
Treaty has been crucial in upholding European and
global security for more than 30 years. Under the INF
Treaty, almost 3,000 missiles have been removed and
verifiably destroyed. We regret the failure of the long-
lasting United States efforts to preserve the INF. The
erosion of that significant element of the European
security architecture constitutes yet another challenge
for international security.

The Russian Federation bears sole responsibility
for the demise of the Treaty. NATO allies have
raised concerns over Russia's compliance with the
Treaty for several years, including within the NATO-
Russia Council.

In December 2018, NATO allies affirmed that
Russia had developed and deployed the SSC-8 missile
system, also known as the 9M729, which constitutes
a violation of the Treaty. We regret that Russia has
shown no willingness and taken no steps to ensure
the implementation of the INF Treaty in an effective,
verifiable and transparent manner.

In a post-INF-Treaty world, we have to take steps
to guarantee our security. However, NATO does
not intend to install new land-based nuclear missiles
in Europe, while Russia decided to field its SSC-8
missiles across from European regions. Those rockets
are hard to detect and can carry conventional or nuclear
warheads and therefore significantly enhance the risk
of nuclear conflict.

Poland, like other allies, supported the United
States' decision to withdraw from the INF Treaty.
It was a logical and understandable reaction to
Russia's actions.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

