Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Permit
me at the outset to thank you for having convened the
Council to discuss in an open meeting a matter as
universal and timely for the international community as
mine action. I am also grateful for the important
briefings by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and by
Mr. Martin Dahinden, Director of the Geneva
International Centre for Humanitarian Demining.

The conflicts which the Security Council
addresses in the exercise of its authority are usually of
two types, and they generally cause great loss of
human life, mutilation and suffering, in addition to
material losses. These are, first of all, anti-personnel
mines and, secondly, the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. Mine action is therefore an essential
element in peace-building in that, as practice has
shown, it plays an important role in peacekeeping
operations. Also, mine-clearance operations play a
preventive role, which is of primary importance in
terms of preserving the life and physical integrity of
the personnel conducting peacekeeping operations and
of the personnel engaged in humanitarian activities.
But we also think of the local population, innocent
women and children, who are very often affected.

Our experience has allowed us to develop, within
United Nations policy, mine action initiated by the
Assembly, and the role of the United Nations Mine
Action Service is today part of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). During this time,
many international instruments have been drafted and
continually updated with new universal norms, such as
the Ottawa Convention and Protocol II of the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, as well
as mechanisms for cooperation and action to resolve
these problems.

Chile has implemented these instruments and has
also taken the necessary measures to fulfil its
commitments proceeding from these instruments. Our
country has, as a first step, eliminated its stockpiles of
anti-personnel mines. In this regard, Mr. President, it is
a pleasure for me to communicate to you that last
August we destroyed the last 59,000 anti-personnel
mines stockpiled by our country's armed forces,
complying two years in advance with Chile's
obligations under the Ottawa Convention. From now
on, our country's efforts, over a nine year period, will
be aimed at planning the removal and destruction of all
anti-personnel mines planted on national territory.

At present, our Government's efforts are also
aimed at providing humanitarian assistance to mine
accident victims and to local communities. We have
worked efficiently to mark those areas that contain
minefields, delimiting them and making them known.
We have also broadly distributed pamphlets containing
preventive measures for persons who have to transit
through areas close to these marked fields.

Mine-clearance activities in our country are
concentrated in a public commission with multisectoral
participation, reporting to the President of the
Republic. One of the main functions of the National
Demining Commission is to propose policies, legal
norms and plans for compliance with the Ottawa
Convention, as well as to obtain resources to develop a
national humanitarian mine-clearance plan which, as I
have said, has been carried out efficiently and ahead of
schedule.

We have no doubt that, from the present
perspective of the United Nations Mine Action Service,
the Security Council must include in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, as a regular and priority
matter and whenever the situation so requires, mine
action as well as action regarding other explosive
remnants of war. Such action, in our view, should work
towards the elimination of landmines, of unexploded
ordnance and, in general, of other explosives remnants
of war or conflicts because of their serious effects on
the civilian population in particular, particularly
children, humanitarian personnel and the personnel of
the United Nations itself. This must be done in
accordance with nationally and internationally agreed
technical criteria.

We agree on the need to reiterate the serious
dangers posed by mines and other explosive remnants
and we believe that the Council should support the
activities of the United Nations Mine Action Service in
the DPKO, with special recognition being given to the
work done by this Department in terms of coordination.
We also believe that the Council, through its
resolutions, should promote, among other things,
respect by all Member States for the norms of
international law on the subject, and we particularly
urge the parties to a conflict to refrain at all times from
the production, transfer, stockpiling and use of this
type of material.

At such an important occasion as this, we cannot
overlook the courage and dedication of the experts who
have risked their lives and their physical integrity in
mine clearance. Our country is proud of contributing
effectively to mine-clearance activities as members of
peacekeeping and mine-clearance operations, as we did
in Nicaragua, and cooperating with other armies in the
removal of mines, as we have done with Ecuador. We
wish to pay tribute to all those who have become
victims of this dangerous work while ensuring that
innocent people do not fall prey to that scourge.

Allow me to conclude by pointing out that the
Human Security Network, a group of countries of
which Chile is a member, has anti-personnel mine
action as one of its priorities. We therefore reiterate, on
behalf of the group of countries who are part of the
Network, our endorsement of the inclusion, as a
priority, of this aspect in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations that are approved by the Council.

