Mr. Hill (Australia): Thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate. We welcome the
opportunity to engage on this issue in the Council. This
thematic debate is a valuable opportunity for the
Council and the broader membership to take a step
back from the task of implementation in country-
specific situations and to consider the issue in a more
strategic fashion.

In this regard, we commend the efforts of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Council in updating the aide-memoire on the
protection of civilians. We also thank Under-Secretary-
General Holmes for his comprehensive briefing in this
regard earlier today.

Given the constraints of time, I will focus my
remarks on three areas of importance for Australia.

First, I would like to turn to the mandated task of
protecting civilians, which has increasingly become a
central feature of United Nations peacekeeping. Recent
events in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have highlighted the critical importance
of this mandated task. These events demonstrated the
expectations of host populations and the international
community associated with a protection mandate and
they also starkly illustrated the constraints and
challenges faced by United Nations peacekeepers. The
Council is to be commended for its clarity in renewing
the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo and the
authorization of additional capacity.

The challenge remains, however, in
implementation. Too often we have witnessed a
disconnect between the political understanding reached
in the Council and the practical reality on the ground.
At times, this disconnect is due to capacity constraints.
At other times, it is due to different interpretations of
the mandate and the absence of a common
understanding regarding the types of tasks permitted
and required by the mandate. This disconnect between
the strategic and operational levels needs to be
reconciled in order to ensure that reasonable
expectations are being set and that United Nations
peacekeeping remains a dynamic and effective
instrument of international peace and security.

As a contribution to addressing this challenge,
Australia, in partnership with Uruguay, will host a one-
day workshop on 27 January focused on the
implementation of protection of civilian tasks in
peacekeeping missions. The workshop is intended to
provide a forum for dialogue among Member States,
the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations with a view to promoting a common
understanding of the challenges faced in the
implementation of such mandates. In so doing, we
hope to work towards closing the gap between mandate
and implementation. We invite all Member States to
participate in the workshop and to contribute to
addressing this important challenge.

Secondly, I would like to emphasize the need to
end impunity for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. As the
Secretary-General noted in his 2007 report
(S/2007/643), where we are unable to prevent such
abuses, we must at the very least ensure that the
perpetrators and those who bear political responsibility
for violence against civilians are held accountable for
their actions. This is particularly the case in relation to
sexual and gender-based violence. We must renew our
commitment to ending impunity for such crimes.

Finally, I would like to touch briefly on the
principle of the responsibility to protect. We look
forward to receiving the Secretary-General's report on
the responsibility to protect in the coming days. We
expect the report to contribute to a shared conceptual
understanding of the principle that was agreed by our
leaders at the 2005 World Summit and to a shared
appreciation of what is required on the part of Member
States and the United Nations to implement the
principle.

While implementation of the responsibility to
protect requires action by a wide range of actors, the
World Summit Outcome and the Charter of the United
Nations give the Security Council a specific role to
play in its implementation. To prevent mass atrocity
crimes, the Council must ensure it uses the means at its
disposal in timely and innovative ways. To take
forward the Council's role, there is a need for it to be
more receptive to early warning information from a
wide range of sources, more willing to put country
situations in which people are at risk on its agenda, and
more prepared to take early action designed to address
the situation at hand. And Member States, of course,
need to support such Council action.

We trust that all Member States can agree on the
central premise that underlies this debate, namely, that
civilians deserve our protection. Australia remains
committed to working with partners in the international
community to ensure that this premise is realized.

