Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Madam President, I wish
to thank you for convening this debate. I also would
like to express my deep appreciation to Under-
Secretary-General John Holmes for his briefing, which
gives us an overarching picture of the challenges we
face in the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I
seize this opportunity to commend his tireless
commitment in defending the lives of civilian victims
of conflicts worldwide and wish him all the best in his
future endeavours. I also wish to thank High
Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay for her
contributions.

Italy fully associates itself with the statement
which will be delivered by the head of the European
Union delegation on behalf of the European Union, and
we also wish to make some further remarks.

I will start by focusing on some of the main
concerns in the field of the protection of civilians.

A number of persistent violators of human rights
and humanitarian law still go unpunished.
Accountability is therefore a central issue. The Council
must be ready to take action against those who
continuously undermine the credibility of its
commitment. The International Criminal Court (ICC)
has an important role to play as well. In this respect,
Italy welcomes the outcome of the recent Review
Conference in Kampala that further strengthened the
ICC's role.

We also share the concern about the lack of
progress in finding durable solutions to the situation of
internally displaced persons. A more comprehensive
approach is needed that looks at both the most urgent
and the long-term problems, such as land and property
issues, which are key in addressing the causes of
conflict.

As far as positive developments are concerned,
the appointment of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Armed
Conflict was certainly a crucial step in addressing what
is one of the most serious threats to the protection of
civilians. We strongly support the mandate of
Ms. Wallstrom, and we look forward to assisting her in
this challenging task.

We also welcome the recent briefing of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The protection of civilians, particularly those
belonging to the most vulnerable categories, must be
an integral part of the work of the Committee. We hope
that such briefings will gradually become a standard
practice.

Moreover, let me express our strong support for
the work undertaken by the informal expert group on
the protection of civilians. As a former member of the
Security Council, Italy has always advocated the
creation of such a forum. The group is indeed an
important platform for discussing and monitoring
humanitarian developments and for devising effective
strategies, with the contribution of all relevant actors. I
would like to stress here that prevention should be a
pillar of any strategy aimed at protecting civilians.
Indeed, a timely preventive strategy can save more
lives than any other action.

Finally, we welcome the engagement of the
General Assembly in the protection of civilians, as
proven by the increasing references to the issue in its
resolutions. We encourage and support this important
trend.

I wish to conclude by highlighting two issues.
First, as also by in resolution 1894 (2009), the
protection of civilians is not only a military task; it is a
more inclusive challenge. Every component of a
peacekeeping mission - military, police, civilian,
gender, human rights and child protection - must
contribute to achieving the protection goals. Whenever
a peacekeeping operation is in place, civilians expect
to be protected by United Nations forces. To ensure
effective protection, peacekeepers must be adequately
trained, which makes synergies with training centres a
must. The cooperation agreement signed by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Italian
Center of Excellence for Stability Police Units last
week is a significant step forward. We must continue to
pursue such a capacity-building approach.
Lastly, the protection of civilians must also
encompass the principle of the responsibility to protect.
This principle implies that with sovereignty come
special responsibilities. Governments must protect
their own populations, and the best way to guarantee
such protection is to promote human rights, the rule of
law and democratic governance. The responsibility to
protect should be seen as an instrument available to the
international community to overcome crises, provided
that the conditions referred to in paragraphs 138 and
139 of the Summit Outcome Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) are met. In this perspective,
10-43853
Italy looks forward to the upcoming informal
interactive dialogue of the General Assembly on early
warning, assessment and the responsibility to protect
with a view to further implementing the concept.

