Ms. Landgren: It is a please to address the Security
Council on behalf of Security Council Report (SCR).
SCR acknowledges the dedicated work of Kuwait, now
in its second year under Ambassador Alotaibi as the
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, and the intense
commitment of the Working Group's members.

Small Changes can be potent. The Council has
steadily, if slowly, improved aspects of its working
methods. In 2007, Slovakia - then Chair ofthe Informal
Working Group - proposed to hold an open debate on
Council working methods. It was too controversial to
implement. Now, the open debate on this item is an
annual event.

Security Council Report is an independent think
tank, reporting on the work of the Council in the
interests of Council transparency, accountability
and effectiveness. SCR has published four research
reports on Council working methods. Our work is
made possible through our good working relationships
with, among others, Security Council members, other
Member States and United Nations colleagues across
the system. I thank them all.

Today's acute challenges include declining trust
worldwide in multilateral institutions and the Council's
persistent failure to prevent or respond adequately
to several serious conflicts. I will look at working
methods in this context, through three sets of actions:
the strengthened role of elected Council members,
deepening the Council's engagement with the wider
membership, and measures to enhance the Council's
mandating of peace operations and preventive actions.

Since the adoption of the most recent note 507
(S/2017/507), in 2017, stellar work has been done to
enhance the readiness of incoming Council members,
which can now observe Council meetings from October
onwards and which often start preparing early, drawing
on a range of capacity-building support, including from
my own organization.

The elected members (E-10), have found common
ground on several working methods. In late 2018, for
the first time, the E-10 joined with the incoming five to
write to the Council presidency seeking greater burden-
sharing among all members in chairing the Council's
subsidiary bodies. Until now, that task has gone
primarily to the elected members. The Council, they
argued, should also make better use of the expertise
of the chairs of specific sanctions committees - these
chairs being an obvious choice as co-penholders on
the related issues. Since January, an elected member
is co-penholder on Darfur; additionally, the elected
member chairing the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya is a
co-penholder for sanctions issues on Libya. These are
modest changes, but a step towards more equitable
distribution of work and towards a more participatory
process around addressing country situations on the
Council's agenda.

Process affects outcomes, and as far back as
2005, leaders at the World Summit recommended that
the Security Council continue to adapt its working
methods so as to increase the involvement in its work of
States not members of the Council. That was linked to
the Council's accountability to the wider membership
and to the transparency of its work. Wider Member
State engagement in the Council's work could include
more interaction around the annual report that the
Security Council submits for the General Assembly's
consideration. It is due in the spring; this timing is
optimal for an engaged and well-prepared debate. This
year, and in the past two years, summer has arrived
with no report. And yet, the discussion of the annual
report is a primary format through which the wider
membership can underline its views and expectations
of the Security Council. Perhaps this reporting process
can be elevated. One suggestion has been that the
Secretary-General take part.

Other ways for Member State engagement to
reinforce Council accountability would be more
analytical and interactive monthly Council presidency
wrap-up sessions. As well, Member States with a
particular interest in a given situation - which may
already participate in public discussions under Article 31
of the Charter of the United Nations - could be invited
to meet with the Council in a more private setting, such
as the informal interactive dialogue format.

The tools are available. And meanwhile, in a
further form of Member State engagement, regional
organizations continue to develop their relationship
with the Council, refining their efforts to feed in
concerted perspectives.

Turning to initiatives for strengthening the
Council's role in preventing deadly conflict and in
peacekeeping, the Council has used visiting missions
to good effect, including to countries not on its
agenda - most recently, Burkina Faso. Field visits are
valuable; members come away with a different sense
of local dynamics, of how mandates are implemented
in practice, and of the work of the United Nations
country team, which is deeply involved in addressing
development- and governance-related causes of conflict,
but whose members rarely interact with the Security
Council. These visits have occasionally been used with
a preventive intent. Field visits are also phenomenally
expensive, and they are rarely coordinated with field
travel undertaken by the Council's subsidiary bodies,
including the Peacebuilding Commission. Active
coordination and the revived use of mini-missions
could give such trips greater strategic impact, while
reducing overall costs.

Still on prevention, while Arria Formula meetings
cannot substitute for formal Council meetings, used
strategically they can frame debate and even generate
political initiatives on fragile situations and issues that
the Council finds itself unable to discuss. Wherever
possible, the Council should strengthen informal
formats that allow for conflict prevention discussions.

It is widely acknowledged that mandate
consultations do not always focus on political strategy,
even though political strategy should drive the design
of peace operations. Better mandating engages several
working methods, of which the most important are
keeping discussions interactive, direct, operational
and focused on political strategy. Members will find
additional practical proposals in SCR's recent report,
"Is Christmas Really Over? Improving the Mandating
of Peace Operations".

Finally, as a former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, let me say how valuable it is to have
a resolution with meaningful language and the entire
Council lined up behind it. In 2018, however, four
missions had their mandates adopted non-unanimously;
this year, the tally already stands at three.

A great deal can be achieved through adaptation
of the Council's working methods. In these testing
times, the challenge is to use the tools creatively and
flexibly, contributing to a culture where better and
more consultative decisions can be taken.

