Mr. De Mistura: It is now five months since the
adoption of resolution 1770 (2007), which has
provided the basis for broader United Nations
engagement in today's Iraq. Many have,
understandably, been anxious to see how the United
Nations itself has advanced in its implementation.

The mandate accorded under resolution 1770
(2007) provides considerable scope for the
Organization to play an effective role in the country.
The challenge is doing that. I arrived in Baghdad on
11 November 2007. Since then, I have been reviewing
every aspect of the Mission's work to identify, together
with the Government of Iraq, priority areas where we
could intensify our efforts and produce concrete
solutions, national reconciliation being both the
guiding principle and the end goal of our job.

The first report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/608) on resolution 1770 (2007) gave an
indication of United Nations preparations to assume an
enlarged role. The report that I am here today to
introduce on behalf of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/19) provides an account of the more results-
oriented activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The time to talk is over; it
is time to act. I will simply share with the Council the
broad strategic outlook that has framed the Mission's
programme of action, from our initial steps well into a
six-month forecast.

UNAMI's modus operandi has been to monitor
emerging trends and to propose carefully chosen and
time-sensitive initiatives, especially in the areas that
have attracted some urgency, either jump-starting
processes or galvanizing existing ones. In doing so, we
have aimed to be both pragmatic and operational. The
resolution is a lengthy one; we have to hand-pick
where we can have an impact and add value every
time.

Primary areas of attention have ranged from
resolving disputed internal boundaries - a subject on
which I will touch - assisting returnees and entering
the debate on the timeliness and preconditions for
08-21255
provincial elections. That is in parallel to maintaining
sustained focus on Iraq's international partnership
under the Compact and advancing regional dialogue,
which remains a crucial priority.

Let me start by saying that United Nations
activities in Iraq did not begin with resolution 1770
(2007). The United Nations is not a new player, but
resolution 1770 (2007) is simply a new resolution, and
for us a new challenge. The United Nations has a new
and enlarged team in place, which we intend to
increase, in both quality and quantity. The new team
will give UNAMI, security permitting, always the
opportunity to be helpful at the request of the
Government of Iraq at this crucial moment in time.

I am looking at the Ambassador of Iraq when I
say that, because we mean it. Everything we do must
indeed be for the empowerment of Iraqis, must be
decided on by and/or in consultation with them and
must be aimed at enabling them to exercise their full
sovereignty, which is the word for this year, and to
assume accountability, which is the second word for
this year. Iraqis set the agenda; the United Nations and
every country that wants to help them helps to drive
it - sometimes by pushing it. But the Iraqis are in the
frontlines.

The nature of the main challenges in Iraq is
largely unchanged. The political and security terrain
certainly remains complex and, prima facie, sometimes
quite daunting. The risks and challenges are not lost on
us; we have gone through them with many of our
colleagues in the past. We are neither immune nor
oblivious. But if ever there was a time for it, 2008 is
the time to be proactive, the time when positive
momentum must be gained.

We cannot ignore the recent improvements, in
both the security and political situations in Iraq. The
notable decline in hostile activities can be credited to
the cumulative effect of increased deployment of
troops from the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I),
the ceasefire declared by Moqtada al-Sadr - which we
hope will be reconfirmed and which we will all work
for - the role of the "Awakening Councils" and
increased cooperation with neighbours on security-
related issues. Let me also add to that Iraqi fatigue. The
fact that many Iraqis are tired of seeing that violence
has led nowhere is also helping the situation.

The prevailing mood at the end of 2007 was that
political advances were not adequate to match and
08-21255

sustain the security gains. We were all feeling a little
bit worried, and sometimes frustrated. Indeed, absent a
political consensus on the most foundational elements
of the Iraqi State, we will achieve no lasting solution
on security. We must move on the political front.

However, in all fairness, recent weeks have
witnessed some tentative and long overdue, but
certainly welcome and very concrete, steps towards
national reconciliation and inclusive political dialogue.
In that connection, I refer primarily to the adoption of
the Justice and Accountability Law, on 12 January.
Mabrouk for that. That is coupled with encouraging
signals of increased dialogue between the Government
and the Sunni Arab bloc and the latter's indications that
a return to the national unity Government is not at all
unlikely. We need to work on that. The Government
must be complimented on enhancing such legislation -
which is why Ijust used the word mabrouk - which is
central to reconciliation efforts, as well as for
intensifying its outreach efforts.

The Secretary-General and the international
community have spoken many times of a window of
opportunity, and 2008 is that window. Clearly, the
Government is also signalling that it recognizes 2008
as the year to demonstrate its ability to administer a
State that enjoys the broadest support and can deliver
basic services - which is the challenge we all face at
the moment - and security guarantees, all the while
supported by credible and independent institutions.
When security improves, the first thing people do, as
we all do in life, is to start to ask for services, because
security is not as much of a worry as it was. That is
why essential services are so crucial this year.

But much is also predicated on intensifying the
pace of enacting other crucial legislation, including the
amnesty law, which is just today being discussed, and
the revenue-sharing and provincial elections laws.
Those are crucial laws that need to come forward, like
the one we just saw adopted on 12 January.

The Government of Iraq cannot be left alone to
tackle the structural, political and security challenges.
We know that. It therefore requires the commitment of
the United Nations, the assistance of the international
community and the constructive re-engagement of its
neighbours.

What can the United Nations offer at this time?
Will the United Nations value its ability to talk to all
sides? We can and we do, and we are in a position to be
3
able to talk to anyone, both formally and informally.
The only people we would never talk to is Al-Qaida,
because they have killed our people and continue to
kill everyone. The United Nations values its ability to
talk to all sides, both formally and informally, all the
while safeguarding its impartiality. It can facilitate
solutions requiring mutual concessions by offering
credibility and international legitimacy in turn. It can
also offer technical assistance to build up the capacity
of national institutions, and it can assist the various
ministries in delivering the basic functions of
governance.

How has the United Nations translated that
commitment into some kind of immediate action? The
first way relates to disputed internal boundaries. I
single out that issue because it has been the most
encouraging demonstration that Iraqi authorities are
willing to work together to resolve even the most
divisive of issues in the spirit of national dialogue. As
the Council recalls, the deadline for a referendum,
according to article 140 of the constitution, was
approaching in December - 31 December was right
around the corner - and preconditions had not been
met. The executive authorities and other players acted
in their common vested interest - proving that that
was possible - to prevent any further destabilization
of an already highly precarious situation. The United
Nations facilitated that and was ultimately invited to
provide technical assistance to the parties concerned in
reaching a peaceful, constructive solution to the
question of some of the disputed internal boundaries,
not only in Kirkuk, but elsewhere, especially in the
north.

That request for our involvement in initiating a
dispute resolution process within six months dovetails
with our mandate under resolution 1770 (2007), which
asks us to do exactly that, among other things. It is also
in line with the firm directive by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon to myself and my team to be proactive
and to have proactive engagement in areas that could
yield action-oriented results. Therefore, UNAMI has
committed to taking an integrated approach, working
on technical assistance packages that do not focus
solely on boundary delineation but ensure protection of
minority rights, complemented by confidence-building
measures. I would certainly be glad to report further to
the Council about the techniques and approaches that
we are planning in order to ensure that the article 140
issue goes forward.
The second area concerns returnees. Without
advocating the mass return of refugees, the United
Nations has stood ready to assist those who have
chosen to return to their places of origin, while
monitoring the conditions of those who are most
vulnerable. Some returnees are more vulnerable than
others, and they deserve our priority efforts. Since the
launching on 4 December of the joint Government-
UNAMI plan for refugees, to which the United Nations
committed $11.4 million, the International
Organization for Migration has already delivered the
first response package to 3,000 of the 5,000 families
that we identified as the most vulnerable. In the
meantime, 600 families are undergoing detailed
monitoring pending an assessment, because we need to
discover why they are returning, where they are going
and what conditions face them when they return. Thus,
we can be better prepared, together with the
Government, to be of more assistance if they decide to
come.

The consolidated appeal Process - with a goal of
approximately $200 million - which, inshallah, will
be launched on 16 February, will aim to cover the gaps
in the most pressing unmet needs not only of refugees,
but also IDPs, while shifting the debate to the broader
issue of vulnerability. Let us not forget that the
problem of refugees and IDPs remains quite large; we
are talking about a total of 4.2 million people. It is
quite a challenge, not only for the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
United Nations agencies that are providing assistance
alongside us within Iraq, but also for the host
countries, which are facing a substantial burden thanks
to their own generous hospitality.

Another area relates to cholera. The immediate
threat of a cholera outbreak has been tackled and the
cases contained, especially in the north. But with
warmer weather ahead, we remain quite worried about
potential new outbreaks, particularly in Baghdad and
southern cities. Therefore, we are proactively focusing
on putting in place mitigating and preventive measures.
The United Nations is making use of the funds of the
World Health Organization, UNICEF and the
International Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq
(IRFFI), totalling $4.5 million, to develop and monitor
the surveillance mechanism. We have also been
actively lobbying the Government to approve
$40 million to assist the Ministry of Health in facing
08-21255
such emergencies - which the Iraqis do not need to
face in addition to the ones that already confront them.

I now turn to economic reconstruction. A year
into Iraq's partnership with the international
community, on the basis of a shared commitment to a
joint national development strategy, all of us are now
called to assess how the Government has delivered on
its commitment to a range of reform measures,
particularly in the economic field, and how the
international community - our side - has been
honouring its own pledges, including for Iraq's debt
relief.

The remaining IRFFI funds, totalling
$222 million - which is still quite a significant
amount - will be dedicated to supporting Compact
projects. So we speak the same language and focus on
the same area, placing greater emphasis on
Government ownership and the principle of co-
financing. That is another key word for 2008, "co-
financing". Iraq is a rich country, and it needs to
assume ownership of its own projects when the
international community gets involved. The only way
to do that is through co-financing, which will increase
the impact and the efficiency of our projects.

With regard to regional dialogue, Iraq's
immediate neighbours have demonstrated their
readiness for constructive engagement, especially on
border security issues. We need to capitalize on the
initial steps. The Secretary-General has encouraged the
neighbours to play a supportive role and to use the
Baghdad-based ad hoc support mechanism, agreed
upon in Istanbul, and to build on the progress made by
the working groups. We are also working on that; we
have been sending the terms of reference to all the
partners and are waiting to discuss with the
Government how can we can assist the ad hoc support
mechanism even more effectively, perhaps by focusing
the next meeting, to be held in Kuwait, on something
very concrete in terms of follow-up, such as the issue
of refugees and IDPs, which is affecting both Iraq and
its neighbours.

How, then, are we planning to further
operationalize the delivery of our assistance? The
Secretary-General is determined to ensure that the
work of all parts of the United Nations system is
closely coordinated with that of the Government of
Iraq. But in order to be able to identify emerging needs
and to respond in a timely fashion in order to meet

them, the United Nations requires an increased
presence - to which we are committed - as well as
an ear on the ground and outreach to the communities.

While the proposal concerning a UNAMI
integrated compound is under review in the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
and the Fifth Committee, UNAMI is now pre-
positioned for an enhanced qualitative and quantitative
presence in Iraq. We will come up with a new proposal
on a UNAMI integrated compound so that we can
proceed swiftly with that. Plans to expand the role of
the Erbil Area Office have been set in motion; we need
a formal launching in order to produce the needed
momentum among ourselves. Improvements to sustain
the UNAMI compound have been initiated both in
Erbil and in Baghdad while we are waiting for the
integrated headquarters, so as not to delay more teams
and more colleagues. In addition, national governorate
liaison officers will be deployed in nine governorates,
so that we can be more in touch with the people of
Iraq. Following the completion of one of our own
security assessments, two personnel of the United
Nations Development Programme are now deployed in
Basra, where the United Nations hopes to maintain a
small but proactive presence while monitoring security
developments there. Last but not least, we are just now
sending a preliminary mission to Kirkuk to explore
options that will enable us to be present and proactive
there, in View of our commitments regarding the
follow-up to article 140.

Of course, much is predicated on the security
situation. But we are most thankful to those Member
States that have answered the call for replenishment of
the Trust Fund to Support the Distinct Entity Created to
Provide Security for the United Nations Presence in
Iraq, which has been helping us to make sure that we
can remain there in a secure environment.

What comes next? UNAMI will pursue its core
mandate activities, which are not just those I
mentioned, but also all the others that are still there.
We will be alert for other openings that require timely
action, priority adjustment and - if I may say so, as it
is not very bureaucratic terminology - an out-of-the-
box approach in order to find solutions in Iraq.
Electoral assistance remains, the constitutional review
process is in the forefront of our activities, and they are
linked to many of the things we are already doing and
want to do. We will be called to determine the
timeliness of countrywide provincial elections, on
which we are working, and the delicate sequencing
with other politically sensitive initiatives. We will also
continue, carefully but effectively, to monitor the
human rights situation in the country, which is
provided for under resolution 1770 (2007). By the way,
the next human rights report, covering the period
1 July-31 December, will be issued from Baghdad in
the coming weeks.

In conclusion, our operating assumptions have
broadly not changed, but the way we are implementing
them has changed. We are committed to being fast and
pragmatic. We should recognize the areas of
improvement and marked progress and we should show
flexibility in adjusting current and potential priority
areas, keeping our proposed structure under constant
review, as dictated by the environment. That, of course,
presupposes the broadest possible buy-in from the
primary stakeholders, as represented in the Security
Council, and the confidence and commitment of the
international community, which I hope we will be
receiving today.

We should remain sensitive and attuned to the
needs on the ground and the shifting of debates. We
should manage expectations and not be over-optimistic,
but at the same time maintain a dose of realism,
pragmatism and operationality. We are not unaware of
the risks and we do not underestimate the challenges,
but we believe, and I believe personally, that including
those who are critical, and sometimes even resentful,
over what they perceive to be the United Nations past
record in Iraq are ready for and welcoming to an
energetic, centre-stage role for the United Nations. We
are ready for that challenge.

If I may summarize a few points, there have been
four positive developments. The first is the security
surge. We have noticed that it has produced effects,
including a 60 per cent reduction of violence, and in
spite of what has happened in Basra - where, by the
way, the Iraqi police managed to control the situation,
which involved 2.5 million pilgrims, so the situation
would have been a challenge for any country in the
world. Secondly, there is an economic surge. The
International Monetary Fund has told us that there will
be a 7 per cent increase every year for the next two
years, and 200,000 barrels-worth of sustained new oil
income. We are seeing it with our own eyes in the
streets of Baghdad; we are seeing it in the eyes of the
people when they open new shops. Thirdly, there has
been an initial timid but crucial political surge with the
law of 12 January. Fourthly, if I may say so, there is
also a United Nations surge as we seek to be much
more effective in areas of crisis and wherever we can
be.

There are, however, two major concerns as well.
The first is that all this needs to be sustained, and it can
be sustained only by political dialogue. Hence, the
urgent need for the other laws that we referred to;
hence, the urgent need for an inclusive involvement of
others in the Government; hence, the need to make sure
that increased income will percolate to the Iraqis
through a sense of everyone benefiting from the social
services they want to have at last.

The second concern is that time is short. 2008 is
an important year. The problem with 2008 is that it is
made up of 12 months, like every year. We have not
much time and the pressure is on the Iraqis. We are
with them and will be with them, but they are in the
lead.

