Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me, at the outset,
to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
this month. I wish you good luck and all the success in
your endeavours. I also thank you for your kind words.

Allow me now to refer to the topic of today's
discussion. Let me express our appreciation for
Kuwait's transparency in conducting the negotiations
on this draft resolution. We would like to thank the
Kuwaiti Ambassador and our colleagues from the
Kuwaiti delegation for their tremendous efforts to
accommodate all comments made by the members of
the Security Council. While recognizing those efforts,
we were unfortunately not in a position to support the
text, as we would have preferred a more balanced result.

We stress that it is the responsibility of Hamas,
Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other militant groups
in Gaza to ensure that no protests are used to inspire
violence. All acts of violence against civilians,
including terrorist rocket attacks, acts of terror and
all acts of provocation, incitement and destruction, are
unacceptable and must stop.

At the same time, while we recognize Israel's right
to protect its border and defend its civilian population,
we call on Israel to respect the rights of Palestinian
civilians to peaceful protests and to the principle of
proportionality in the use of force when defending its
legitimate security interests. We call for respect for
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, particularly with regard to the prohibition
of the deliberate targeting of civilians and other
protected persons in situations of armed conflict. All
actors must comply strictly with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
We call for an end to all actions that make a resumption
of negotiations more difficult and reiterate our call for a
comprehensive peace between Israelis and Palestinians
based on a political settlement and bilateral dialogue
leading to a two-State solution.

Finally, let me reiterate what I have already said
in the Chamber: there is no justification under any
circumstances for deliberate acts of violence against the
civilian population, and both Israelis and Palestinians
have the right to live in peace and safety.

