Mr. Eitel (Germany): Let me belatedly take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and at the same time
to express my appreciation for the outstanding performance
of your predecessor, Ambassador Mahugu of Kenya.

I would also like to affirm that Germany fully
supports the comments made by the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, Sir John Weston, on
behalf of the European Union.

The Security Council is today examining two separate
operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina: the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and the
Stabilization Force (SFOR). Each one is led by a different
organization: the United Nations on the one hand and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on the other.
There can be no question, however, that they are
intrinsically linked, that one cannot exist without the other.
UNMIBH still depends on the military protection and the
ability to create a secure environment provided by SFOR's
presence on the ground. UNMIBH, and in particular the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), together with the
High Representative and his Office, provide the civilian
mechanism without which sustainable peace could not be
established in that war-torn country.

Regardless of all the progress in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the preconditions for durable and sustainable
peace have not yet been firmly put into place. Among the
remarkable positive developments, perhaps the most
important has been the commitment of an elected
Government in the Republika Srpska to the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. On the
other hand, there have been very worrisome incidents
caused by elements in Bosnia which wish to maintain
ethnic segregation as the result of earlier "ethnic
cleansing". Germany looks in particular to the leadership
of the Bosnian Croats and to those who can influence
them to curb efforts to render impossible the return of
refugees and displaced persons. Let me add that Germany,
which bears a heavy burden in providing for hundreds of
thousands of refugees from the former Yugoslavia on its
territory, takes a specific interest in the issue of refugee
return. Also, in too many cases, the High Representative
has had to do the job of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities by imposing decisions they were unable to
make.

A considerable number of indicted war criminals
have either surrendered to the International Tribunal or
been arrested. Only a few hours ago, German and French
SFOR troops arrested another indicted person in south-
east Bosnia. Still, however, the work of the Tribunal is
hampered by incomplete cooperation with the Tribunal.
The "champions" of ethnic violence, Radovan Karadzic
and Ratko Mladic, are still at large. In Germany's View,
durable reconciliation will not be possible without
essential justice being done.

Germany considers it one of the important
achievements of the last months that NATO has decided
not to fix an end date to its engagement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We agree that it is preferable for NATO to
look at the actual situation on the ground and to be able
to react flexibly in the framework of an overall strategy
of transition towards sustainable peace without outside
assistance. Still, it is proper that the Security Council,
following its practice, authorize SFOR for a definite
period of 12 months, with a View to further extending the
authorization in the light of the situation. SFOR has
further fine-tuned its abilities to the demands of the
changed situation by creating specially trained and
equipped multinational units to work in the field of public
security.

IPTF, on its side, has taken similar action by
assigning special task forces to areas such as corruption,
drug smuggling and tax evasion. In close and fruitful
cooperation with the High Representative, IPTF has
achieved great advances both in restructuring and training
the local police and in maintaining freedom of movement
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. As acknowledged in
the annex to the Dayton Agreement relating to the IPTF,

 

however, reform and restructuring of the local police will
remain ineffective if not accompanied by similar efforts
regarding the judiciary system. In this context, the High
Representative has pointed out that the IPTF is best
equipped to monitor criminal courts in Bosnia. The Security
Council will urgently have to find a pragmatic solution
which enables IPTF to begin this task, setting aside
theological or budgetary disputes. It is our historic
responsibility to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
remain fully focused on the goal of lasting peace in that
country which has suffered so much. It is our responsibility
to taxpayers at home to make the international effort in
Bosnia a truly coherent and therefore successful one, and
not to be diverted by secondary questions regarding the
philosophy of United Nations peacekeeping in general.

Let me end by expressing my country's deep
appreciation for the work of both the leaders and the
members of UNMIBH, SFOR and the Office of the High
Representative. Almost exactly a year ago, a tragic
helicopter accident took the lives of high-ranking members
of the Office of the High Representative and of IPTF,
among them well-known German colleagues and friends of
mine. All those who commit themselves to the goal of
stable peace and reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
should know that their joint work is highly valued.

