Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste, and thanks him for
his comprehensive and frank briefing on the situation
in his country. I also wish to thank Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste, for the important work he has
accomplished as head of the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). In addition, we welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/251), which
contains recommendations and options with regard to
how the United Nations could assist Timor-Leste after
UNOTIL's mandate expires, on 20 May 2006.

First, Peru wishes to express its support for the
Government of Timor-Leste in the search for ways to
ensure a viable State and a sustainable democracy. I
wish to stress the progress that Timor-Leste has made
in recent years in strengthening democracy, the rule of
law and respect for human rights in demarcating the
land border with Indonesia and in reaching agreement
with Australia on sharing maritime natural resources.

However, despite that progress, there are still few
prospects for the economic viability of Timor-Leste.
Four years after its independence, it remains one of the
least developed countries in the world, with high rates
of poverty and extreme poverty - a country where the
annual per capita income is $370 and declining, half
the population has no potable water, child mortality is
high and life expectancy is only 55 years. That
information is detailed in the 2006 national human
development report published in Dili two months ago
by the Government of Timor-Leste and the United
Nations Development Programme.

With those economic and social indicators, it
comes as no surprise that there is no political stability
in Timor-Leste. That is why we regret the incidents
that occurred last week. This morning, international
news media reported that Dili's population continues to
fear a repetition of the violence.

For those reasons, Peru believes that Timor-Leste
needs a compact whereby the United Nations, the
friends of Timor-Leste and the international
community would provide resources to ensure the
country's stability. For such a compact, it is important
that the Government of Timor-Leste prepare a realistic
development plan that would establish a system for
distributing the income that could come from future
petroleum and gas resources in order to fight poverty
through programmes and plans covering areas
including, in particular, the health, education and
agricultural development sectors. The Government
must ensure that wealth is managed in such a way that
the general population is the beneficiary. In that
connection, we welcome the fact that last year, the
Parliament approved the creation of a petroleum fund
as a single account in which all income derived from
petroleum sales is to be deposited - income allocated
for the country's development. That is major progress,
and we support it.

Before concluding, and in the light of what was
indicated earlier, my delegation wishes to state that it
supports the Secretary-General's recommendations, in
particular regarding the establishment of a small
integrated United Nations office, for a 12-month period
beginning on 21 May 2006, comprising civilian, police
and military elements. That office would be mandated
to help the Government of Timor-Leste, inter alia,
organize the 2007 presidential and parliamentary
elections, assist the leadership of the national police in
planning for election-related security and continue
promoting the capacity of State and governmental
institutions and of national human rights protection
mechanisms.

We believe those last two elements to be of
particular importance, bearing in mind that although
Timor-Leste has made progress in establishing basic
public administration institutions, the majority of those
institutions lack trained staff. Moreover, strengthening
the capacities of national mechanisms to protect human
rights and to promote justice and reconciliation will be
crucial in the work of implementing the
recommendations of the Commission for Truth - in
particular regarding the acknowledgement of victims
and the denial of impunity to those responsible for
human rights violations. That would enable citizens to
be in a better position to reconcile and integrate into a
democratic and stable society.

