Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): We thank
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing,
and we welcome Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta. We
look forward to hearing what he has to say to the
Council.

The Irish Presidency will later in this debate be
making a statement on behalf of the European Union to
which the United Kingdom fully subscribes.

We join others in paying tribute to the progress
achieved in Timor-Leste over the past two years. It is a
testament to the spirit and determination of the
Timorese people. We wish also to acknowledge the
contribution that the United Nations has made under
the able leadership of Kamalesh Sharma.

It is clear already from statements this morning
that all agree with Under-Secretary-General Guehenno
not only that there has been remarkable progress but
also that further international assistance to Timor-Leste
remains essential. The United Kingdom wishes to
support the clear emerging consensus that the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
should be extended for one further year, in a reduced
and modified form, in a consolidation phase.

As others have also said, however, much remains
to be done. There is clear continuing work for
UNMISET, and there are also areas where we would
like to see the Timorese make further progress, for
example, by passing the Civil Service Act, by
establishing the Office of the Provedor for Human
Rights and Justice, by making a commitment to rooting
out corruption, and by giving greater urgency and
commitment to the creation of an appropriate
investment culture.

We are concerned, too, about the poor relations
between the Timorese police and defence forces and
would urge the Timorese Government to address this as
a matter of urgency. We encourage the Government to
pass police and defence bills and clearly to delineate
the roles of the police and defence forces.

We share the Secretary-General's concern about
the overall weakness of the Timorese police and
defence forces, and we remain committed to working,
both bilaterally and through the United Nations, to
assist the Government of Timor-Leste in strengthening
those institutions. We particularly welcome the
establishment of the independent inquiry into the
incident in Los Palos and hope this will be transparent
and impartial.

On the police side, the United Kingdom has been
working with Australia and the Timorese Government
on a programme for training and assistance to the
police. In that context, we would like to request the
Secretariat to coordinate plans for policing assistance
now rather than reviewing the question in December, in
order to determine appropriate numbers of police
advisers and to avoid any possible duplication.

Like other speakers, we are pleased at progress in
establishing good relations with Indonesia and at the
transformation of Timor-Leste's external threat
environment. We urge Timor-Leste and Indonesia to
reach early agreement on their land border and
encourage both countries to continue to work together
to resolve the question of the resettlement of former
refugees and the outstanding cases of Timorese
children separated from their families.

We agree with others who have spoken previously
that we should not jeopardize the successful investment
which the international community has made in Timor-
Leste, and we look forward to further discussion of the
Secretary-General's recommendations for a United
Nations presence beyond May 2004. We recognize that
there are remaining security concerns and concerns
about the preparedness of the police to deal with
security incidents. We therefore believe that the follow-
on mission should include a security element with a
focus on policing. We continue to support a police
back-up model along the lines proposed by Australia.

