Ms. Jahan (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
complimenting the leadership of Libya in stewarding
the Council's deliberations during the current month. I
would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
initiative to organize this open debate on peace and
security in Africa pursuant to the landmark resolution
1809 (2008).

We commend the African Union-United Nations
panel, in particular Chairperson Romano Prodi, for
presenting to the Council the report on modalities for
support to African Union (AU) peacekeeping
operations (S/2008/813), now before the Council. The
report has raised some interesting ideas and points that
we believe need further exploration, both by the
Council and the General Assembly.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Cuba, which
currently holds the Chair of the Coordinating Bureau
of the Non-Aligned Movement. However, we would
like to highlight some issues and to add a few points.

Bangladesh welcomes the complementary role
played by regional organizations in United Nations-
mandated peacekeeping operations. Their role,
however, must not be seen as a substitute for that of the
United Nations in maintaining peace in conflict areas.
United Nations peacekeeping forces must maintain a
true international character to uphold the
Organization's universality, impartiality and neutrality.

We are pleased to note that cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU has grown over recent
years. The partnership in the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur is a
case in point. Notwithstanding the need for enhanced
cooperation and partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations, Bangladesh
supports the recommendation contained in the panel's

report - which was further subscribed to by the
Non-Aligned Movement in a statement made earlier
today - that, in defining the division of

responsibilities, it is imperative to avoid creating the
perception that the United Nations is subcontracting
peacekeeping to the African Union. The prime
objective of this strategic partnership should be to
maximize the African Union's strengths in terms of its
contribution to conflict prevention and mediation and
its capacity to undertake peacekeeping operations in
conformity with Chapter VIII of the Charter.

The African Union must be provided with the
necessary support in developing its institutional
capacities, thus enabling it to implement its mandate in
a coordinated and appropriate manner, including in
areas of building integral capacities to plan, manage
and support both conflict prevention and peacekeeping
activities in Africa in close cooperation with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

As a leading troop-contributing country,
Bangladesh attaches utmost importance to the safety
and security of troops in the field. We welcome the
various steps taken by the Secretariat. However, more
actions are needed for better safety and security of
peacekeepers. In this context, Bangladesh would like to
stress upon the deployment forces should be
commensurate with the mandate and the situation on
the ground in a particular mission. Moreover,
contingents should only be tasked to cover areas of
responsibility that lie within their capabilities and
agreed mandates based on memorandums of
understanding.

Bangladesh recognizes United Nations
peacekeeping to be an indispensable and cost effective
tool in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Based on this principle, we support United
Nations peacekeeping operations and we have full
commitment to them. Bangladesh had been providing
approximately 10 per cent of the total troops for
peacekeeping for more than a decade. Besides,
currently, we are the largest contributor of police
personnel in United Nations peacekeeping. These
statistics are a true manifestation of our commitment
and contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

My delegation will maintain this commitment,
and we will continue to coordinate our collective peace
and security efforts under the auspices of the United
Nations. In this vein, we shall continue to support the
Security Council in fulfilling its Charter mandated
responsibilities in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

