Mr. Levitte (France)(spoke in French): The
members of the Council have before them the report of
the third Security Council mission to the Great Lakes
region. I believe that we may be able to use this
meeting to reflect on the significance of our mission.
In 10 days we met with 8 heads of State, the
leaders of several rebel movements - Congolese and
Burundian - many leaders of political parties and
representatives of civil society. We conducted this new
mission at the request of the parties themselves, in a
spirit of real partnership between the Security Council
and the parties to two African Agreements - the
Lusaka Agreement and the Arusha Agreement - to
achieve peace in the Great Lakes region and security
for all the countries ofthe region, and primarily for the
future of the peoples concerned - the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the people of
Burundi.

Let us recall that between 2 and 3 million people
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo itself have
fallen victim, directly or indirectly, to the war in the
Great Lakes region, a conflict that has lasted for more
than three years. There have also been mass violations
of human rights, a disastrous humanitarian situation
and the plundering of resources. What struck us in
hearing the representatives of civil society everywhere
was their unanimous message regarding the withdrawal
of all foreign troops, the political and administrative
unity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of
Burundi and the need for a halt to the plundering of
natural resources, which must belong to the people of
the countries concerned.

This was our third mission in two years. It was an
opportunity to examine the ground covered in that
period to unravel the complicated aspects of this crisis.
The ceasefire in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is holding along the disengagement line, even though
there is fighting in the most eastern part of the country,
where there are many civilian victims.

Secondly, the disengagement line is being fully
respected, even though there are still certain positions
to be corrected here and there. It is urgent that the
parties implement the commitments that they
themselves have made. Thirdly, the withdrawal of
foreign armed forces has been completed by Namibia.
Uganda and Angola are fully engaged in this process.
Zimbabwe has begun, and no withdrawal by Rwanda
has been confirmed by the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC).

Fourthly, the inter-Congolese dialogue has made
remarkable progress in Sun City, and we should pay
tribute to the facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire, to
President Thabo Mbeki and, above all, to the
Congolese participants themselves, who unanimously
adopted 37 texts, which constitute an excellent base for
a transition of two or three years towards democratic
elections.

The Government and the Mouvement pour la
liberation du Congo (MLC) concluded an agreement on
the political formula for this transition period. It was
signed by 80 per cent of the participants at Sun City,
but it has not been accepted by the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie-Goma (RCD-Goma),
which has created an alliance with a certain number of
political parties.

So, you can see that there is undeniable progress.
However, at the same time, there is still a long way to
go. Therefore, the objective of our mission was to
make some progress in the main areas of the peace
process.

Our first recommendation following this mission
is the absolute need strictly to respect the ceasefire.
Today, nothing can justify a violation of the ceasefire.
Those who might take the initiative of restarting the
fighting, must know that they would be condemned in
the severest terms by a unanimous Security Council.

Secondly, with respect to the inter-Congolese
dialogue, the Security Council wants an inclusive
agreement that leaves no one on the sidelines. We
believe that the negotiations that we got going again
among the three signatories of the Lusaka Agreement
during the meeting in Luanda must be followed by
further meetings, which must be held in a spirit of
openness and without preconditions.

It seems to us that that there really remains very
little to discuss in order to reach an agreement. It is a
question of finding the formula that will make it
possible during two or three years to govern the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and guide it
towards democratic elections. However, the little that
remains is still quite sensitive because it involves the
distribution of posts. That is why we recommend that
the dialogue be held in a spirit of discretion, which will
make it possible to bring the positions closer together. I
repeat, it must be done without preconditions and in a
spirit of openness. It is possible, and the parties must
make progress in this direction. The Security Council
will have to encourage anything that can help the
parties to come together. We will discuss this again in
our consultations at the end of the week.

Failing this, there is a risk that we would have to
envisage a partition for an undetermined period. One
thinks of Cyprus. I must say that there is a great
difference between Cyprus and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In Cyprus, the populations of
the two sides of the island do not wish to live together.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, quite to the
contrary, there is a unanimous will on the part of all the
Congolese to be united, which struck all members of
the Security Council. Nonetheless, there is a risk of a
division of the country into two antagonistic areas.
This is of concern to us because we are committed to
the search for peace and security for the Congo and its
region.

My third message relates to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of the combatants, the
former Forces armees rwandaises (ex-FAR) and the
Rwandan Interahamwe. We must be careful to fully
take into consideration the security concerns of
Rwanda. We noted with satisfaction the solemn
commitment made before the Security Council by
President Kabila, a commitment under which his
Government is not now helping and will not help the
ex-FAR and Interahamwe groups. The wish was
expressed that MONUC should verify that
commitment.

Likewise, President Kabila expressed to us his
determination to transfer to the Tribunal in Arusha
those guilty of genocide, appearing on the list of the
Tribunal and possibly residing on Congolese soil. I will
mention to members of the Council that I received a
telephone call from Adama Dieng, the Registrar of the
Tribunal, who received a letter from the Congolese
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. She Okitundu,
inviting him to return to Kinshasa in order to establish
cooperation on the ground with a view to transferring
those guilty of genocide that might be on Congolese
soil.

During our stay in Kinshasa, we destroyed 1000
weapons by fire. We want to see the process of the
voluntary disarmament of 1,800 Rwandan combatants
that began in Kamina be followed by their voluntary
repatriation as soon as possible.

Finally, MONUC, represented here by Mr.
Ngongi, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, is determined to undertake phase III of its
work with the deployment towards the east, which will
make it possible to come much closer to the ex-FAR
and Interahamwe groups in order to disarm them on a
voluntary basis and to repatriate them to Rwanda.

The fourth aspect of the situation is the
withdrawal of foreign forces from Congolese soil. That
withdrawal must be fully completed with reciprocal
movements as provided for in the Lusaka Agreement.
In order to take into account the security concerns of
three countries neighbouring the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Uganda, Burundi and Rwanda, the
Council put forward an idea that, it seems to us, is
likely to render service to the parties themselves: the
idea of a "curtain" of troops. I will reiterate the terms
of that idea as we presented them to our interlocutors.
In the framework of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
and as the last phase of the withdrawal of foreign
troops from the countries concerned, it would involve
the presence of troops from the neighbouring country
on Congolese soil, for a limited time period and over a
limited space, along the borders: for example, a curtain
of Rwandan troops on Congolese soil, along the border
with Rwanda. Those troops would, for a limited period
and over a limited area, be there to work with
Congolese troops and - why not, if the parties so
request? - with the contribution of MONUC observers
and possibly African contingents. This would be the
last stage before complete withdrawal. This would be
done to create a spirit of cooperation and trust between
neighbouring countries that are destined to live side by
side in a spirit of cooperation that would be gradually
built between them in order to ensure the security of
all.

That proposal was overall positively received by
the leaders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
first of all, but also by the three heads of State of the
countries concerned: President Museveni, President
Buyoya and President Kagame. Once again, let me say
that this is just an idea and that it is now up to the
parties themselves to work on it and to see whether
they want to follow up on it.

To conclude my comments on what Ambassador
Greenstock termed the triangle of these three
situations, let me say that our concern is to see to it that
the three sides of the triangle - the Government in
Kinshasa, the disarmament of the ex-FAR and
Interahamwe groups, and the withdrawal of the troops
- all are moving towards a global solution.

We can see that progress has been made, and we
must continue to work in that direction. That is the
thrust of our proposals.

These three aspects are interrelated. Let me give
an example: Rwanda tells us that its concern is security
- that security is its only concern. If it finds a
solution, we will withdraw all of our troops. Thus far,
Rwanda has adopted a strategy of advancing 600
kilometres within the Congo in order to resolve the
problem on its own. But Rwanda has acknowledged
that this strategy is not working, since it is asking us to
implement another strategy - that of the disarmament
of ex-FAR and Interahamwe groups. Therefore we
would express to Rwanda our conviction that, if a
government of national unity can be established in
Kinshasa, that will help Rwanda to resolve its problem,
because, as I have said, President Kabila has expressed
his determination to prevent the provision of any
assistance to the ex-FAR and the Interahamwe.

Mr. Jean-Pierre Bemba has expressed to us his
determination to resolve this problem once and for all,
and it goes without saying that the leaders of the RCD-
Goma have the same intention. Therefore the
establishment of a transitional government of national
unity in Kinshasa is, objectively speaking, a means of
helping Rwanda to deal with its security problem.

Secondly, MONUC will be able to act effectively
if it has in Kinshasa a government that represents the
unity of the Congo and that is determined to help
MONUC observers and contingents accomplish their
task of disarming the ex-FAR. Thus we can see that
there certainly is a link between the establishment of a
government of national unity in Kinshasa, the effective
disarmament of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe groups,
and the necessary withdrawal of all foreign troops from
the Congo.

We want to use that triangle to create the
dynamics of peace. I believe that this is the profound
meaning of our action, and that this is the very core of
what the Security Council wants to accomplish in the
service ofpeace in the Great Lakes region.

I might add that one thorny issue remains as far
as the Council is concerned: the question of Kisangani.
We went there, and I think that I can accurately convey
the aspirations of civil society in Kisangani. The
people of Kisangani want the withdrawal of all troops
that are present in the city and in its environs. They
want the complete demilitarization of the city, and they
want the reopening of the river to commercial traffic,
as announced, to become a reality. The agreement was
signed by the Kinshasa Government, the MLC and the
RCD-Goma. None of the parties must be able to
prevent the reopening of the river to commercial
traffic. MONUC must be able to assist in the
resumption of trade, as the lives of millions of
Congolese are at stake. The commitments undertaken
must be implemented: the speedy and complete
demilitarization of Kisangani and the reopening of the
river to commercial traffic.

The relaunching of the economy has begun.
During our stay, the Director-General of the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) was in Kinshasa,
and I want to welcome the presence in this Chamber of
representatives of the World Bank and of the IMF. It is
a good thing for us to be able to listen to each other and
understand each other, so that the efforts made on one
side can complement the efforts made on the other. The
relaunching ofthe economies must show the peoples of
the region that progress towards peace will bring with
it peace dividends.

We gave all the heads of State of the region a
non-paper expressing the views of the Council on an
idea that is not new - that of holding an international
conference in the Great Lakes region - in order to
show them that we envisaging prospects of cooperation
among neighbouring countries whose future is to work
together for peace, for mutual security, and for
integrated economic development.

In order to follow up on all of this, we suggest a
follow-up mechanism, the terms of which remain to be
specified. Since the Council has the useful habit of
visiting the region once a year, and since our partners
from the Political Committee in Lusaka also come here
to see us once a year, in the fall, then it seems to us that
it is necessary that on a day-by-day basis there also be
close follow-up. That is why the recommendation
contained in our report is being made.

These are my comments on the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

On the subject of Burundi, I think that I can be
quite brief. We met with all of the authorities of the
country, and we noted first of all that considerable
progress has been made since our visit last year.
Indeed, the transition has begun; it is a reality now. We
met with all ofthose involved.

Yet the peace process in Burundi also remains
fragile. There are three messages: first, the cessation of
hostilities. The two armed groups with which we met in
Pretoria - the Forces pour la defense de la democratic
(FDD) and Forces nationales pour la Liberation (FNL)
- must hear our message. Nothing can justify the
continuation of hostilities. The fighting must come to
an end. There is an urgent need for those movements to
go to the negotiating table.

A regional summit is being envisaged in a few
weeks. Our Council should maintain a intensive
dialogue with the leaders of Burundi and of the region
in order to achieve that necessary cessation of
hostilities, to which we all aspire.

Secondly, the implementation of reforms during
this transition period is indispensable - with or without
a ceasefire - within the limits ofthe military situation.
Specific reforms are provided for under the Arusha
Agreement. The Security Council is determined to see
that the authorities of the transition period, each one in
its sphere of competence - be it the presidency, the
Government or the two Assemblies - accomplish all of
the reforms that have been stipulated, insofar as
possible.

Lastly, and I say this in the presence of the
representatives of the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund, all of our Burundian interlocutors -
the leaders, the political parties and civil society -
have insisted strongly and with unity on the need for
urgent economic assistance. They all want the pledges
made at the Paris and Geneva conferences to be
fulfilled without delay. The Security Council supports
these requests, because it is aware of the link between
peace dividends and the success of the peace process.

If the population in Burundi sees that the
transition that has been established, and that may be
exemplary, does not lead to a cease-fire, or to reform,
or to economic progress, then we have reason to fear
the serious consequences of disillusion, the first
elements of which are already appearing.

A last conclusion and recommendation on
Burundi concerns the Arusha Agreement follow-up
committee, which has been repatriated from Arusha to
Bujumbura. The paradox of the present situation is that
last year there was a representative of the Secretary-
General, Jean Arnaud, permanently residing in
Bujumbura. Today, the committee has been repatriated
to Bujumbura, but there is no representative living in
Bujumbura. We know the specific reasons explaining
the current situation, but we recommend that the
Secretary-General find a solution in accordance with
the modalities that he decides to set forth.

In conclusion, there has been slow but undeniable
progress since the Council committed itself to the
Great Lakes region. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as in Burundi progress towards peace is well
under way, but the progress is still fragile. The peace
process in the two countries has not yet become
irreversible. The commitment of the international
community therefore must remain constant and strong.
The role of MONUC is in all areas positive. I want to
avail myself of this meeting to pay tribute to MONUC,
which, in difficult circumstances, is accomplishing
remarkable work. Our own commitment in the Security
Council must remain constant in a partnership with all
the countries of the region, be they the signatories of
the Lusaka Agreement or the countries of the regional
initiative on Burundi.
I would like to thank all Council members,
because I believe that what we have accomplished in
those 10 days was real teamwork. I would like to
express my gratitude to you for this.

