Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting and for Mr. Mark Lowcock's important
briefing.

Peru follows with deep concern the continuing
conflict and the serious humanitarian situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic. It is clear that in recent months
there have been developments on the ground and that
levels of violence have been reduced. It is also true that
millions of people are living in conditions of extreme
vulnerability.

We must deplore the persistence of violence in the
north-west of the country and its impact on the civilian
population, with new fatalities and injuries. We consider
it essential to avoid another humanitarian tragedy by
preserving the demilitarized zone established in Idlib,
thanks to the agreement reached by Turkey and the
Russian Federation last September. We also consider it
necessary to address the precarious conditions in which
the civilian population trapped in Deir ez-Zor is living,
and to protect them from attacks directed against
Da'esh militants.

In reiterating our strong condemnation of all
terrorist activity, we emphasize the need to observe the
humanitarian principles of proportionality, legality and
precaution. In welcoming the recent United Nations
humanitarian deployment in Rukban, we underscore
the obligation to allow sustained access to assistance
for as long as necessary.

On the other hand, we would like to welcome
the first advances made by the Astana group in the
identification of missing persons, the return of mortal
remains, and the release of detainees and missing
persons. We hope that new and further developments in
these important humanitarian issues will contribute in
the coming weeks and months to promoting the relief
from tensions required to end the conflict and achieve
Syrian reconciliation.

I conclude by stressing the need for the Security
Council to remain united in the exercise of its
responsibilities under international humanitarian law,
as reflected in the adoption of resolution 2449 (2018),
which, inter alia, has extended access to cross-border
assistance. In this regard, we acknowledge the efforts
of the delegations of Sweden and Kuwait to move the
draft resolution forward with a view to alleviating the
suffering of the Syrian population.

However, we must bear in mind that only the
achievement of a political solution that lays the
foundations for sustainable peace in Syria will make
it possible to overcome the humanitarian disaster that
continues to affect its population. In this vein, we
wish, finally, to stress the importance of convening the
constitutional committee before the end of this year,
with a view to making progress in the construction of
a political solution to the Syrian conflict, guided by
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique.

