Mr. Poukre-Kono (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): Allow me on behalf of the
Government of the Central African Republic to
congratulate you, Madame President, on your
delegation's assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. We are encouraged by your
country's commitment to helping fragile States in their
struggle against insecurity and violence wherever it
occurs.

The Central African Republic has taken due note
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/584) on
the political, security and socio-economic situation and
on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
5
(BINUCA). We believe that the report is important and
timely in view of the national and international stakes.

We thank Her Excellency Ms. Sable-Work
Zewde, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for her highly edifying briefing. We are aware
of her perspicacity, commitment and devotion to our
country's cause, and once again we express our deep
respect for her.

The Central African Republic is on the path
towards the elections scheduled for 23 January 2011.
Clear assurances have been provided by President
Bozize' that the actions currently under way shall result
in the holding of free, equitable and transparent
elections. The list of six candidates has been made
known, the voter registration process has been carried
out and the final preparatory measures are concluding.
All dossiers have been deposited pursuant to the
presidential decree and to the provisions of the
Independent Electoral Commission. Finally, there is
consensus on a manual electoral roll.

The matter of redrawing of electoral districts
remains pending. We acknowledge that this has not
been an easy process, because it has often been
interrupted by destabilizing, worrisome actions.
Reason has finally prevailed and consensus will
continue even if discontent exists here and there, which
is the rule in democracies, as long as it does not
impede our objective of holding the elections by the
given deadlines.

However, in order to enable these elections,
stability in our national territory must be assured.
There are genuine concerns in a number of regions,
where insecurity remains rife and fuelled by rebel
groups that have still not signed the Libreville
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and do not feel
bound by their national duty, in spite of the hand that
has been extended by the Government. Furthermore,
unidentified armed groups are active in the principal
region in the north-east. We hope that a solution will be
found by then so that all Central Africans can
participate in elections that are so important for the
future of the country. One thing that is certain and
reassuring is the cooperation of the former rebel groups
with the Central African armed forces in areas that
have not been secured.

The alarm has often been raised about the north-
eastern section of the country in case of the withdrawal
of the United Nations Mission in the Central African
6
Republic (MINURCAT). Indeed, as soon as the United
Nations Mission left, the principal city in the north,
Birao, was invaded by the Convention of Patriots for
Justice and Peace and other rebel groups. That
confirmed the concerns that have been raised here in
this Chamber.

The presence of Central African forces is far too
limited in that area and they lack equipment and arms.
It is therefore easy to attack and to create confusion
among civilians who have fled to the bush. However,
voices have spoken out, even here, in favour of
preventing a vacuum from developing and of ensuring
a transitional period. The Central African Government
has also conveyed its equipment and training needs to
the Security Council. We have asked friendly countries
to provide assistance. Bureaucratic machinery has
finally begun to move as a result of those steps.

The Government must therefore take such
necessary steps. It has always called for our defence
and security forces to be properly equipped, trained
and deployed; this has been its main concern. We have
called for the return of MINURCAT equipment.
However, that request has had no effect. The Central
African position on the need to strengthen its armed
forces remains clear. We have consistently supported
the idea of strengthening regional peace forces in both
personnel and logistical terms, as has been proposed by
the international community.

An alliance of foreign and Central African rebel
groups, aligned with criminal groups, threaten further
destabilization and discord in the region. Major ills
require major responses. That is the way to respond to
these criminal groups. The Central African Republic is
not remaining idle in this situation, and that is why we
welcome the initiative adopted by the United States
Government to support the struggle of countries in the
region against the excesses of the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA), pursuant to the recommendations of the
Bangui conference on the LRA. The same should apply
to other armed groups through the implementation of
cross-border agreements among neighbouring
countries.

A further important step remains the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, which is one of the
recommendations issued from the inclusive political
dialogue. To this we should add security sector reform
and the rule of law. Security and justice are constant
10-68048
concerns of ours, as they are essential to lasting
sociopolitical stabilization.

If disarmament and demobilization process has
made progress in the north-west, that is not the case in
the north-east, given not only the reticence of a number
of groups to adhere to the various peace agreements
that have been signed, but also the prevailing
insecurity caused by the presence of a number of
armed groups, including the LRA. However, we must
underscore that financing remains essential to any such
undertaking. We note that the majority of projects lack
adequate financing to begin; this is especially true of
projects addressing security sector reform, which has
been the subject of round tables and seminars in the
past. The reinsertion of ex-combatants is equally
essential to ensuring the implementation of the
development hubs.

Several years of conflict in the Central African
Republic have destroyed the economic fabric of the
country and its infrastructure, lowered our standard of
living and weakened our administration by driving
many functionaries to seek better lives elsewhere, and
led to a deterioration of basic social services. The
institutional dysfunction is visible. Corruption and
delays are rife. However, we must recognize that
following the patriotic events of 15 March 2003,
palpable change took place in the wake of the elections
that were held, the organization of political dialogue,
and the courageous reform launched by the
Government to help the country out of its deadlock.
One of the most pressing priorities remains the
implementation of the poverty reduction strategy paper.
In other words, the Central African Republic is getting
back on its feet, even while a great deal remains to be
done in terms of security, stability, respect for human
rights, and so on.

On 20 September, when the special high-level
meeting on the Central African Republic was held,
President Bozize commented on the development of
the Central African Republic since it embarked on its
reconciliation process. That encounter allowed
participants to take stock of the efforts that had been
made and future prospects. It also demonstrated the
return of trust and confidence among our partners. I
wish here to sincerely thank the sponsors of that
initiative, the World Bank and the Central African
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, with
which the Central African Republic enjoys good
relations. Once again, we would like to express my the

esteem of my Government and our partners for the
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission in its
Central African Republic configuration, Ambassador
Grauls of Belgium.

The Central African Republic has celebrated its
fiftieth anniversary this year. Although our State is still
in its infant stage, we have been able to turn the page
on the past and to plan for the future. We therefore ask
the international community to understand our errors
and to help us to correct them. What is most important
is to listen to us before issuing demands. That is why
we have welcomed the presence of BINUCA and the
other partners we have agreed to host.

Like any other institution, BINUCA must evolve.
BINUCA, which replaced the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African
Republic a year ago, must adapt to the new
requirements in the Central African Republic. It is time
to take stock of its activities on the ground. Its
principle mandate is to align the actions of all United
Nations agencies and funds and to speak as one.

As that institution is still taking shape, the
Central African Government fully endorses the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend its
mandate for one year, until 31 December 2011. In
general terms, the Government is satisfied with the
assistance provided by BINUCA and recognizes the
commitment and devotion of the Special
Representative to the Secretary-General in the Central
African Republic.

At the same time, the Government is of the view
that BINUCA should do more by prioritizing training
and the strengthening of national capacity in all areas.
Its proven international expertise should have an
impact on the people and the various sectors. That is
what we aspire to for the coming year.

The future withdrawal of BINUCA should not
leave a vacuum, as we have witnessed with the
withdrawal of MINURCAT. We hope that BINUCA
will fully discharge its mandate in good faith, and we
expect to see the dividends of the transfer of its
expertise. Furthermore, given that the two working
languages of the United Nations are English and
French, we dare to hope that the integrated mission
will also include Central African officials of proven
competence among its staff. Neither English nor
French should take priority when it comes to
recruitment. Furthermore, this category of staff should

enjoy the status of international officials, rather than
that oflocal staff.

At the same time, the presence of BINUCA in the
Central African Republic is all the more welcome
given that its scope of action has been expanded and is
to further expand in the North-East with a physical
presence requiring supplementary resources. BINUCA
should therefore be the focus of the full attention of
Mission Support to allow it to better discharge its
mandate. The members of the Security Council might
seriously envisage a rapid solution to the problems
described paragraphs 72 and 84 of the Secretary-
General's report.
To conclude, the Central African Republic will
continue to cooperate with all its partners, without
exception. Ours is not a desperate case. Like other States,
it implements policies within its capacities to ensure the
survival of its people and the preservation of its
institutions. It has demonstrated this in many instances,
and calls for international aid to support its actions.

