Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I, too, thank the
French presidency for convening this meeting, which,
we believe, serves as a good preparatory step to
contribute to the open debate of the Security Council
planned for next week on the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. I welcome High Commissioner
Guterres to the Council and thank him for his timely,
comprehensive and informative briefing.

We recognize the efforts made to date and the
resulting progress in initiatives on repatriating refugees
and reintegrating them into their own communities. My
delegation, however, is deeply concerned about
increasing displacement in many parts of the world and
the expanding number of stateless persons, as High
Commissioner Guterres has warned about, as well as
challenges in protecting refugees in conflict areas and
ensuring humanitarian access to them. We are
dismayed at the fact that refugees in conflict areas -
first of all, women and children - continue to fall
victim to killing, maiming and all sorts of gender-based
violence.

The current situations in Afghanistan, Pakistan,
some South Asian countries, vast areas of Africa and,
most notably, in Gaza are clear and typical testimony
to that. With 1.5 million inhabitants of the Gaza Strip
being victimized in a terrible manner, this humanitarian
crisis has been an appalling example of the magnitude
of the suffering that human beings can be driven into,
and it has provided living evidence of the imperative
need for greater and better humanitarian efforts.

Given the gravity of the situation, and while
again confirming the primary responsibility of States in
meeting the humanitarian needs of their respective
civilian populations, we wish to emphasize that it is
critical to enhance the role of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and its coordination with other relevant United Nations
entities, such as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in conducting humanitarian
operations, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in addressing displacement and violence
against civilians and the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict in tackling child-related issues, et
cetera. In that regard, United Nations field missions
also have an important role to play.

It is our View that, in order for humanitarian
activities to be effective and efficient, humanitarian
access must not be politicized, but must instead strictly
adhere to the principles of neutrality, impartiality and
independence and must be in conformity with national
and international law. While underlining our consistent
position that the resolution and prevention of conflict,
the reduction of poverty and the improvement of living
conditions for populations in conflict areas are true
remedies for the root causes of humanitarian issues, we
also believe that greater focus should be placed on
repatriation and reintegration. This should, inter alia,
pool the efforts of multiple stakeholders, including the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, the World
Food Programme, the World Bank and, of no less
importance, local, regional and international non-
governmental organizations and civil society groups,
which can help ensure effective repatriation and
sustainable integration, thus contributing to the process
of post-conflict reconstruction.

