The President: I thank the representative of
Bangladesh for the kind words he addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jamaica.

I wish to thank the head of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
Dr. Peter Piot, for his introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General on follow-up to the Security Council
meeting on HIV/AIDS in Africa, contained in
document S/2000/657. We welcome the establishment
of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee set up in
February 2000, and commend its efforts in working
towards the development of strategies for addressing
HIV/AIDS in peacekeeping and humanitarian
operations.

The many reports available to us point to one
undeniable fact: the AIDS pandemic has reached
catastrophic proportions, not only in Africa but also
worldwide. HIV/AIDS has had a devastating impact on
many countries, and is threatening to wipe out
economic and social gains, hard-won over past
decades, and threatens the future of many countries.
Situations of conflict are fertile grounds for the spread
of HIV/AIDS among affected populations.

The cycle of the epidemic cannot end until the
world community acts in unison to deal with this
scourge. It would be morally wrong to ask young men
and women to serve the cause of peace without
acknowledging that HIV/AIDS also poses a real threat
to their well-being. We must seek to prepare them for
this emerging challenge. To the extent that the
HIV/AIDS epidemic could affect the efficacy of
peacekeeping operations, the Council has a
responsibility to seek to address the challenges
presented. My delegation therefore supported the
inclusion in all peacekeeping resolutions of a
paragraph on efforts to sensitize peacekeeping
personnel to the prevention and control of HIV/AIDS
and other communicable diseases. We must begin to
properly sensitize peacekeeping personnel, and in this
regard, we commend the work of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

Jamaica recognizes that the issues of peace,
security and development are multifaceted, and must be
tackled in a holistic manner. These efforts require a
multisectoral response from the international
community and, with regard to the United Nations
system, necessitates the involvement of all its organs
and agencies. To do otherwise would be to deny the
truly complicated interrelationships that militate
against sustainable peace and security in many regions
of the world. In this regard, we commend the
Economic and Social Council, UNAIDS, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Children's
Fund and other agencies for their work in formulating
appropriate responses to the HIV/AIDS pandemic.

While researchers continue to seek a cure for
AIDS and to develop vaccines, the international
community must build on the experiences and lessons
learned and endeavour to find ways to ensure that the
advances in medications and treatment are widely
available. Jamaica therefore supports the holding of a
special session of the General Assembly to address
appropriate responses to the HIV/AIDS pandemic. We
support this draft resolution and wish to commend the
United States of America for bringing it forward.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

