Mr. Oshima: I would like first of all to thank the
members of the Council for their very warm words to
me and to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). I also thank the
members of the Council for their continued
commitment to the agenda for the protection of
civilians, which has again been very clearly stated
today. I trust that the members of the Council will
extend the same support and cooperation to my
successor, Jan Egeland of Norway.

If you would allow me, Sir, I would like to join
members of the Council in expressing appreciation to
Ambassador Traore, because I, too, have had the
pleasure and great honour of working with him -
particularly during Guinea's presidency of the Security
Council, but at other times as well - and especially on
problems relating to West Africa. I thank him very
much for his support and cooperation.

May I also say a few words in response to some
of the questions posed and suggestions made today
concerning the implementation of the aide-memoire
and some aspects of the work done in promoting the
agenda of protection of civilians.

First, the Ambassador of Mexico proposed that
the next report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict be moved
forward from next June. This suggestion is welcome,
and we would like to look into the possibility and
explore the opportune timing with the Council
President. As indicated earlier, my Office is ready
anytime to provide country-specific briefings on the
situation of civilians to the Council, as well as bilateral
briefings to delegations.

The delegation of Pakistan mentioned the
possibility of a global workshop programme. We
welcome this suggestion to move from individual,
occasional workshops to a more systematic and
multiple-year programme. We will evaluate this
proposal and the financial and personnel resources it
requires once we have completed the current round of
workshops.

Ambassador Greenstock, leader of the Security
Council mission to West Africa, asked us to share the
report of the recent workshop in Accra. We are of
course happy to share with all members of the Council
the report of the West Africa workshop, as well as the
report of another that was recently held in Fiji. We will
soon finish the reports of these workshops and will be
happy to share them with all the members, as well as
with the leader of the West African mission,
Ambassador Greenstock.

In addition, we heard important suggestions
concerning the work done by OCHA in close
cooperation with other humanitarian agencies, as well
as with political and peacekeeping departments within
the Secretariat, on the protection of civilians. Specific
questions were raised by Ambassador Greenstock and
other members.

On mainstreaming, I acknowledge the importance
of this issue and would like to highlight the fact that we
are addressing it by establishing shared training on the
protection of civilians jointly with, and involving staff
from, DPA, DPKO and OCHA. We would welcome the
participation of members of the Council's missions in
this event. Clearly, the most important mainstreaming
issue for the protection of civilians is demonstrated by
the establishment of collaborative inter-agency
protection frameworks in the field. I mentioned that
through those protection frameworks - including the
establishment of working groups on protection in such
countries as Burundi, Afghanistan and, more recently,
in Iraq - the aide-memoire is being applied in a
practical way to report and address protection issues in
those countries.

Finally, there were proposals to better implement
the recommendations put forward by the Secretary-
General in his first two reports. The Ambassador of
Guinea suggested some sort of interdisciplinary group
to review the state of implementation, and this is very
welcome. It is precisely the thinking behind the
establishment of the Member States support groups on
the protection of civilians, as well as the
implementation group within the Executive Committee
on Humanitarian Affairs, to promote those objectives.
Those mechanisms are being set up, and we wish to
ensure that they produce specific, concrete results. That
is our intent as we plan to report to the Council a
revised, refined road map and the updated aide-
memoire in the next briefing to the Council, in
December.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the Council for the
support you have shown and the commitment that has
been expressed very positively around the table on this
very important issue.

