Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for the
very comprehensive information that he has given us.
We also thank the Permanent Observer of Palestine and
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Israel for their
presentations.

As is our custom, every month we meet to consider
the issue of the Middle East and we frequently find
ourselves obliged to repeat our arguments. However,
during the past month, we have been faced with
very unusual situations, whose future impact is still
uncertain. Only last week, we had several significant
events.

First, we did not reach agreement on providing
unanimous political support to Mr. Kofi Annan and,
therefore, adopted a 30-day extension of the United
Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic, supposedly for its orderly withdrawal.
Secondly, in Lebanon, the national dialogue was
resumed under the threat of a spillover of violence
from Syria. Thirdly, in Yemen, the authorities continue
to wage war against terrorist groups that threaten the
nascent democracy. Fourthly, only a few days ago,
more than 100 persons were reported dead in Iraq,
reminding us that the country remains on our agenda,
as the recently adopted extension of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq underscores. Fifthly,
there was a terrorist attack against Israeli tourists in
Bulgaria - an act that we condemn.

The situation in Syria is ofparticular concern given
the information that reaches us daily on the human
and material losses and the high number of displaced
persons. The lack of consensus on a draft resolution
by the Council is doubly unfortunate against that
humanitarian background. On this occasion, we will
also mention one key issue that has been on the Security
Council's agenda for the longest time and that took up
most of Mr. Serry's briefing, namely, the Palestinian
issue. That issue has been somewhat overtaken by
events in other countries of the region.

In that regard, and as for the peace process in the
Middle East, we continue to believe that the creation of
a Palestinian State, living in peace and security within
secure borders with its neighbour, Israel, is an objective
of singular importance. The so-called two-State
solution favoured by the Quartet must be the product of
direct negotiations between the parties involved, with
the support of the international community.

We believe that the daily efforts to find a definitive
peaceful solution must continue. However, they should
be complemented by the will and commitment of the
parties to negotiating in an atmosphere of good faith
and mutual trust. Both sides should do their utmost to
find common ground that will lead them to finding a
satisfactory solution as soon as possible.

We note that the situation is extremely fragile, but
that does not mean that it is impossible to resolve. The
efforts of the Quartet and its individual members, as well
as the direct approaches that have taken place between
the parties themselves, suggest that all is not lost. We
are willing to support and promote every opportunity to
resume negotiations, but we remained concerned over
actions that clearly threaten the prospect of a peaceful
solution.

As stated by the International Court of Justice,
the settlement policy promoted by the Government
of Israel is illegal and jeopardizes the outcome of the
peace process. In that regard, we are concerned that
the Israeli Government, on the one hand, should seek
to justify such illegal actions by publishing the report
of a presidential commission appointed to study the
situation of the settlements in occupied territories,
while on the other hand it denies access to United
Nations officials appointed by the Human Rights
Council to analyse the legal status of these settlements.
It is even more disturbing to note that, according to
Israeli authorities, the work of such a mission would be
"biased and flawed" and that the fact-finding mission

"embodies the inherent distortion that typifies the
United Nations Human Rights Council's treatment
of Israel and the hijacking of the important human
rights agenda by non-democratic countries".

We have serious doubts about the characterization
of the work of one of the most important bodies for the
protection of human rights as "biased and inaccurate".

Additionally, we believe it necessary to review the
need to continue the blockade imposed by Israel on the
Gaza Strip. We are concerned that some 80 per cent of
families in Gaza depend on humanitarian aid. While
recognizing Israel's security concerns, this collective
punishment has been imposed on all innocent families
living in the area. At the same time, we consider it
important that all armed groups operating from Gaza
cease their military claims. Their actions only prolong
the suffering of these families and jeopardize the peace
process.

Finally, my delegation believes that respect for
international law is the key to the peace process in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. That
respect depends not only on Israel and Palestine, but,
in the face of their continued violation of these norms,
on the international community and the United Nations
as well. Only by respecting the rights of each of these
populations, and by pledging to seek a peaceful solution,
will they be able to live together with strong and secure
borders.

