Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the Bolivian
presidency of the Security Council for convening
this very important debate. I also thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing.

Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Viet Nam is deeply concerned about the ongoing
complicated situation in the Middle East, particularly
the long-protracted conflict between Israel and
Palestine, and the situations in Syria, Yemen, Iraq
and Afghanistan. We share other Member States'
great concern regarding the escalation of tensions two
days ago and the deterioration of the humanitarian
and economic situation in Gaza. Cycles of negative
developments have once again been hampering hopes
for peaceful solutions to the conflicts in the region.

We recognize the tireless efforts ofthe international
community, including those of the United Nations, but
we believe that much greater efforts are needed now.
We therefore support all efforts by the United Nations,
the Middle East Quartet, the League of Arab States
and countries of the region to push forward the peace
process for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict with a view
to achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting solution
that ensures the legitimate interests of all the parties
concerned, as well as peace and security for the Middle
East. Concerted actions are now needed to resume direct
and constructive talks between Israel and Palestine.

Viet Nam reaffirms its unwavering support for
the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people for
their inalienable rights, including the right to self-
determination and the establishment of an independent
and sovereign State. We firmly believe that the only
viable solution is to establish a Palestinian State on the
basis ofthe pre-l967 borders, living side by side with the
Israeli State in peace, security and mutual recognition.

We urge all the parties concerned to strictly
comply with international law, exercise maximum self-
restraint, refrain from violence and foster a favourable
environment for dialogue. We call on Israel to halt
all settlement construction and take action to protect
civilians and improve the living conditions of the
Palestinian people in Gaza. The relevant United Nations
resolutions, in particular Security Council resolutions
478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), must be fully implemented.

With regard to the Syrian situation, Viet Nam
welcomes recent positive developments, including the
agreement by Israel, Syria and the United Nations to
reopen the Quneitra crossing in the Golan Heights and
the cooperation between Jordan and Syria to reopen
the Jaber-Nasib border crossing. However, we remain
concerned about tensions in Syria and call upon all
parties to settle disputes through peaceful means. We
support efforts to find a political solution in Syria
based on the fundamental principles of international
laws and the Charter of the United Nations, including
the principle of respect for the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria.

The Security Council, with its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
should take prompt and effective action to seek peaceful
and comprehensive solutions to the conflicts across the
region. As a partner for sustainable peace, Viet Nam
will continue its efforts to contribute to lasting peace
and security in the Middle East.

