Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
outstanding leadership of the presidency of the Council
this month. I thank Morocco for its stewardship of the
Council last month. I also wish to thank Mr. Robert
Serry for his detailed briefing this morning. I welcome
the presence of the Foreign Minister of the State of
Palestine and his participation in this meeting. I would
like to welcome the new Council members and pay
tribute to the outgoing members.

This is the first debate of 2013 on this issue.
The Group of Arab States would therefore like to
reaffirm the fact that 2013 will be a decisive turning
point with regard to the Middle East, in particular the
Palestinian question, which is the primary cause of
the Arab world. On 29 November 2012, we witnessed
the historic granting to Palestine of non-member
observer State status in the United Nations. It is the
first major individual achievement in many years on
the path to lasting and comprehensive peace and the
two-State solution. It is particularly important at a time
when the international community has demonstrated
its incapacity to compel the occupying Power, Israel,
to respect the unanimous will of the international
community and to end the occupation of Palestine
through ensuring the implementation of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, including those of the
Security Council.

It is unacceptable that, to date, the international
community has continued to adopt the same approach
ofmany decades in addressing the Palestinian question.
It is high time for the world, through the United
Nations and particularly the Security Council, to
assume its direct responsibilities in the maintenance
of international peace and security, particularly since
Israel has continued to occupy Arab and Palestinian
lands and to maintain its illegal and illicit activities
in blatant violation of all international laws and
instruments, including the building of settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem.

In that context, the deliberate violations carried out
by the Israeli Government have escalated, as if Israel
is attempting to further punish the Palestinian people
and their leaders in view of their diplomatic, political
and legal successes at the multilateral level that have
promoted Palestine to the rank of observer State to the
United Nations.

The escalation of activity, including settlement
construction, led to the Israeli Government's
announcement of three thousand additional units to be
built in Palestinian territory, namely, East Jerusalem,
and the completion of the so-called E-l settlement
complex, which would isolate East Jerusalem, separate
it from the West Bank and cut the geographic link
between the north and the south of the West Bank. That
is an additional threat made by the State of Israel, and it
highlights the illegitimacy of its settlement activities. It
also represents a major obstacle to the achievement ofa
solution based on two States living side by side within
the pre-1967 borders.

Unsatisfied with their actions so far, Israeli forces
also savagely acted against Palestinian activists who
were demonstrating against Israeli expansionist
policies and peacefully attempting to protect their land
by setting up Palestinian villages that they call Bab
al-Shams and Bab al-Karamah.

We vehemently condemn the continuing Israeli
violations against the Palestinian people and their land.
In 2012, the occupying Power killed 226 Palestinians,
including more than 60 women and children, and
injured 2,300. It also destroyed 2,100 homes and
facilities and uprooted more than seven thousand fruit
trees, and authorized the construction of 26,000 new
housing units. Israel must realize that its continuing
crimes will have negative consequences and that those
who perpetrate the crimes will not escape fromjustice.

Israel must be held responsible for the health of all
of the Palestinian detainees and prisoners, given that its
detention policy spares no sector of Palestinian society.

The Arab Group also condemns Israel's piracy
through its control of Palestine's trade channels and
crossings, particularly its refusal to transfer tax and
customs revenues to the Palestinians. That revenue is
fundamentally important to the economy of the State of
Palestine, which has already suffered serious challenges
due to Israeli policies limiting the movement of goods
and individuals both inside and outside of Palestine.
Beyond the piracy implications, the Palestinian
Authority faces difficulty in paying the salaries of its
civil servants, which has affected the interests of about
1 million Palestinian citizens. From the viewpoint ofthe
Arab Group, we call upon the international community
to take immediate action to compel Israel to release
the Palestinian tax revenues and to refrain from such
illegitimate and immoral practices.

The Arab Group welcomes the positive signs that
have emerged from the meetings recently held in Cairo,
with the aim of accelerating reconciliation between the
Palestinian factions. The Arab Group welcomes, in this
context, the great efforts of Cairo and the Arab League
towards Palestinian reconciliation, which is an Arab
priority.

Arab and Palestinian hands are fully extended
to ensure a just and lasting settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of two
States - an independent State of Palestine within
the pre-l967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its
capital, alongside the State of Israel, in line with the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

Israel has continued to play its role as the
occupying Power and to demonstrate its arrogance in
the region. It has preferred that role, rather than a role
aimed at establishing natural and normal relations with
neighbouring States. Yesterday parliamentary elections
took place in Israel. During the campaign, we heard
the negative slogans of a number of parties. Therefore,
we must tirelessly continue our efforts to end Israeli
violations of international law in order to achieve peace
in the region.

All efforts could be undermined if Israel continues
to violate international law and to hamper international
Arab efforts to achieve peace, as it has continued to do
in recent years. We therefore call upon the international
community to take immediate action in proposing a
serious initiative with an established deadline and time
frame for all parties, aimed at achieving two States in
line with international legitimacy and with the peace
process.

