Mr. Misie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow me,
Mr. President, to extend to you my sincere congratulations
on the able manner in which you have been conducting the
work of the Security Council this month. I should also like
to congratulate your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Li
Zhaoxing, Permanent Representative of the People's
Republic of China, on his able stewardship of the Council
last month.

At the outset of this statement, I should like to express
our deepest sympathy to the delegation and Government of
France and to the families of the two valiant and
honourable members of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) whose valuable lives were cut short at such
an early age by the merciless and cold-blooded actions of
professional killers, whoever they may be.
 

My Government strongly rejects all the methods that
the murderers of innocent members of UNPROFOR and
of Bosnian civilians - men, women, children and the
elderly - have been using for more than three years.

In this situation - which could potentially uncover
the nature of the war in Bosnia and clearly draw a line
between the aggressor and the victim - my Government
is exposed to an unacceptable formula that recently has
been widely employed in delicate situations. It gives its
assurance that there is no basis to believe that any
Bosnian soldier was involved in the recent tragic events.

Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that this tragic
incident must not be used for ethically unacceptable and
inappropriate political manipulations that espouse the
myth that all the sides in Bosnia and Herzegovina should
be seen in the same criminal light and as having the same
responsibility for the evil that has engulfed my country
for more than three years.

Instead, this tragic occasion should be utilized as a
turning point. Continuing to appease the aggressor side
for the purpose of obtaining its cooperation and achieving
even meagre success in a paralysed peace process can
only pull us away from peace - a fact that has been
confirmed many times throughout these years.

The truth, no matter what it could be and what its
price might be, must be given priority over half-truths or
complete lies. The truth must finally be faced.

Too high a price has already been paid, because for
too long high-ranking officials, both within and outside
the United Nations, denied the existence of concentration
camps; because mass rapes and "ethnic cleansing" were
not recognized and denounced in time; because the
appeasers went so far as to use libel in spreading the
morally corrupt fallacy that the army of Bosnia and
Herzegovina could possibly have staged the massacres in
the bread line or in the marketplace in Sarajevo. Each
time, after such suspicions had been expressed loudly and
clearly, the issue was resolved, as a rule, by a magic
formula stating that it was not possible to determine who
had fired the deadly grenades or shots. This sounds really
absurd and it is very discouraging; but, beyond all that, it
is totally damaging to the credibility of UNPROFOR and
especially to its effectiveness, as well as to the prospects
of the peace process.

The death of two innocent soldiers who were trying
to prevent deadly sniper fire by erecting sniper barricades

 
testifies to the continuing terrorization of Sarajevo; and to
the fact that resolutions on safe areas continue to be
routinely violated and that there are those who continue to
violate the cease-fire and the cessation of hostilities. The
soldiers' deaths will not be in vain if they contribute to a
change in the situation. This draft resolution is a first step
in that direction. We support the intention to establish new
measures, on an urgent basis, that would prevent further
attacks against UNPROFOR troops and contribute to the
improvement of their security.

The Government of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will sincerely cooperate in these efforts and
will offer its assistance and support. We would also like to
believe that they will logically lead to a review of the
current state of the UNPROFOR mandate, which appears
reduced and deformed in comparison to its definition and
to the provisions envisaged in the resolutions of the
Security Council. That is why we believe that this body
will, in the time frame and the manner envisaged by
Security Council resolution 982 (1995), give its full
attention to this question, which is essential to the future of
the peace mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as to
the peace process as a whole. Departures from and self-
serving interpretations of Security Council resolutions on
the ground have not been followed up by adequate and
timely reactions from this Chamber. There is not much time
left to correct this situation and to make the necessary shift.

The President of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, His Excellency Mr. Alija Izetbegovic, has
recently stated the position of our Government. We
understand the calls for an extension of the cease-fire, but
we cannot take on such an obligation without guarantees
that it will not become a time frame from which only the
aggressor can benefit.

We agree that it is high time the peace process moved
forward. For our part, we have made the contributions that
were expected of us. We accepted, almost 10 months ago,
the Contact Group plan that Karadzic continues to reject up
to the present moment. The fact of our acceptance seems to
be neglected, more often than not, and the fact of
Karadzic's refusal seems to be veiled by some countries. In
this game, the decision of the Contact Group to give
support to the party that does accept the plan and punish
the one that rejects it seems finally to have been totally
forgotten. Does this all possibly mean a gradual
introduction of a new variant of a peace settlement? If that
is what is envisaged, the message of my Government
should be clear: there will be no more concessions from our
side. In making concessions and sacrifices for the sake of

 
peace, we have reached the edge of the abyss; any further
step would mean a definite fall into that abyss for the
victim and a cynical reward for the aggressor. Any step
or intention in this direction would be terminal and would
only encourage the aggression to continue. We strongly
believe that no one has a right to do this.

With the death of the brave soldiers of the French
peace contingent, attacks on the Bihac region continue, as
does the terrorizing of the safe area of Tuzla and its
surroundings. The strangulation of Sarajevo has tightened,
denying to officials of Bosnia and Herzegovina and even
to the United States Ambassador to Bosnia and
Herzegovina the right to travel on United Nations planes.
The murder and wounding of civilians continue as well.

In another wave of "ethnic cleansing", more than
150 Muslims from Bijeljina and 400 Muslims and Croats
from the Banja Luka region have recently been expelled.
Karadzic's followers persist in this practice, which all of
us had believed had vanished with the defeat of fascism
in Europe.

Unfortunately, fascism was long ago revived, and it
has now advanced in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia, in particular the part under the control of
Karadzic's Serbs.

As we prepare for the fiftieth anniversary of the
great victory of mankind over fascism, it is not excessive
to suggest that the best way to commemorate that victory
and pay tribute to the millions of victims of fascism
would be to defeat these new practitioners of the revived
fascism and disable them for ever.

