I thank the President of the Security Council for convening today's debate, and I would like to align myself with the statement delivered on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group. Ireland thanks Estonia for continuing, in cooperation with Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the practice of convening annual open debates on working methods. As we have noted before, improving the Council's working methods is not an end in itself, but a way to enhance the Council's effectiveness and therefore its relevance. This annual debate is an important forum for non-Council members to engage with the work of the Council, and this year provides us with an opportunity to emphasize the need to build on the progress achieved in December 2019 when a record number of notes of the President further codifying the Council's procedures were adopted. This accomplishment, which took place during Kuwait's term as Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, is testament to the value elected members bring to the Council, and we look forward to further improvements to the day-to-day operation of the Council under the tenure of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as Chair, and Estonia as Vice-Chair, of the Informal Working Group. Transparency, efficiency and effectiveness are always of vital importance in the work of the Council. However, in the current circumstances in which we find ourselves, they are more essential than ever. We are therefore grateful to recent Presidents of the Council for their efforts to increase the openness of the Council's work at this time, including by seeking to adopt press elements after each closed video-teleconference (VTC). As an aspiring member of the Security Council, Ireland was pleased to note the adoption of a number of measures in the aforementioned presidential notes that will enable incoming elected members to better prepare themselves for the Council's work ahead of taking their seats in this body. In particular, providing that newly elected members will begin receiving relevant documents from | August in the year prior to their joining the Council and permitting newly elected members to observe informal consultations relating to the negotiation of Council outcome documents from | October of that year will increase new members' familiarity with the Council's functions and working methods. These changes not only assist elected members to prepare for their tenure but also improve the efficiency of the Council by ensuring smoother transitions from one year's membership to the next. While these new measures are welcome, more must be done to empower elected members' participation in all aspects of the Council's work, including the drafting of resolutions. As the work of the Council grows, we note the need for burden-sharing and an equitable distribution of work among all members of the Council, including through a transparent process for the allocation of penholder positions that takes into account the expertise of elected members. We echo ACT's call for increased fairness and clarity of sanctions processes and encourage the Council to strengthen the independence and impartiality of the Office of the Ombudsperson and expand the mandate of the Ombudsperson to other sanctions regimes. We understand that new time frames adopted by the Council for the publication of its annual report are due to apply from the start of 2021. Nevertheless, we urge the Council to adopt its most recent report as soon as possible. We call once again for the inclusion of an analytical introduction in the report to enable the General Assembly to engage in a meaningful way with the Council. In order to consider the Council's effectiveness, the Council needs to provide an analysis of its actions. Simply recounting a list of meetings held and decisions made during the preceding year does not permit such review and interaction. Ireland welcomes the Council's adoption of novel working methods during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, including the use of written voting procedures to adopt resolutions and the inclusion of statements by Member States that are not members of the Council in the compilation document following open VTCs, such as today's. The Council must continue to show flexibility in adapting its procedures and ensure not just the continuity of its work but also its effectiveness and transparency. We are therefore disappointed that the Council has, after almost two months, been unable adopt a resolution in response to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire during the COVID-19 pandemic. If the Council cannot show that it is ready and able to act in the face of this unprecedented crisis, its credibility will be damaged. We would also like to see a formal adoption of a programme of work each month and formal records of meetings. The Security Council must learn from this experience, be forward-looking and ensure it is better prepared to operate under extraordinary working conditions in future. With recent meetings of the Council demonstrating the benefit of technology and the way in which it can open up the work of the Council to the outside world, we believe there is scope in future to use VTCs to enable participation by briefers and speakers who are otherwise unable to travel to New York. Ireland also notes that civil society access to the Council has been limited since the practice of holding virtual meetings began. Civil society organizations bring much needed expertise and experience to the work of the Council, and it is imperative that the new working methods do not become obstacles to the inclusion of civil society. We further note that it still is not possible for non-members of the Council to deliver oral statements at VTCs and welcome the presidency's clarification that if it becomes technically feasible, non-members of the Council may be able to deliver statements orally at open VTC meetings. To conclude, Ireland believes in a Council that is effective, open and accountable and if elected to the Security Council this June, we will make that a priority of our time on the Council.
