Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): It is a great honour for me
to welcome the President to New York and to thank him
for Togo's initiative to convene this debate on "Peace
and security in Africa: the challenges of the fight
against terrorism in Africa in the context ofmaintaining
international peace and security". His presence at this
meeting is testimony of Togo's commitment to doing
whatever is necessary to ensure that the challenges
of terrorism are effectively addressed through
international cooperation, which is the only way that
the scourge can be defeated.

I express our sympathies to the people of Turkey.

I am also grateful for the opportunity given to
me to speak on my country's behalf as Chair of the
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
a subregional organization that, in close coordination
with the African Union, has done so much to address
the challenges of terrorism in the Horn of Africa.

In that respect, both IGAD and the African Union
(AU) have been at the forefront of the fight against
international terrorism. The two organizations have
also been extremely eager to strengthen international
cooperation in counter-terrorism efforts, including
with a view to ensuring the effective implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. Both have been ready to work closely with
the Secretariat's Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force. Both IGAD and the AU have also sought to
ensure greatly enhanced cooperation with the Council's
three anti-terrorism Committees - the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and Executive Directorate,
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).

The AU, and before it the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), has been actively engaged in the fight
against terrorism since the 1990s. It began with the
adoption, in 1992, of the resolution on the strengthening
of cooperation and coordination among African States.
A major step was taken by the OAU subsequently when
in 1999 it adopted its Convention on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism. To give concrete expression
to the principles of the Convention, the organization
produced a plan of action in 2002 that provided for
the establishment of the African Centre for Studies
and Research on Terrorism, which came into being in
2004 with its seat in Algiers. Among the functions of
the Centre is the objective of strengthening the capacity
of African States in the struggle against terrorism. No
event has shown more clearly how Africa needs to build
its capacity in this area than the situation that we faced
in Mali. Our experience in Mali has also demonstrated
how much the building of robust State institutions is
absolutely indispensable to fight terrorism effectively.

But still, where Africa has shown the most resolve
has been on the practical side of the fight against
terrorism and extremism. No doubt, both Africa in
general, and the Horn of Africa in particular, have
been targets of international terrorism. It is obvious
that the ultimate victory over extremism and terror can
be achieved only when the root causes of the scourge
are effectively addressed. It is impossible to ensure
acceptable levels of peace and security in the face of
abject poverty and deprivation, and the hopelessness
that they spawn. But terrorism has no justification. The
international consensus at present condemns terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, committed by
whomever, wherever and for whatever purpose.

Our experience in the IGAD region tells us
that there is little chance of succeeding in the fight
against terrorism, except through genuine, effective
international cooperation that makes no distinction
regarding where the crime of terrorism is committed.
That often-expressed notion, with the aim of
distinguishing among groups that resort to terror based
on where the act is committed, is a recipe for defeating
the spirit and determination of genuine international
cooperation aimed at overcoming this scourge. In
other words, as long as there is a double standard in
the fight against terrorism, there can be little hope
of defeating international terrorism. We have agreed
at the international level that the location, the targets
and those who carry out the act do not matter as far as
terrorism is concerned. It is the means used to achieve
a goal, whatever the goal may be, that is the basis for
international cooperation against terrorism. In that
regard, we still have a long way to go before we reach
to the stage where we can say that now, at last, we, the
international community, have laid the foundation for
an effective cooperation and coordination in the fight
against terrorism.

That is not to say that the IGAD region, for instance,
has not enjoyed the cooperation of the Security Council,
other partners and the international community at
large to ensure that progress is made towards peace
and stability in our subregion. The progress we see in
Somalia today would not have been possible without
such cooperation. On the other hand, it is clear, given
the magnitude of the problem in the subregion and
its vulnerability, that much more is needed to ensure
that real progress is made and that gains made are not
reversed. By any standard, at present it appears that
there is far greater cooperation and coordination among
those promoting and perpetrating terror than there is
among those theoretically committed to doing whatever
is necessary to defeat the scourge. Those committed
to terror have become very adept at using modern
communication technology, including the Internet,
perhaps better than most who profess the determination
to fight them.

That is the experience we have had in the Horn of
Africa, and that is why it has become so critical to have
genuine practical international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. Transnational crimes of the various
types that help spread terrorism can be contained only
when there is such cooperation and coordination at
the international level. Legal regimes for combating
terrorism are critical to success in this area, but their
effectiveness depends on the existence of genuine
cooperation that makes no distinction based on where
the crime of terrorism is committed. In that regard,
there is no doubt that the international community
has a lot of work to do in order to make progress in
addressing the concerns of many, including those in the
IGAD region.
