Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me join other
delegations in welcoming the Foreign Minister of Iraq
to the Council and in thanking him for his presentation.
My delegation is also grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq,
Mr. Qazi, for his comprehensive briefing.

Iraq and the Iraqis, like other nations, have every
right to live in peace, without fear and in dignity. My
delegation, therefore, is very concerned over the
continuing political, sectarian and criminal Violence
that deprives the Iraqis of these rights.

We note the pause in sectarian conflict after the
introduction of a security plan, but it was so brief and
so frivolous that a chance for sustainable peace could
not be seized. Now, clashes among factions continue
and hostilities occur on an almost daily basis.

Indonesia condemns all terrorist attacks. In this
regard, we express our deep sympathy to the families
of the victims of today's attack in Sammara.

We welcome the commitment of the Iraqi
Government to security and stability as its highest
priority, not only in Baghdad, but also in the rest of the
country. However, my delegation stresses the urgent
need for the protection of civilians and the strict
observance of international human rights and
humanitarian law whenever security measures are
enacted upon.

Atrocities in Iraq cannot be fully responded to by
a security approach. Those acts are rooted in the
complexities with which the Iraqis continue to grapple.
In our View, a soft-power approach that promotes
inclusiveness and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms must also be sought. In this
regard, Indonesia supports the efforts of the Iraqi
Government to engage leaders from across the political
and religious spectrum to promote confidence-building
through national dialogue and reconciliation.
In realizing its commitment to support Iraqi unity,
on 3 and 4 April 2007 Indonesia hosted the
International Conference of Islamic Leaders for
Reconciliation in Iraq. The Conference adopted a
declaration aimed at realizing inclusive reconciliation
based on such values as peace, justice and equality,
freedom, tolerance, balance and consultation.

My delegation also underlines the significance of
national dialogue and recognizes the urgency of
seeking reconciliation within the governing coalition.
We support Prime Minister Al-Maliki's efforts to
promote the unity of government.

The humanitarian consequences of the continuing
Violence in Iraq are a matter of great concern to my
delegation. We highly appreciate the role of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other humanitarian actors in addressing
the needs of the Iraqi internally displaced persons and
refugees. We commend the generosity of the receiving
countries. My delegation welcomes the convening in
Geneva in April 2007 of an international conference on
displaced Iraqis. That was an important initiative in
seeking collective solutions to the humanitarian
challenges that affect the region as a whole.

Considering the magnitude of challenges that the
Iraqis are facing now, support and assistance from
countries in the region and the international community
remain critical. Only through their contribution can
Iraq fulfil its enormous human and economic potential.

Indonesia welcomes the convening of the
expanded ministerial conference of neighbouring
countries of Iraq in Sharm el-Sheikh on 4 May 2007.
We look forward to the implementation of the three
technical committees established at the conference on
security, displaced Iraqis and energy supplies.

My delegation also attaches particular importance
to the International Compact with Iraq, which marks a
new partnership between Iraq and the international
community. We fully support the role of the United
Nations in helping Iraq achieve the goals of the
Compact.

With regard to the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, we continue to underline its
importance in providing Iraq with constitutional
support activities, electoral assistance, human rights
promotion and development and humanitarian
assistance. We welcome the intention of the Secretary-
General to consider an expanded role and presence of
the United Nations in Iraq. Under the current
circumstances, in our View, there are at least three
possible ways to enhance the role of the United
Nations in Iraq. These are the flexible presence of more
United Nations institutions in the country; a greater
institutional foothold at United Nations Headquarters;
and stronger United Nations support for Iraq in various
international processes.

Iraq is experiencing a major transformation. We
empathize with the challenges with which the Iraqis
are dealing in such a process. A transformation of this
magnitude cannot be done instantly and hastily.
Indonesia reaffirms its full support for the Iraqis in
their pursuit of a peaceful, stable, prosperous and
democratic Iraq.

