Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Mr. Mladenov and Ms. Hary for
their briefings.

Israel's settlement policy in the occupied Palestinian
territories is illegal under international law, particularly
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention, and contravenes Security Council
resolutions. Colonization also helps to heighten tensions
on the ground and undermine the possibility of a two-
State solution. It erodes the prospects for lasting peace
between Israelis and Palestinians, as was recalled in
resolution 2334 (2016). With almost 650,000 settlers
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, we are near the
point of no return.
For that reason, France has condemned the decision
to build 2,342 housing units in the West Bank and the
infrastructure works near Bethlehem, which undermine
the territorial continuity of a future Palestinian
State. Such decisions are in addition to the ongoing
construction of 3,000 housing units in settlements in
the West Bank and East Jerusalem from mid-June to
mid-September and the expansion with another 6,000
units in the previous quarter. In total, the number of
decisions on settlement housing construction since
the beginning of this year is already higher than in
2018. France therefore calls on the Israeli authorities
to halt such initiatives as well as all those that would
jeopardize the two-State solution. In that regard, we will
pay particular attention to the information contained
in the Secretary-General's next report of 2019 on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).

We regret any decision that may encourage further
settlements. Respect for international law is not
negotiable. It is binding on everyone. Undermining that
principle weakens the entire international system. It is
not up to one country to decide what is legal. The issue
of the legality of settlements cannot be looked at on a
case-by-case basis.

I would also like to return to the latest developments

on the ground, in particular the dangerous escalation in
Gaza last week. France strongly condemns the firing
of more than 450 rockets into populated areas of Israeli
territory from the Gaza Strip. I would recall in that
regard that France believes that Israel's security is not,
and never will be, negotiable. Any attack deliberately
targeting civilian populations and infrastructure is also
contrary to international humanitarian law. In addition,
we have taken note of the Israeli army's announcement
of an internal investigation into the deaths of eight
Palestinian civilians, including five children, in an air
strike on Deir el-Balah on 14 November. We call for
that investigation, like those announced by Israel in
April 2018, to be completed in a transparent manner
and followed by measures that are commensurate with
the gravity of the situation.

We call on all parties to exercise the utmost restraint
and to respect the ceasefire agreed under the auspices
of the Special Coordinator. In addition to the immediate
need for a cessation ofhostilities, there will be no lasting
stability in Gaza without the lifting of the blockade,
along with credible security guarantees for Israel, and
without the return of the Palestinian Authority.

The Palestinian Authority will be able to fully
exercise its authority in Gaza only ifthere is a resumption
of the intra-Palestinian reconciliation process, which
must involve credible elections held throughout
the Palestinian territories, including Gaza and East
Jerusalem. We noted with interest the commitment of
President Abbas to holding elections in the near future
as well as the preparatory work undertaken to that end.
We encourage the Palestinian leadership to ensure that
the elections take place, and we stand ready to support
it on that path.

In a context where the situation in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem remains worrying, I reiterate France's
commitment to respect for freedom of expression and
the protection ofjournalists. We also call on the Israeli
authorities to reconsider their decision to revoke the
residence permit of the Director of Human Rights Watch
for Israel and Palestine following the confirmation by
the Israeli Supreme Court of that decision.

In conclusion, I would like to recall France's
unwavering support for the two-State solution. At
a time when the prospect of such a solution is being
questioned, it is more necessary than ever to recall
that only a solution based on the internationally agreed
parameters will make it possible to meet the aspirations
of Israelis and Palestinians and to bring lasting peace
to the region. It must allow the establishment of a
Palestinian State living in peace and security alongside
Israel, within secure and internationally recognized
borders drawn on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
Jerusalem as the capital of the two States. Any peace
plan that deviates from the internationally agreed
parameters would be doomed to failure. As France is a
friend ofboth Israel and the Palestinians, it stands ready
to encourage them to resume dialogue on that basis.

Pending a lasting peace that provides ajust, realistic
and sustainable solution to the issue of Palestinian
refugees, the role of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
will remain crucial. At the General Assembly, a very
large majority of Member States called for the renewal
of its mandate for three years, which France welcomes.
We will remain vigilant as to the Agency's ability to
implement its mandate and to continue its operations,
in particular in East Jerusalem.

Together with our European partners, we will
continue to monitor the situation closely and to advocate
for an order based on international law. It is also the
responsibility of the Council to ensure compliance with
international law and the parameters agreed by the
international community. France will ensure that.
