Mr. Jallow: I, too, should like to state that we are
greatly encouraged by the support and appreciation of
all Council members for our work in the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and in the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). Members' comments will serve as
a further source of encouragement for us in Arusha.

There are three issues, raised by many
representatives, that I would just like to comment on
briefly. First, there is the question of the prospects for
the arrest of fugitives; then there is the issue of
transfers of cases to national jurisdictions for
prosecution; and finally, there are concerns relating to
witness protection.

Mr. Kabuga, of course, continues to be a number-
one priority on the list of fugitives for the ICT R; he is
our top priority and the most senior person among all
the fugitives. We continue to make every possible
effort to look for him and for the others.

Of course, there are many challenges in tracking
these fugitives. We have a Tracking Unit, which tries to
gather information and intelligence on their
whereabouts and their movements. The Unit itself is
not responsible for arrests; it works with national
police authorities, providing them with information so
that arrests can be effected. There are challenges in
gathering the information and in locating the people,
and there is a need for the fullest support from national
law enforcement authorities and national political
authorities if we are to make progress on these arrests.

However, I am optimistic that, with our new
strategy of enhancing the Unit's capacity and securing
the commitment of the political and law enforcement
authorities in the countries concerned, there is a good
chance that we can make some good progress in this
area this year. Sometimes it is not just a matter of
cooperation by States. For example, sometimes
fugitives are very difficult to locate. We are aware that
a number of them are in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in areas that remain inaccessible even to the
authorities themselves, so it is not just a matter of
securing State cooperation. In the case of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, our intelligence
occasionally tells us that a number of them are located
in the eastern part of the country, which is apparently
beyond the control of the authorities themselves. But
we rely essentially on State cooperation, and I believe
it would be good if the Council could reiterate that
States must live up to their responsibilities to help the
two Tribunals effect the arrests of these fugitives when
they are located. For our part, if we discover any
shortcomings in the discharge of those obligations, we
will not hesitate to bring it to the attention of the
Council for its support.

Regarding transfers, in addition to what Judge
Mose explained, all I would like to say is that we have
indicated that certain legislative and administrative
measures need to be taken, particularly in the case of
Rwanda, in order to comply with certain standards for
fair trial and in relation to the death penalty. I very
much welcome the statement made by our friend the
Deputy Prosecutor-General of Rwanda that legislative
measures will soon be taken in that respect. Once they
are in place, I should be able to consider making
applications to the Trial Chambers with regard to
transfers of people who have already been indicted.
Then it will be up to the Trial Chamber to make a final
decision as to whether or not such transfers will be
effected.

Regarding the issue of double standards in
relation to the death penalty, the United Nations does
not, of course, accept the death penalty, as a matter of
respect for fundamental human rights, so the Tribunal
cannot effect any transfer to a jurisdiction where there
is a risk that the person in question will be exposed to
the death penalty. That could give rise to a situation in
which our transferees would have the benefit of not
being subjected to the death penalty, whereas perhaps
locals who have been prosecuted in the national system
might be subjected to the death penalty. But that is the
situation as it exists. If we want to effect any transfers,
we must get the States concerned to make an exception
for our prisoners. That would not be an unusual
arrangement, since States make that sort of exception
in extradition arrangements between themselves. A
State that does not recognize the death penalty often
extradites a prisoner to another State that recognizes
the death penalty, subject to its not being imposed on
the prisoner. So it would not be a very unusual
arrangement.

With regard to witness protection, it is a very
important issue. The efficiency of the Tribunal and the
integrity of its proceedings depend on the free flow of
witnesses who come forward to give their evidence
without interference or intimidation. Therefore, it is
very important that there be an effective system of
witness protection. We have been receiving complaints
in the Tribunal concerning alleged interference with
witnesses and alleged intimidation of witnesses not just
of the prosecution, but also of the defence. Some of
those complaints are currently being investigated by
my Office. I can assure the Council that if the case is
established, the rules allow the prosecution of such
people, and we will make sure that we take the
necessary steps to protect the integrity of the process.

Beyond prosecution, of course, it is important
that there be an effective witness protection system in
the Tribunal. Judge Mose explained to the Council the
measures that the Trial Chambers can order. But that
also be an effective system of protecting them in the
countries where they reside. In this case, most of them
reside in Rwanda. There needs to be a system there to
protect them before and after they have given evidence.

We also need to look at the possibility of
relocating witnesses to third countries. It may difficult
to protect some of them in their countries of residence,
so there is always the need to consider the possibility
of relocation. My Office has made a number of
requests to certain countries to accept the relocation of
witnesses and/or their families for security reasons.
Here, again, I would like to appeal to the Council and,
through the Council, to Member States to consider such
requests with the understanding that they are important
to the integrity of the process. If witnesses and their
families are not protected, some of them may not come
forward to testify, and that would affect the outcome of
the process itself.

Those are the few issues on which I wanted to
comment.

I would like to thank all the members of the
Council for their support.
