Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): To
begin, the Argentine delegation would like to
congratulate the delegation of Brazil and to thank it for
proposing today's topic. We believe that selecting the
topic of the African dimension in the work of the
Security Council was extremely appropriate,
considering the number and importance of African
items on the international agenda and the need for the
international community to understand the need to
resolve those problems. This meeting gives us the
opportunity to take an overview of the Security
Council's consideration of African topics and to take a
fresh look at the problems and characteristics that are
shared by those conflicts.

In our view, today's debate should serve as an
opportunity to state that the entire United Nations, not
just the Security Council, must tackle the conflicts in
Africa in an integrated manner that takes into
consideration, in a coordinated manner, not only the
important security dimension but also the equally
important humanitarian and developmental dimensions.

Our experience with the recurrence of conflicts
that have long been on the Council's agenda and the
many dimensions of those conflicts should lead us to
take more creative and more inclusive approaches. In
many situations, the underlying economic, social and
political conditions which aggravated, or ever gave rise
to, a particular conflict remain throughout the duration
of military operations, only to reappear full-strength
once the armed conflict seems to be on the way to
resolution.

We understand that the Security Council's pivotal
task under the Charter of working towards the
maintenance of international peace and security cannot
be fully effective unless we carry out, in parallel with
those efforts, activities in the post-conflict phase, or
even as a crisis winds down, that are aimed at erecting
bulwarks against any resurgence of such conflict. We
believe that such bulwarks should include, among other
things, practical steps in the areas of development and
reconstruction, human rights, he rule of law and
democracy.

A concern for the multidimensional nature of
many conflicts, in particular in Africa, is nothing new,
either in the Council or in the system as a whole. The
creation of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, as well as the
existence of parallel groups in the Council and in the
Economic and Social Council charged with considering
the situation of specific countries in the post-conflict
phase, are clear evidence of the fact that we understand
the multiple dimensions of many conflicts.

Similarly, the integration of various dimensions
in peacekeeping missions established by the Council is
nothing new either. Over the past three years, the
concept of integrated missions has provided a tool
whose military component is enhanced by the
humanitarian element. Peacekeeping missions in Africa
demonstrate the practical realization of this approach.
The Council's work in areas such as the protection of
civilians and the situation of women and children in
armed conflict also bears witness to the fact that the
Council has integrated new dimensions in its efforts to
promote peace and security.

However, despite all of those initiatives, the
resurgence of certain conflicts in Africa seems to
indicate that the efforts made to date have not been
sufficient and that we must make greater efforts and
take new steps that will enable us to address conflicts
in an integrated manner in order to consolidate the
hard-won peace.

In the humanitarian area, the United Nations
system has been involved in an important debate on the
question of the transition from assistance to
development. Similarly, we believe that the time has
come to create new structures that would address, in an
integrated manner, the situation of countries emerging
from conflict.

In discussing such mechanisms, the role played
by the Security Council will be pivotal and should be
stressed, bearing in mind the fact that, in the absence
of a suitable security framework, it is virtually
impossible to take the basic steps required in important
areas such as development and reconstruction, human
rights, rule of law, democracy and protection of natural
resources.

In that context, we believe that the proposal set
out in the report of the Secretary-General entitled "In
larger freedom" to the effect that a Peacebuilding
Commission be set up provides a solid basis for a
discussion of a new mechanism that appears at this
point to be indispensable.

We believe that, for this proposal to be viable, the
mechanism must have a mandate and a capacity that
are institutionally appropriate. In the early post-conflict
phases in particular, the Security Council must be able
to rely, at the systemic level, on adequate assistance
from the funds and programmes, and, at the financial
level, on an effective and flexible funding mechanism
that makes it possible at all times to monitor the use of
resources.

