Ms. Wickramanayake: "One day I will become
President and I will bring a law that will stop people
from fighting and stop using guns and bombs", my best
friend told me when we were in sixth grade. Unlike most
sixth graders around the world, we were not having that
conversation in a classroom or a playground. Instead,
we were whispering into each other's ears in a safety
bunker in the corner of our school grounds. There
were bombings and suicide attacks in the capital of Sri
Lanka, Colombo, and running to the safety bunker was
a regular activity during our school days.

Many years later, as the Secretary-General's
Envoy on Youth, I had an opportunity to meet and
hold hands with hundreds of young people in conflict-
affected areas around the world and share their
heart-wrenching stories. But the difference was that
some of them - without waiting to be President and
without resources or institutional support - were
already leading exceptional peacebuilding initiatives
in their communities, schools, townships and even
refugee camps. Today we celebrate those fearless
young peacebuilders.

Allow me to thank the Government of Peru for
its leadership in convening this historic open debate.
Around this table today, in addition to Government
representatives, we are three young people - young
women - about to brief the Security Council, which
I believe is a first in the history of the Council and a
fair reflection of how young people, especially young
women, are turning tables and leading change on
the ground.

I would like to thank Mr. Graeme Simpson,
independent lead author of the progress study on
youth, peace and security, appointed by the Secretary-
General, as well as the Expert Advisory Group for its
support extended to guide Mr. Simpson's work. I would
also like to acknowledge the work of the United Nations
Population Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office,
which acted as secretariat for that independent report,
as well as the United Nations Development Programme
and other United Nations agencies for co-convening
regional consultations with young people and the
numerous partners from civil society and others.

It is not every day that the Security Council has
an opportunity to gather around an independent report
carrying the voices of over 4,000 young people from all
regions of the world, who represented the aspirations
of millions more. It was one of the most participatory
processes ever undertaken with the United Nations
support. Those young people entrusted us to carry
to the Security Council their hopes and unfiltered
perspectives for a more peaceful world. Today we
will hear directly from two of them: Kessy Ekomo-
Soignet from the Central African Republic and Sophia
Pierre-Antoine from Haiti.

The date of 23 April marks exactly three years since
the Security Council convened its second-ever meeting
(see S/PV.7432) on the role of youth in promoting peace,
which was presided over by the youngest-ever Council
President, the then-21-year-old Crown Prince of Jordan.
The meeting recognized that young people drive change
but they are not in the driver's seat and called for giving
them the license to help steer our common future.
Thousands of young people rallied behind that call by
using their exceptional communication and networking
skills to mobilize behind a common cause. They
challenged and rejected the false narratives labelling
them as a threat to peace and stability in society. The
Security Council responded by adopting resolution
2250 (2015). That resolution offers a beacon of hope
to countless young women and men risking their lives
to address conflict, violent extremism and the need for
peace. From Cameroon to Myanmar, from Kyrgyzstan
to Guatemala, young people use the resolution to engage
their Governments and support their work.

A little more than two years after the adoption of
resolution 2250 (2015), much has happened already.
Coalitions on youth, peace and security have been formed
in a number of countries. Dedicated programmes, with
young people at their heart, are being designed. Civil
society partners have mobilized to support the work led
by young people. United Nations country teams have
experimented with ambitious programmes. Donors are
rethinking their funding streams. Now we have the
progress study, which gives us unique insights on how
young people see and experience the world we live in,
their hopes for peace and security and their demands
of Governments and the multilateral system. It echoes
what I have heard from young people around the world.

This all points to two key issues that need
immediate attention: the growing mistrust among
young generations towards formal political institutions
and the exclusion of young people from political, civic
and economic life. Allow me to highlight a number of
key takeaways.

The progress study is a critical contribution to
the discussions on building and sustaining peace.
This debate, on the eve of the high-level meeting on
sustaining peace to be convened by the President of
the General Assembly, shows that we are starting
to see young people as the missing peace. That is
directly related to the Secretary-General's priority of
preventing conflict and violence. The youth, peace
and security agenda is at the intersection of Agenda
2030 and its ambitious Goals. It is at the very nexus
of peace and security, development and human rights.
It also is a critical complement to the women and
peace and security agenda and the children and armed
conflict agenda.

The progress study give us pointers that can inform
Member States' ongoing thinking about the reform of
the United Nations and points towards new systems
of accountability, the engagement of civil society and
young people. The study offers us a new narrative on
the role of young people. It recognizes that only a small
minority of young people ever engages in violence, and
it warns against policy panic triggered by unfounded
assumptions that youth are violent.

This agenda is about transforming systems that
lead to the exclusion of young people, shifting how
they are engaged and protecting their human rights.
The complex nature of peacebuilding and conflict
prevention requires us to tap into the potential and
creativity of young people. As Secretary-General
Guterres said,

"If we are serious about prevention, and
particularly about preventing conflict, we need to
be serious about engaging with and investing in
young women and men."

I believe we all can agree that my generation represents
promise, not peril. We should be seen as an asset,
not a problem. The Security Council has a unique
opportunity to redress the mistrust between young
people, their Governments and the multilateral system
by opening new paths for meaningful participation and
contribution. The study offers many concrete, tangible
recommendations that I hope the Council will take
forward. As I see it, there are three main ways to do this.

The first is by supporting the peacebuilding
work of young people: recognize it, fund it, scale it
up, protect it. I will not ask delegations to let young
people lead, because they are already leading, but they
need inclusive, safe spaces and enabling environments
to succeed. Countless young people are building and
sustaining peace in their countries. We see this in the
United Network of Young Peacebuilders and many other
organizations. Their numbers are much bigger than that
of their peers who have fallen prey to extremist groups.

Yet those young peacebuilders rarely make the
headlines of local and international news, and they
definitely do not boast of the same level of financial
resources and freedom of mobility as those on the
other extreme. Many had difficulties in obtaining
travel permits to be with us in the Chamber today and
used innovative means, such as crowdfunding and
space-sharing to get here. Those young people deserve
more investments and more news headlines. I invite all
young people in the Chamber to raise their hands so that
we can recognize their presence and show solidarity to
those who could not be with us today in person.

Secondly, we can prioritize political participation
for young people to be fully engaged. That includes
ensuring that young people have a space at the peace
table, that their voices are heard as peace is negotiated
for Syria, South Sudan, Colombia, Yemen, Myanmar
and beyond. On peacebuilding strategies and action
plans, young people must be key stakeholders, not
mere recipients of directions. Young people should
feel that their vote counts and should be engaged in
electoral processes and political party structures, and
not be considered too young to run for public office.
Countries must remove all age restrictions that limit
young people's political participation.

Lastly, we can partner. Today's open debate
should be an important building block to continue our
collective efforts to promote young peacebuilders.
I have personally met young people in Iraq, Somalia
and Colombia who spoke about how resolution 2250
(2015) is helping to close the trust deficit between
young people and the international community. We
need to build on that momentum. In that connection,
I welcome the efforts of Peru and Sweden to further
strengthen the youth, peace and security agenda by way
of a follow-up draft resolution to this debate. I sincerely
hope the members of the Council will offer support that
opens a path for regular Council discussions on this
critical issue.

The diversity in the Chamber today is a testament
to how multiple partners from different organizational
standpoints can come together to advance progress.
That is what the courageous and important work of
young people engaged in peacebuilding demands
and deserves. What history books will write about
representatives here today, and what their children and
grandchildren will read about them, will depend upon
what decisions they make today. I sincerely hope that
they decide that youth is no longer a subsidiary agenda,
but the most important agenda for the Council and for
the United Nations.

