Mr. Ahsan (Bangladesh): We thank you, Madam,
for convening this meeting on the situation in Angola.
We wish to join previous speakers in welcoming the
Foreign Minister of Angola once again to our midst
and to thank him for his comprehensive statement. We
also thank Ambassador Gambari for his briefing this
afternoon.

Only last month we had an opportunity to review
the situation in Angola in the wake of gruesome attacks
by UNITA on civilians. Since then, as Ambassador
Gambari mentioned, reports of more fighting and of
violence by UNITA have reached us. We have not seen
any appreciable improvement in the situation. We
therefore find it opportune to address this issue once
again in the Council.

Seen in its totality, however, the picture is not all
that discouraging. The sanctions imposed on UNITA
are taking effect. We deeply value in this regard the
work done by the Monitoring Mechanism on Sanctions
against UNITA, chaired by Ambassador Larrain. The
Mechanism's pioneering work in monitoring sanctions
implementation has actually established the concept
that effective monitoring is a sine qua non for the
implementation of sanctions. Given UNITA's pursuit of
the military option, it is clear that the international
community should do all it can to make things difficult
for UNITA. Sanctions, therefore, must be implemented
effectively.

It is right that with increasing cooperation from
States in the region, the focus of the sanctions should
now be more on diamonds, arms, UNITA's financial
assets and the activities of its representatives abroad.
The Mechanism's recommendations in these areas have
been before the Council for close to a year now, and we
believe that the time has come to ask what the Council
wants to do with them. An answer can be found only if
a serious review of these recommendations is
undertaken. We have therefore supported the idea of
the review currently underway in the sanctions
Committee. We believe that such a review will show
that much more needs to be done in a number of areas
covered in the sanctions.

The latest report of the Mechanism also brought
to the fore how extensively and effectively the UNITA
representatives abroad have made use of the Internet,
as personal contact among them has been made
increasingly difficult by various restrictions, including
on travel.

Here we wish to reiterate a particular point that
concerns certain regional arrangements that UNITA
officials have abused in continuing unrestricted
movement across borders. We believe that the binding
nature of relevant Council resolutions must be upheld
and necessary adjustments should be made to those
arrangements to ensure compliance. We attach
particular importance to the tracking of UNITA's funds
and financial assets, and we encourage the Mechanism
to persist in their efforts in this regard.

The key role of regional States has been
established in ensuring full implementation of
sanctions in the area of diamonds and arms. We
strongly support the steps taken by the States of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
and emphasize the need to assist them in their
endeavour.

Reaching out to all citizens, meeting their basic
needs and restoring their basic rights are priority areas
on which the Government of Angola must focus. The
creation of the Fund for Peace and National
Reconciliation, the four-point peace plan, resettlement
of the displaced population and, as we just heard from
Minister Miranda, the meeting between the President of
Angola and the chief of the Inter-Denominational
Committee for Peace in Angola (COIEPA) are steps in
the right direction. In determining more such steps,
consultation with all political parties, civil society and
church and community leaders is essential. This, we
believe, will pave the way for free and fair elections
that the Government intends to hold.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to recognize once again the excellent work by the
United Nations Office in Angola with regard to
capacity-building in the area of the administration of
justice and protection and promotion of human rights.
The process of peace and reconciliation in Angola,
however, needs to be bolstered. While the primary
responsibility for it lies with the Government and
people of Angola, we agree with Minister Miranda that
the international community should extend the
necessary assistance. Ambassador Gambari, on behalf
of the United Nations, has been pursuing consultations
with authorities in Angola in order to redefine the role
of the United Nations in helping the peace process. We
believe innovative and courageous steps are needed to
pull Angola out of the morass. Through Ambassador
Gambari's laudable efforts, the Security Council should
continually seek to assess the situation on the ground
and facilitate the search for a negotiated solution.

Finally, we are happy to endorse the statement
that the Council will adopt at the end of our meeting
today.

