Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would like to congratulate Lithuania on its initiative to
hold this debate, a debate allowing us to reaffirm and
bolster the commitment on the Security Council, on the
basis of the Australian initiative and resolution 2117
(2013). Belgium also supports the idea of adopting a
new draft resolution based on objectives defined in the
concept note circulated by the Lithuanian presidency
(S/2015/306, annex). As the Secretary-General
underscores in his report,

"Each crisis or conflict dealt with by the Security
Council has its own characteristics.Yet,a key
common denominator in all issues on the Council's
agenda is that availability, ownership and use of
weapons and ammunition significantly determine
the dynamics of the crisis." (S/2015/289, para. 3)

Too often, civilians, especially women and
children, are the primary victims of armed violence and
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. The
availability of the latter is one of the factors that fuels
sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict zones.
While the fight against the illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons cannot by itself resolve these
issues, it remains nevertheless an essential component
in a comprehensive approach.

Arms embargoes imposed by the Security Council
will be effective only if the violations of these
embargoes are detected and dealt with, bringing those
who breach them to justice. In this respect the sanctions
committees and their expert groups play an essential
role. Belgium therefore is in favour of including in the
mandates of the United Nations missions monitoring of

arms embargoes in close cooperation with the sanctions
committees and the relevant panels of experts - an
approach that is already reflected in resolution 2117
(2003) and in the conclusions of meetings held within
the framework of United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
The Secretary-General's report referrs to positive
experiences of the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
of the role played by the United Nations police units.

Last year, Belgium organized a seminar devoted to
the tracing and tracking of illicit weapons in conflict
zones, and we included the results ofthis seminar in our
contribution to the 2015 review of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The tracing of illicit weapons
in conflict zones can provide answers to the following
questions. Where do non-State actors obtain their
weapons and ammunition? Is there any unauthorized
re-exporting, and, if so, is the original supplier aware
of this? Who are the end-users, brokers and shippers
who present a heightened risk of diversion towards
conflict zones. Which Governments' stockpiles are
sold on the black market and on what scale? Which
elements of the armed forces are possibly involved in
the diversion ofweapons? Do weapons collected as part
of a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) effort later reappear on the black market?

The trademarks of the black market and the
diversion of small arms and light weapons that have been
made visible through tracing can be used to improve
efforts at controlling weapons. That information can
help exporting States in evaluating the risk of diversion
before issuing export licenses and to reduce these risks
before and during the transfer of these weapons. All of
this is required by article 11 of the Arms Trade Treaty.
This information can also improve the effectiveness
of DDR operations as well as security sector reform
operations and the integrated management of borders
and better secure weapons stockpiles and arsenals.
We support the inclusion of stockpile security, where
appropriate, in the mandates ofUnited Nations missions.

All of those results can be achieved only through
cooperation and information-sharing. Information
on any illicit trafficking identified should therefore
be compiled and made accessible to the relevant
authorities. That sharing of information should take
place at the national, regional and international levels.
For that reason, the reports of the groups of experts are
essential to the achievement of that end. We also believe
that the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
has a role to play in extracting the relevant data from
those reports and in compiling it in the appropriate
databases.

Regional organizations and exchanges within
the framework of the Arms Trade Treaty, bilateral
notifications, the broader use of the INTERPOL Illicit
Arms Records and Tracing Management System and
non-governmental initiatives, such as the iTRACE
project run by Conflict Armament Research, can all
also contribute to the tracking and sharing of results.

In 2014, during the fifth Biennial Meeting of States
within the framework of the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, States noted that technological developments
and the design of small arms and light weapons had had
an impact on the effectiveness of the marking, registry
and tracing of such weapons. They recognized the
challenges but also the potential of such developments.
Next month, governmental experts will meet at the
United Nations in order to ensure the effectiveness
in the future of the International Tracing Instrument.
The success of that meeting, which could provide input
into the 2018 Review Conference on the Programme of
Action will be very important in our continued fight
against the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. Belgium will contribute to those efforts on
the basis of a document that we have elaborated along
with Germany and other States.

