Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation reiterates its forceful rejection
of the insistence of certain delegations on diverting the
deliberations of the Security Council on the item "The
situation in the Middle East" from the primary purpose
for which it was established by forcibly introducing
other topics outside the scope of the item, such as the
internal situations in Syria, Egypt, Lebanon or other
countries. Their objective is clearly to marginalize the
Israeli occupation of Arab territories, to demote it on
the list of United Nations priorities, and to nullify the
terms of reference and substance of the item, which,
as we all know, is connected primarily to the effort to
end the Israeli occupation and to achieve a settlement of
the Arab-Israeli conflict in accordance with the well-
known terms of reference.

It was very strange to hear the Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General disregard, in
his briefing this morning, the clear legal description
of the occupied Syrian Golan accepted by the United
Nations. He continually referred to "the Golan" rather
than to "the occupied Syrian Golan", which is the
accepted expression used in the United Nations. On
top of that was his failure to address the importance
of ending the Israeli occupation of the Golan in
accordance with Security Council resolutions. He also
failed to highlight the cooperation between Israel, on
one side, and the armed terrorist groups that are active
in the area of separation in the Golan, on the other side.

I will not respond to the arguments and claims
of certain delegations about my country under the
agenda item for this meeting, because I do not wish
to contribute to efforts that serve only the continuing
Israeli occupation and the policies of those who protect
it. I should say, however, that we have much to say in
refutation and dissection of the claims made by the
delegations of the same States that support, shelter and
arm the terrorists spreading destruction and extremism
in Syria and working very hard to ensure the failure
of any peaceful solution to the crisis under Syrian
leadership. In that regard, I would name in particular
the Governments of Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Turkey,
as well as various well-known Western States, as was
recently confirmed by Zbigniew Brzezinski, a former
United States National Security Advisor, and Roland
Dumas, a former Minister for Foreign Affairs of France.

The Israeli occupation of the Arab territories and
its consequences for the peace and security of the area
have reached dangerous levels, in the context of the
international community's failure to compel Israel to
end the occupation in compliance with the relevant
international resolutions and to halt Israel's gross
violations of international conventions, particularly
the 1949 Geneva Conventions, and its continuing and
unprecedented settlement activity and expulsion of
Arab peoples from their lands. In that regard, it is very
strange that certain countries that feign enthusiasm
for the protection of civilians and respect for human
rights lose that enthusiasm where Israeli violations are
concerned, depriving the Palestinian people of their
right to self-determination and to rid themselves of
the racist Israeli occupation. In that regard, we should
point out the dangers ofIsrael's pursuit ofwhat is called
the Prawer Plan, which effectively seeks to confiscate
800,000 dunums of Arab lands in the Negev, destroy
36 Arab villages and displace 45,000 Palestinian
residents from their homes in order to build Israeli
settlements instead, in order to further its plans for
ethnic cleansing and Judaization, practised by Israel in
full view of merchants of crisis around the world.

The suffering of Syrian citizens continues under
the Israeli occupation in the Syrian Golan, in the
absence of the international will needed to end that
occupation in accordance with relevant United Nations
resolutions, especially resolution 497 (1981), and in the
context of the impotence of international human rights
mechanisms and the failure to take steps to end Israel's
methodical and gross violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in the Golan. There has
unfortunately been no serious international movement
to end those violations, or to halt the campaign of
settlement, oppression and racial discrimination, as well
as the kidnapping of Syrian citizens from the area of
separation and Israel's construction of a separation wall
in the occupied Golan. Almost 46 years have passed
since Israel occupied the Golan and began its barbaric
practices there. Unfortunately, during that time, we
have heard no one call for meetings aimed at defending
and protecting the population of the Golan suffering
under the occupation or those displaced by Israel from
their lands. We have heard no one call for conferences
to be held to collect humanitarian assistance for those
people - not to mention the fact that the enthusiasm of
certain parties for establishing commissions ofinquiry
suddenly evaporated when it came to the occupied
Syrian Golan.

Thanks to this international silence concerning
such Israeli practices, Israel went so far as to commit
an act of aggression against Syrian territories on
5 May, and has continued to threaten further such
acts. We would like to state here that Israel's continued
perpetration of such acts of aggression has increased
tension in the area to unprecedented levels that could
lead to the outbreak of a widespread regional war,
which could threaten international peace and security.
The continuing practice of certain permanent members
of the Security Council of providing cover for acts
of aggression and occupation of Arab territories by
Israel makes them partners in those acts and entirely
responsible for their consequences.

Israeli occupation forces are providing assistance
to terrorist groups in the area of separation in Golan
by transporting injured terrorists across the line of
separation to Israeli hospitals, where they are treated
and returned to Syrian territory across the line of
separation, where they can continue their terrorist
activities in that very sensitive area. We should focus
on the fact that such Israeli assistance to terrorists
is not merely a blatant violation of the Separation of
Forces Agreement, the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) and
international law, it also puts the lives of United Nations
forces there at risk and undermines their work. That
is exactly what happened when, on several occasions,
terrorist groups kidnapped members of UNDOF's staff
with direct incitement by Qatari intelligence. This is a
very grave matter, and we are still awaiting the results
of the Under-Secretary-General's investigation of it.

In conclusion, there are those whom it behooves
not to continue deceiving themselves and the rest of
the world or providing justifications and excuses for
Israel. It is well known to all that Israel is a settlement
entity built on ethnic cleansing and that it has thus
never been concerned with peace. It has responded to
every peace initiative with postponements, diversions
and justifications about what they falsely term security
concerns, at the expense of the Arab population, which
has now been living under the Israeli occupation for
decades.

