Ms. Honore: I would like to express my gratitude
to Angola, in its capacity as President of the Security
Council, for convening today's meeting on Haiti and to
all Council members for their continuing support.

(spoke in French)

I also take this opportunity to welcome the presence
of the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Haiti.

(spoke in Spanish)

I would like to especially thank all those countries
that contribute troops and police to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), as well
as all those Member States that work with us in the
process of strengthening stability in Haiti.
(spoke in English)

Following the interruption of the electoral process
that started in 2015, Haiti stands at a critical juncture
in its democratization process. The next few weeks will
be decisive for the short- and mid-term prospects for
Haiti's democratic consolidation, demanding from all
actors involved a good-faith effort that is guided by the
interest of the Haitian people.

On 25 October, Haiti held the second of the three
electoral rounds planned for 2015, demonstrating
progress towards the renewal of its democratic
institutions and the re-establishment of institutional
balance as enshrined in the Constitution. As a result
of those elections, 14 of 20 Senators and 92 of 119
Lower House members were sworn in, establishing the
country's fiftieth Legislature and enabling Parliament
to resume on the constitutional date of 11 January,
ending a year of dysfunction and rule by decree.

This positive momentum came to an end with the
postponement of the third electoral round, against a
backdrop of mounting tensions over allegations of
fraud and increasing security concerns. The risk of
yet another governance vacuum was averted by an
agreement arrived at on 5 February between former
President Martelly and the Presidents of the two
chambers of Parliament.

Drawing on the spirit of the Haitian Constitution,
the agreement provided a road map for institutional
continuity following the end of the presidential term
on 7 February. It called for the indirect election, by
the National Assembly, of a provisional President for a
period of up to 120 days, together with the appointment
of a consensus Prime Minister and Cabinet, and the
re-establishment of the Provisional Electoral Council
to complete the 2015 electoral cycle through elections
scheduled for 24 April.

Despite the many efforts deployed by those
responsible for the implementation of the agreement,
tensions continue to run high, with the political class yet
to unite behind a common vision for the political process.
While 14 February saw the swearing in of former Senate
and National Assembly President Jocelerme Privert as
Haiti's provisional President, for some three weeks an
impasse persisted over the appointment of a consensus
Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Parliament's vote
of confidence in the former's Government programme.
In that regard, yesterday's meeting of the Lower House
was adjourned, ostensibly because no agreement could
be reached over the proposed cabinet.

Concurrently, in consultation with the relevant
sectors, steps have been taken to identify the members of
the new Provisional Electoral Council. Their installation
is, however, stalled pending the confirmation of the
Prime Minister and his Cabinet. Continued demands
are being made for the establishment of an independent
electoral verification commission, in respect of
which there is as yet no definition of its mandate or
composition, that would enhance confidence as the
2015 electoral process continues.

The delays accumulating both in the confirmation
of the Prime Minister and in the re-establishment
of the Provisional Electoral Council, coupled with
uncertainty over the verification of the 2015 electoral
process, not only stand to impact the implementation
of the agreement and the conclusion of the electoral
cycle within the specified timeline of 120 days, but
may also prevent a swift return to full constitutional
order, thereby prolonging the period of political
instability that has plagued the country for far too long.
A protracted political crisis may result in deflecting
the attention of all actors, Haitians and international
partners alike, from sustaining the stabilization gains
achieved in recent years. Haiti cannot afford to lose
focus in that regard, as it can ill bear further declines in
economic growth.

The security situation has remained largely
peaceful, albeit fragile, although influenced by the
electoral process and related political tensions during
the past months. The 25 October polls registered a
decrease in security incidents, which is testimony to the
continuously growing capacity of the Haitian National
Police, which was the primary provider of election
security. When I last appeared before the Council (see S/PV.7530), I testified to the increased capacity not
only of the police but also of the Provisional Electoral
Council and the Government of Haiti to assume greater
responsibility in leading the country's electoral process.
While the elections on 25 October reflected the leading
role played by those key national institutions, the
continued engagement of the United Nations system
in support of operations, logistics and security and the
ongoing financial assistance from Haiti's international
partners remain critical to the completion of the
electoral cycle and the stabilization of the country.

Equally, in the last year of the implementation of
its 2012-2016 development plan, which is supported
by MINUSTAH, the Haitian National Police has
demonstrated both the commitment and the ability
to provide greater security to the Haitian people.
Further improvement of specialized capacities and
the strengthening of the institution are, however,
necessary in order for the national police to be truly
self-sustaining. That will require a sustained and strong
commitment to the development of the Haitian National
Police, within the framework of the broader rule-of-law
reforms to be undertaken by the Haitian Government,
with the support of Haiti's international partners.

The country's economy is showing signs of fatigue,
with public and private investment in drastic decline,
growth waning and inflation increasing, which has
resulted in a reduction in social spending, a drop in
income-generating activities, increased vulnerability to
external shocks, and higher exposure to humanitarian
crises, against a backdrop of decreasing international
funding. Three consecutive years of drought have
resulted in poor harvests, plunging 1.5 million Haitian
people into severe food insecurity and further testing
the resilience of the Haitian people.

In order to tackle those challenges, which impact
the daily lives of millions of citizens, and to implement
long-term reforms, Haiti needs stable institutions
and a capable governance system. There is therefore
no alternative to a return, as soon as possible, to the
path of institutional and political stability through the
completion of the pending elections. A failure to work
towards those objectives will have serious consequences
in the long term and put at risk the well-being of the
Haitian people, who yearn for and deserve stability.
Also, Haiti's international friends and partners need
assurance that their assistance will continue to have an
impact that promotes the interests of the Haitian people.

A strong spirit of compromise among Haitian
stakeholders and an equally strong commitment to
consensus-building will be key in order for the country
to find a way back to full constitutional order. I continue
to reiterate this message with a sense of urgency and
grave concern to all the actors involved, including to
the provisional President and the leadership of both
chambers of Parliament.

MINUSTAH's operating environment will be
shaped largely by the manner and the timing in which
the electoral process is completed. It is therefore of the
utmost importance that the international community
take a firm position in support ofa solution that ensures
that Haiti takes resolute action to continue on a path to
democratic consolidation.

As the Council is aware, MINUSTAH has entered
the last year of its conditions-based consolidation, and
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team have
started work on a joint transition plan. That plan will
outline a road map for the progressive disengagement
of the Mission from functions that can be assumed
by the Government of Haiti or other partners, while
identifying areas in which further support is required
from international partners, including the United
Nations, so as to ensure that the stabilization gains of
the past are preserved and that prospects for the long-
term viability of key institutions, such as the national
police and rule-of-law institutions, are increased.

That preparatory work on transition will feed into
the strategic assessment that resolution 2243 (2015)
requested the Secretary-General to conduct after the
elections with a view to presenting recommendations
on the future presence and role of the United Nations
in Haiti. In view of the current political uncertainty
in the country, the Secretary-General has proposed in
his report (S/2016/225) that the strategic assessment be
carried out following the completion of the interrupted
electoral process. The Secretary-General intends to
submit recommendations to the Security Council on the
future of MINUSTAH, ahead of the expiration of its
mandate in October, separately and apart from electoral
developments on the ground.

I thank all my colleagues in MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team for their dedication during
this challenging period for Haiti. I also call on all of
Haiti's international partners to continue to lend their
invaluable support to the country's political process.

Finally, I call on all Haitian actors at all levels to
be guided, first and foremost, by their responsibility
towards the people of Haiti and to ensure the completion
of the electoral process in a climate of serenity.

