Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his quarterly
briefing and for his effective chairmanship of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).

The Security Council has once again taken up a
very worrying report from the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The
report underscores that Iran is continuing to refuse to
honour its international commitments and to meet the
demands of the Security Council and of the IAEA
Board of Governors. The Agency also points out once
again that it is not possible for it to confirm that all
nuclear material in Iran is intended for peaceful
purposes.

Iran is continuing its uranium enrichment
activities, at 3.5 and 20 per cent, as well as its heavy-
water-related project, in violation of its obligations
under resolutions adopted by the Council and in the
absence of credible civilian purpose. Iran has begun to
produce uranium enriched to 20 per cent at its
underground facility at Fordo, which, let us remember,
had been concealed for many years. That is an
alarming development to which we, along with our
German, British and American partners, drew the
Council's attention in January.

Iran's increased capacity to produce enriched
uranium beyond 3.5 per cent clearly brings it very
close to military levels. The IAEA also expresses great
concern about the possible military dimension of Iran's
nuclear programme. In its report of 8 November 2011,
it details Iran's activities specifically tied to nuclear
arms. We regret that, despite two visits by the Agency,
Iran has refused to give it access to all necessary
documents, people and sites. That refusal is contrary to
the demands formulated by the IAEA Board of
Governors in November. We especially regret that
IAEA inspectors were not authorized to visit the
military site in Parchin, We are also concerned by
reports from the Agency that several kilos of natural
uranium metal may have been diverted.

Beyond nuclear issues, other Iranian actions in
Violation of Council resolutions compound our
concern. Iran is improving its ballistic capacities,
including under cover of its space programme. France,
along with the United Kingdom, the United States and
Germany, notified the Committee of a satellite
launched on a Safir rocket on 3 February - yet
another Iranian violation of paragraph 9 of resolution
1929 (2010).

We are also deeply concerned about the weapons
that Iran continues to distribute in violation of Council
resolutions, threatening the security of its neighbours
and of an already unstable region. I am particularly
concerned about Syria. New arms transfers between
Iran and Syria have been reported to the Committee
since our last meeting (see S/PV.6697), compounding
the numerous confirmed cases already reported to the
Committee by several Member States. The high
number of those instances confirms a deliberate and
ongoing policy of illicit transfer of arms and related
material between Iran and Syria. In Lebanon, too,
Hizbullah continues to claim Iran's material support, in
violation of resolutions 1747 (2007) and 1701 (2006).

In the face of this challenge, the international
community has demonstrated its unity and
determination. Measures taken by the Security Council
are not ends in themselves; they are meant to convince
Iran to negotiate. And they have an effect. We must
therefore continue to implement them rigorously. That
will require first of all a firm response to reported
violations. The Committee must in particular identify
individuals and entities accused of violations, in
accordance with its mandate. We must also improve the
implementation of sanctions wherever they are
necessary. We call yet again for the final report of the
Panel of Experts to be published, in accordance with
sanctions committees practice.

What we call for - and what the Council has
demanded numerous times - is that Iran convince us

of the peaceful nature of its nuclear programme. Our
goal remains a negotiated solution. We are ready for
dialogue, in keeping with the dual approach that we
have always advocated, but Iran must demonstrate its
willingness for serious negotiations. Ms. Ashton, on
behalf of the six parties, has proposed to Iran to restart
talks about nuclear issues. She has noted their
willingness to embark on a policy of re-establishing
trust, leading to a comprehensive solution, whereby
Iran would fully implement its obligations under
resolutions of the Security Council and of the IAEA
Board of Governors. For the six parties, it is essential
that discussions be focused on the concerns raised by
Iran's nuclear programme. We therefore call on Iran to
seriously engage in that process. We call on it to seize
this opportunity to emerge from the international
isolation caused by its military nuclear programme.

