Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank the presidency of New Zealand for having
convened this debate under its programme of work and
also to thank Minister McCully for presiding over our
meeting today. I should like also to thank Ambassadors
Yamamoto and Saikal, respectively, for their briefings.

First, I should like to welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Tadamichi Yamamoto, and to wish him every success
in his work. We also thank all of the United Nations
personnel working in Afghanistan for their dedication
and stress the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in fulfilling its
mandate under extremely difficult conditions.

Uruguay would also like to acknowledge the work
of the delegation of Spain in preparing and negotiating
the presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/ 14) that we
have just adopted today. Uruguay reiterates its support
for the Government of Afghanistan and encourages it to
continue its efforts to move towards a lasting peace that
is based on sovereignty, territorial integrity and national
unity. The instability and insecurity that prevail in the
country continue to require the ongoing support of the
international community to overcome the obstacles that
it is facing in the political and security areas, which
have a direct effect on its economic development. We
deplore the fact that the political divisions seen over the
past few weeks have put the Government's unity to the
test. In that respect, we call on the country's authorities
to act with the necessary leadership so as to bring about
an agreement that will provide stability and make it
possible to carry out the relevant reforms for the benefit
of the Afghan people. International solidarity will also
be required to that end. In the same vein, we call for
sustained efforts to bring about direct talks between the
Government and the Taliban that will create conditions
conducive to peace in Afghanistan.

The October Brussels Conference on Afghanistan
will be an important opportunity for the Afghan
people to continue to determine their future and to
achieve progress related to the strengthening of their
institutions, the rule of law, respect for human rights,
economic growth and reduction of poverty, among
others. The support of the other countries in the region
will also be critical to achieving economic growth and
to addressing issues related to peace and security.
Security problems continue to beset the Afghan
people and many armed clashes and suicide attacks
persist. We regret that in only the first quarter, the conflict
has killed or wounded 5,166 civilians. Uruguay is still
deeply concerned over the humanitarian situation that
continues to deteriorate with new internal displacements
resulting from the conflict and exacerbated by lack of
access. We regret that humanitarian workers have been
wounded or killed and we deplore continued reports of
limited humanitarian access.

Our country attaches particular importance to the
secure and swift access of humanitarian aid to conflict
zones, in order to avoid critical situations that prolong
the suffering of the civilian population. In that regard,
we note that blocking humanitarian aid is a clear
violation of international humanitarian law.

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/768)
indicates, displaced people continue to be extremely
vulnerable. Food insecurity and limited access to
basic services such as health, water and sanitation
have exacerbated the existent health problems and
malnutrition. Over the past 15 years, over 1,100,000
people have been forcibly displaced from their homes
due the conflict, with 245,000 in 2016 alone. The levels
of malnutrition are alarming, affecting 2.7 million
people, including 1 million children under 5. Only 35 per
cent of affected children receive medical attention, and
only 25 per cent of those treatments are successful.

As such, the protection of civilians, particularly
women and children, has become critical. That is why
Uruguay believes there is an urgent need to respect their
fundamental rights. We call for child education and
the adoption of new legislation that will ban abhorrent
practices such as child marriages and bacha bazi, also
known as bacha bereesh.

As set forth in paragraph 34 of the Secretary-
General's report, the Government continued its
efforts to address violence against women and girls.
On 11 June, the Government approved the 2016-2020
strategy and action plan for the elimination of violence
against women. We hope that strategy will soon bear
fruit and allow Afghan women to emerge from the
stagnation and oppression in which they have lived for
the past 30 years.

Uruguay reiterates its call to fully implement
resolution 2286 (2016) on the protection of the wounded
and sick, medical facilities and medical personnel,
adopted on 3 May by the Security Council, which
would be particularly applicable in Afghanistan as it
makes difficult the work ofmedical personnel in charge
of vaccination campaigns for the civilian population.

Finally, Uruguay wishes to thank all United
Nations personnel and other humanitarian workers who
face extreme security situations on a daily basis. We
trust that their efforts in bringing aid to thousands of
Afghans in need, while putting their own lives at risk
amidst persistent abductions and attacks, along with
appropriate Government measures will soon give rise
to improved living standards for all Afghans.

