Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): I thank you very
much, Sir, for convening this important meeting on
Bosnia and Herzegovina. My delegation also wishes to
thank Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Coordinator of United
Nations Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
lucid manner in which he presented the report on the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), as well as for his comprehensive briefing
and his frank and candid remarks. I wish to assure Mr.
Klein of the support of our delegation in the important
task he heads to implement the mandate of UNMIBH.

The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) has successfully been
executing its mandate, with a view to establishing
mechanisms for enforcement of the rule of law in the
country.

The core programmes designed by UNMIBH are
geared towards achieving durable peace and security in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is only through such
programmes that sustainable law enforcement agencies
can be put in place and operate in an effective manner.

My delegation commends UNMIBH for its
excellent work in the field of training, reform and
restructuring of the police and all law enforcement
personnel. UNMIBH has been making an immense
contribution towards establishing the credibility of the
police by providing them with international standards
of personal integrity and professional competence,
which will, in turn, be an important asset for the
maintenance of law and order in the country.

However, we are concerned about the continuing
political interference in professional police work. We
call on the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as the Office of the High Representative, to give
priority to addressing the problems of housing status,
irregular and low wages, and efficient judicial follow-
up with respect to police work.
We have no doubt that the police in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is fully capable of successfully
discharging its responsibilities in the maintenance of
law and order in the country. It is encouraging to note
that the Bosnia and Herzegovina police is already
making a significant contribution to the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).

More than five years after the signing of the
Dayton Peace Agreement, the fuelling of hatred still
persists. Notwithstanding the reconstruction of towns
and cities, the countryside is reported to be still littered
with bombed-out ruins. A significant number of people
are still displaced from their homes. The Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is still struggling to recover
from the effects of the war.

My delegation views with concern the fact that,
so far, the Constitutional Court decisions on the
equality of citizens throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina
have not been implemented, nor has there been
agreement on a permanent law on elections. We urge
all those concerned to cooperate to take this process
forward.

Likewise, we call upon all of the parties
concerned to comply strictly with the obligations of the
General Framework Agreement on Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Dayton Accords.

My delegation firmly believes that every possible
measure should be taken to prevent any nationalistic
action, with a view to safeguarding the multi-ethnic
fabric of society in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this
regard, we strongly condemn the recent attempts to
establish a Croat self-government in parts of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as the recent incidents of
mob violence by Bosnian Serbs.

In the same vein, we support measures aimed at
combating cross-border smuggling, organized crime,
money laundering and illegal immigration. All of these
measures will undoubtedly create a better climate for
facilitating the return of refugees, who have clearly
expressed the wish to do so.

Any attempt to change State borders or
democratic institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina or
in the region through obstruction and violence aimed at
weakening international determination and the
international presence should be severely condemned.
In this regard, we welcome the commitments expressed
by the Governments in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the
Republic of Croatia and in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia for constructive bilateral and regional
relations based on mutual respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of each State. Cooperation
between these countries is paramount to the
achievement of sustainable peace and stability in the
region.

We would like to pay tribute to the members of
UNMIBH, who are doing a commendable job in
difficult conditions, with limited resources. We appeal
to the international community to contribute
generously to the priority projects of UNMIBH and to
the Trust Fund for the police assistance programme in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, so that UNMIBH can
successfully carry out its mandate.

Finally, my delegation supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General regarding
the extension of the mandate of UNMIBH in Bosnia
and Herzegovina for one year.

