Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): My delegation
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ivo Petrov, for his briefing and
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document S/2000/387.

I would like to make some brief comments on
several areas. The first relates to elections. As my
delegation commented on 21 March, the holding of
parliamentary elections in Tajikistan on 27 February was
a significant step forward in the democratic process. We
are pleased to note that it was the first multi-party,
pluralistic election in the history of Tajikistan. It included
participation by former warring parties, and the fact that
elections were held without violent incidents designed to
halt the process was in itself a success.

Secondly, with regard to the integration of
opposition fighters, we believe that in order to consolidate
the peace process, the reintegration of ex-combatants into
society should be given high priority. It cannot be Viewed
merely as a sequential event which will follow their
disarmament. The two processes are intertwined. Positive
results gained from the reintegration of the former
combatants into society will mobilize those still holding
on to arms and encourage them to surrender their
weapons.

My third comment relates to the role of the Tajik
Government, which should focus on consolidating the
achievements already made. Elections are only a starting
point in a long journey in the quest for national
reconciliation and democratic institution-building. The
Tajik Government, with the full support of the
international community, should concentrate on carrying
this process forward.

Fourthly, with regard to future United Nations
engagement and the role of the international community,
we have noted from the Secretary-General' s report that he
will be consulting the Tajik Government about the
possible role of the United Nations in post-conflict peace-
building and will inform the Council about the outcome
of his consultations. It would be worthwhile for the
Council to consider some viable and convincing options
for the future involvement of the United Nations in
Tajikistan.

Finally, with regard to the way ahead, the
international community has a responsibility to see that
the gains achieved in Tajikistan are not lost due to
waning interest after the immediate crisis is over. It

 

should come forward with assistance to help the fledgling
democracy take root and to create opportunities for the
people to see hope in their future.

