Mr. Skoog: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to address the Council this morning on
behalf of the Liberia configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I wish also to thank Under-
Secretary General Ladsous for his very pertinent
briefing this morning.

First, I, too, wish to congratulate Liberia on having
been declared Ebola-free last week by the World Health
Organization. The Peacebuilding Commission has been
very impressed by the steadfast determination of the
Liberian people and the Government, represented here
by the Minister, to fight the disease, and I am heartened
by the fact that full attention can now be geared
towards recovery. As we have continuously stressed,
peacebuilding must form part and parcel of rebuilding
after the Ebola crisis. The crisis exposed gaps in the
peacebuilding and State-building efforts made to date,
including in the area of building trust between citizens
and the State, and with regard to strengthening the
social fabric. The economic downturn that followed
after the Ebola crisis must be met with increased support
from the international community for revitalizing
socioeconomic development.

Let me turn to the main focus of today's briefing:
the continued drawdown of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) and the handing over of security
and stability tasks to the national authorities at the
conclusion of the security transition, by 30 June 2016.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out in his report
(S/2015/620), the assumption of responsibility for
security in the country by the Government of Liberia
will be an important milestone in post-conflict Liberia
and a demonstration of confidence that the country has
turned the corner from conflict, as Mr. Ladsous just
pointed out.

In this regard, the leadership of and ownership
by the Liberian Government will be absolutely
essential as the national authorities prepare to take
over. The international community will, of course,
have to maintain an important role in supporting and
accompanying Liberia in this transition phase.

At the same time, it will be important to not only
focus attention on what needs to happen until June 2016,
but equally so on what needs to follow the conclusion
of the security transition. Early and proper planning is
needed. Only by identifying longer-term peacebuilding
needs can we now jointly ensure that the required
capacity and support structures are in place to reinforce
national efforts. The Peacebuilding Commission
will continue to stress the imperative of greater
focus on institutional reforms and capacity-building,
socioeconomic development and the strengthening
of the justice sector in the context of consolidating
Liberia's peace efforts.

The international community has generated
experience and a body of knowledge on United Nations
mission transitions, upon which we should now seek to
draw. In our view, there are no excuses for not learning
from past successes as well as failures. We know that
the drawdown of United Nations missions constitutes
a defining moment on the path to sustainable peace
and development. However, we are still experiencing
significant gaps in political attention, as well as in
the financing of critical processes, programmes and
institutions. We could certainly do better when it comes
to transitioning between different modes of United
Nations engagement on a general level. In this regard,
we are fortunate to have had two recent reviews on
how to strengthen peace operations that offer a detailed
analysis. The PBC stands ready to learn from these
analyses and to do our utmost to provide effective and
relevant support to Liberia in its crucial next phase.

The Peacebuilding Commission will continue to act
as a convener and to advise and help mobilize resources
for Liberia's key longer-term peacebuilding priorities.
The Liberia configuration, whichI chair, intends to soon
host a meeting with all relevant stakeholders involved in
peacebuilding efforts with the aim ofidentifying needs,
discussing capacity and potential gaps, and looking
at where funding is falling short and where donors
could do more. Such a meeting would constitute an
opportunity for the Liberian Government to brief on the
progress made under its transition plan and for UNMIL
to provide an update on the security transition. The
meeting will also help shed light on local perspectives
of civil-society organizations and grass-roots actors.
We hope that these discussions will complement and
add to the work undertaken in the joint implementation
group in Monrovia, which is tasked with monitoring
the implementation of the Government's plan for the
UNMIL transition. The Commission is ready to share
the conclusions of those deliberations with the Council.

In addition, in order to ensure that the Peacebuilding
Commission plays a relevant role beyond the transition,
the configuration has taken steps towards the revision
of its current instruments of engagement with Liberia.
The Commission has invited the Secretary-General
to make recommendations for a updated framework
of engagement for the PBC in view of the security
transition. This strategic input by the United Nations
system will be critical to enabling the Commission to

play an effective role and will help align our support for
the efforts made by the operational actors in the field.
Those actors include the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the African Development Bank.

The key priorities of our current engagement
remain valid, namely, reform of the security sector,
national reconciliation and the rule of law. The
updated instrument is intended to align and bring
together existing national plans, including the Agenda
for Transformation, the Government's plan for the
UNMIL transition and the Ebola recovery plan. The
configuration looks forward to engaging with the
Liberian Government on updating our framework of
engagement, and we will keep the Council informed on
this exercise as well.

As Liberia is preparing for the security transition,
it is simultaneously grappling with a number of other
reforms with a bearing on peace consolidation. The
preparations for the elections in 2017, the current
constitutional review and the process of decentralization
will also remain on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, as these processes will affect fundamental
aspects of State- and nation-building. Similarly,
implementing the strategic road map for national
healing, peacebuilding and reconciliation also remains
imperative. We will also try to highlight land issues and
their relevance to the crucial area of natural-resource
management, not only to ensure reduced tensions
between affected communities and concessionaires,
but also to help Liberia develop a sustainable source
of domestic revenue. Lastly, tackling corruption with
continued vigor will be key in order to raise public trust
in Government institutions.

In closing, one might say that the value-added
of the accompanying role of the Peacebuilding
Commission is clearly being tested as a post-conflict
country approaches a milestone in its journey towards
sustaining peace. Liberia has a challenging year ahead.
The Council and bilateral and multilateral partners
have accumulated experience and knowledge that we
must continue to deploy in support of Liberia's own
efforts to consolidate peace. The Commission that
I chair stands ready to contribute to all these efforts
focused on national priorities and sustained peace.

