The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rowe
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council expresses its warm
appreciation to the President and Chief
Prosecutor of the Special Court for Sierra Leone
for their briefing during the debate of the Security
Council on 8 June 2007.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
support for the Special Court and commends the
progress the Special Court has achieved. The
Security Council particularly notes the
contribution of the Special Court to strengthening
stability in Sierra Leone and the subregion and
bringing an end to impunity.

"The Security Council welcomes the
commencement of the trial of Charles Taylor on
4 June 2007 in The Hague following the adoption
of resolution 1688 (2006). The Security Council
also congratulates the Special Court on handing
2

down its first trial judgement on 21 June 2007 in
the AFRC case.

"The Security Council also acknowledges
the Special Court's progress towards achieving its
completion strategy. The Security Council
underlines its expectation that all organs of the
Special Court will do their utmost to finish the
work of the Court in accordance with the
completion strategy.

"The Security Council urges the
international community to continue to support
the Special Court as it moves into its final stage
of work, including by ensuring that the remaining
fugitive indictee appears before the Court.

"The Security Council in particular takes
note of the Special Court's ongoing needs for
financial support. The Security Council
emphasizes the vital need for further pledges of
voluntary contributions in order to allow the
Special Court to complete its mandate in a timely
manner, and asks all United Nations Members
State to consider making such pledges.

"The Security Council also notes the other
varied challenges facing the Special Court as it
works to fulfil its mandate, and urges States to
consider supporting the Special Court by entering
into appropriate arrangements with the Special
Court for witness relocation and enforcement of
sentences.

"The Security Council recognizes that
further arrangements will be needed to address
residual matters after trials and appeals are
completed, including issues arising from long-
term enforcement of sentences for convicted
persons, the future trial of any indictees
remaining at large, witness protection and the
preservation of the archives of the Special Court.

"Finally, the Security Council commends
the important outreach activities of the Special
Court in bringing its judicial work to the attention
of the people of Sierra Leone, and thereby
contributing to the restoration of the rule of law
throughout the country and region."
07-40295
(spoke in French)

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2007/23.
07-40295

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.10pm.

