Mr. Abbas (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the outset,
Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March.

The Council is now engaged in a discussion of a
long-standing, recurring issue of great seriousness; it
must shoulder its responsibilities in a positive and
effective manner. The situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories has reached a stage at which it
requires urgent, immediate and effective action by the
Security Council in response to grave Israeli measures
in a way that will secure international protection for the
Palestinian people and its leadership. The Council
should do its utmost to prevent a further deterioration,
which would lead to heightened tension throughout the
region.

Despite the international belief in the justice and
legitimacy of the call for the deployment of an
international protection force as soon as possible,
Israel's intransigence and actions compel us to recall a
number of points.

First, Israel is attempting to prevent the Council
from adopting a binding resolution, once again
branding it as a country that lacks commitment to
resolutions of international legitimacy, to international
law and to the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949. That does not surprise us. There is
nothing to deter Israel from such a course.

Secondly, when it is exposed for what it is, Israel
tries to protect itself and to conceal its true nature with
the assistance of a permanent member of the Security
Council, with a view to stopping the Council from
condemning it for all its oppressive measures and for
its war of genocide against the Palestinian people. Israel
makes these attempts because international bodies have
started to expose its inhumane policies. Here it is worth
mentioning the recent 14 March report
(E/CN.4/2001/121) of the human rights inquiry
commission established pursuant to Commission on
Human Rights resolution S-5/1 of 19 October 2000, on
human rights violations in the occupied territories. We
urge Council members to heed the recommendation set
out in paragraph 11 of chapter X, part II of that report.
That recommendation reflects the magnitude of the
tragedy, which is no secret to anyone.

Thirdly, Israel's attempts to pre-empt Security
Council resolutions, especially resolution 1322 (2000),
and the resolutions of the tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly are making it more
difficult for the Council to adopt the urgent measures
that the situation calls for. This is in addition to Israel's
continuous attempts to divert attention from its
colonialism at a time when the old form of colonialism
has totally disappeared. Such prevarication is aimed at
muddying the issues to enable Israel to present itself as
a country under occupation, and not a country that
occupies the land of others. That prevarication and
procrastination are no secret. No one can argue that the
occupation is not the essence of the crisis. Israel treats
the world with utter contempt, despite its occupation,
which has lasted too long and which has caused the
situation to explode.

Fourthly, Israel continues deliberately to
prevaricate, at a time when no one would deny its
request for security. But the truth about Israel's
position is now well known to the international
community: it reflects only Israel's colonialist leanings.
Israel is taking all these measures and making all these
attempts to prevent the Council from adopting any
resolution that would run counter to its own viewpoint
or would block its aspirations. The sponsors of this
behaviour, notably the United States of America,
should shoulder their responsibility and make the
necessary effort to put the peace talks back on track,
rather than maintain a policy of a double standard,
which was a distinguishing mark of the previous
United States Administration. That would enhance the
credibility of the Security Council, which is needed
more than ever before.

The League of Arab States has always expressed
its interest in a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
for all the countries of the region, and has made that
position well known in every regional and international
context, notably before the Security Council. Given its
Charter responsibilities, in view of the gravity of the
situation and in the light of the statements made thus
far in this debate, the Council should, first, take all
necessary steps to enable all parties to overcome the
present situation and to put an end to the tragedy
suffered by the Palestinian people by adopting the draft
resolution that has been before the Council since last
December; this would set matters straight and would
revitalize the Middle East peace process.

Secondly, the Council should unambiguously
reiterate to Israel that a just peace will provide true
security and that such a peace can be achieved only by
implementing resolutions of international legitimacy,
by the total withdrawal of Israeli forces from territories
occupied since 1967 and by making possible the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine with
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), which recognized the
existence of two States in Palestine within the borders
of the Mandate. Any other settlement will be doomed
to failure.

Thirdly, the Council should move with the utmost
speed to attain the objectives of international
legitimacy, as reflected particularly in Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and in General
Assembly resolution 194 (III), as well as in the Madrid
peace agreements.

