Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): I thank you, Sir, for
allowing the Netherlands to take the floor at this
important debate on the situation in Afghanistan. We
fully align ourselves with the statement made earlier by
the Ambassador of the Czech Republic.

Before offering a few remarks regarding the
future, allow me to express the gratitude of the Dutch
Government for the exemplary leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Eide in the
run-up to and during the International Conference on
Afghanistan in The Hague earlier this year. We are also
grateful for the overwhelming support and constructive
attitude of the approximately 100 delegations that
attended the Conference.

Regarding the future, the Netherlands would like
to make a few observations. First, on the upcoming
elections, many speakers around the table have
rightfully emphasized the importance of fair elections
and, in this regard, the need to ensure a level playing
field for all candidates. But let us not forget that these
are the first elections organized by the Afghan
authorities themselves, and that is no small
development. It is an important sign that the spirit of
democracy is gradually finding its place in Afghan
society, and we congratulate the Afghan people on this.

Secondly, it is time for the international
community, including the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), to start thinking of
the period after the elections. We believe that there is
merit in discussing some sort of agreement between the
international community and the new Afghan
Government, following the formation of such a
Government. That will enable both sides to express
their expectations towards each other.

From our side, we would wish to focus on the
areas of good governance and human rights, values
which are cherished not only by the international
community, but also and more importantly by the
Afghan population. In particular, more emphasis on
clear targets in the area of the rule of law will help to
establish the credibility of a new Government that will
be trusted by the people of Afghanistan.
A third issue relates to what is sometimes referred
to as the civilian and military surges which are under
way and which we believe are necessary, particularly
given the volatile security situation. We attach particular
importance to the growing consensus regarding the
importance of civilian assistance. In that regard, we
share the view of others that international civilian
efforts should be geared towards supporting and
consolidating Afghan civilian capabilities, in line with
the priorities identified by the Afghan authorities
themselves. Pooling international civilian assistance
capabilities would increase the efficiency of aid efforts
and reduce the risk of duplication or, even worse,
miscommunications between donors and the Afghan
authorities.

This brings me to a fourth and final observation -
the Dutch experience in Afghanistan. We say this with
modesty because we fully realize that situations in
different provinces have been and are different.
Nevertheless, we feel a few developments are
noteworthy. First, the civilian footprint of the Dutch-
led multilateral provincial reconstruction team in
Uruzgan is growing. In fact, the team operates under
civilian leadership. We feel that investments in
civilian-military cooperation are paying off. UNAMA
opened an office in May, and we feel that this is very
useful. Moreover, the presence in Uruzgan of civilian
actors has risen to 50 non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), international organizations and companies, as
opposed to 6 NGOs in Uruzgan just three years ago. At
the same time, Afghan authorities have increased their
security and military presence in Uruzgan, and we
expect this trend to continue.

Secondly, the civilian capacities of the Afghan
authorities in Uruzgan are growing. We used to liaise
mainly with the Governor, but these days we are
linking our activities more and more to the executive
branches of line ministries in Uruzgan and thereby
strengthening the institutional structures and policies
of the Afghan Government.

Thirdly, all those developments, both on the
civilian and on the military side, are contributing to
strengthening the zone of stability and development in
Uruzgan, and this will help us and our international
partners to gradually shift towards a more national and
a less single-province-oriented approach.

We share Special Representative Eide's view that
such a shift will help reduce the current level of aid
09-38734
fragmentation in Afghanistan. This is what we are
trying to do already; of our assistance for Afghanistan
of approximately €200 million since 2006, about one
third is spent directly in Uruzgan, in full transparency
towards the central authorities in Kabul and UNAMA,
while about two thirds are spent through multilateral
channels in support of the central Government.

