Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
too wish to thank Mr. Rashid Khalikov for his briefing
this afternoon.

My country welcomes the convening of this
meeting. We are not seeking to punish a regime that is
sinking in its own errors and needs no one's help to do
so. The only purpose of this meeting is to ensure
visibility for a humanitarian crisis of great
magnitude - for a humanitarian situation that is
endangering the health and very lives of hundreds of
thousands of human beings. Through this meeting we
are calling upon the international community and upon
world public opinion to mobilize in order to prevent
the future growth of what is already a significant crisis
and the future implications of actions taken in response
to judicial circumstances that have nothing whatsoever
to do with the lives of these hundreds of thousands of
people, whose very existence is now under threat.

The magnitude of the crisis has yet to be seen,
thanks to the effectiveness of the efforts of the
humanitarian organizations that have now been
expelled. Tomorrow, malnutrition, hunger, disease and
the deaths of many of these people will bring home to
us the true scope of this crisis.

On 8 March, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs estimated that 1.5 million people
no longer had access to food or health services; that
drinking water, basic sanitation and hygiene services
would no longer be provided to 1.16 million; that food
would no longer be distributed to 1.1 million; and that
4,000 children would no longer receive assistance to
address malnutrition.

The expulsion of 13 humanitarian organizations
that were providing services in the country has paved

the way for a great collective tragedy through the
intentional abandonment of many people. Preventing
those people's access to humanitarian assistance could
result in their deaths, which could constitute another
violation of international humanitarian law. The Sudan
must remember that it is obliged to protect its
population, that it must honour the commitments it has
made and that it must consider revoking the decision to
expel international humanitarian organizations. The
Sudanization of relief is not credible. Replacing the
assistance provided by nearly 8,000 humanitarian
workers organized to do so is no easy task.

Finally, I am grateful for the efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the World Food Programme,
which are exploring ways to meet the urgent
humanitarian needs in the Sudan and to prevent further
damage.

