Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I thank Mr. Huang Xia very much for
his briefing.

For several months, the Great Lakes region has seen
a new dynamic, energized by President Tshisekedi and
the support of President Lourenco and the commitment
of Presidents Museveni and Kagame. Such resolve
to reduce insecurity has already allowed for tangible
progress. The meetings held in Kinshasa on 31 May
and in Luanda on 12 July and 21 August led to the
signing of a memorandum of understanding between
Rwanda and Uganda intended to improve their political
and economic relations. The decision of the Southern
African Development Community to strengthen its
cooperation with the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region is also a part of that momentum.

The situation in the region, however, continues
to be unfortunately all too often characterized by the
tensions and insecurity that have been on the rise over
the past months in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It has also been characterized
by the deteriorating humanitarian situation and the
forced displacement of populations. Foreign armed
groups and various militias are carrying out illicit and
criminal activities in violation of the most basic rights.
We commend the continuous efforts in the eastern part
of the country by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which faces that situation on a daily basis.

In his effort to address those challenges, I commend
the announcements made by President Tshisekedi with
regard to combating impunity, improving the capacities
of the Forces arme'es de la Republique democratique
du Congo and managing natural resources. I hope
that those announcements will soon be translated into
action, and I encourage the neighbouring countries to
implement similar initiatives.

The development of good-neighbourly relations
and the strengthening of border cooperation are vital
to achieving the shared goal of bringing peace to the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is necessary to address the root causes of regional
instability at the same time, first by stopping all forms
of trafficking and the efforts of those who finance
them, and developing economic opportunities based
on the legal and beneficial use of natural resources for
all, with a view to achieving genuine development of
the region.

Those root causes must also be addressed
by encouraging a reconciliation process among
communities so that everyone can enjoy their civil
and political rights, as well as economic opportunities,
including fair access to land; by supporting the fight
against impunity and respect for human rights - as
Mr. Huang Xia said earlier - as well as by maintaining
full humanitarian access to ensure the provision of
assistance to those most vulnerable; by addressing land
conflict resolutions to allow for peaceful co-existence
among the various communities; and by implementing
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
for armed groups to allow for the effective reintegration
of former combatants within their countries and
their communities.

Such mechanisms have been initiated for the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda and
the Mouvement du 23 mars. Progress has been made,
which France commends, and it must lead to its
natural conclusion. In Ituri the process began with
the Congolese group known as the Force de resistance
patriotique de l'Ituri. That is encouraging, and the
process must be rapidly pursued in order to avoid any
relapse into conflict. Time is not on our side.

In other instances it will require a combination of
military and police action underpinned by incentives
for demobilization and cooperation among countries of
the region. The handing over of Rwandan rebels by the
Burundian authorities to the Kigali authorities in April
represents such an example.

Lastly, we must respond decisively to the
humanitarian and health crisis affecting hundreds of
thousands of people in the region owing to conflicts
and the Ebola, malaria, measles and cholera epidemics.
In that regard, France calls on all international partners
to take action to respond to the latter. Only 30 per cent
of the funds required for the humanitarian response
plan for the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
been provided. That is grossly inadequate.

The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General has a
crucial role to play in all of those aspects through his
support for the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region and its Oversight
Mechanism. France reassures him of its full support,
as well as reaffirms its solidarity with the Great Lakes
region and its support for reconciliation and regional
development. France will remain faithful to the
commitment made in 2013. We share the common goal to
help forge long-term regional stability. We stand ready
to work with the region to overcome current challenges.

