Mr. Acharya (Nepal): First of all, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. I would also thank
you for allowing me yet another opportunity to appear
in the Council during the discussion regarding our
request for continuation of United Nations support for
the peace process in Nepal.

I would like to thank Mr. Martin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive presentation on developments in the
peace process in Nepal since the Council's last
discussion on the subject.

On behalf of the Government of Nepal, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his personal
support for the peace process in Nepal and for his latest
report to the Council (S/2009/l) recommending
extension of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) by another six months, at our request.

As Mr. Martin has just explained in his brief,
following the submission of the report, important
political developments have taken place in Nepal that
have far-reaching impact on the success of the peace
process. The Constituent Assembly has elected its
various committees and the respective chairpersons
entrusted to start the task of drafting a new
constitution, mostly on the basis of consensus among
major political parties. In a statement to the
Constituent Assembly on 7 January, the Right
Honourable Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal
"Prachanda" made several important commitments to
the implementation of the peace process, including on
the issues regarding the return of property and the
commitment to continuing the practice of taking all
major decisions related to the peace process through
consensus among the major political parties. The
Government has also started to meaningfully engage
some of the Tarai armed groups and has, in fact,
already signed framework agreements for negotiations
with a few of them.

We understand the concerns of the Secretary-
General and of some members of the Council regarding
the delay in progress in certain aspects of the peace
process, especially on the issue of the integration and
rehabilitation of Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)
(CPN (M)) armed personnel in the cantonments.

Though this process has taken some time, it is
important to note that an agreement has been reached
in the formation of the special committee to supervise,
integrate and rehabilitate the Maoist army personnel in
the cantonments through consensus and mutual
accommodation among the parties represented in the
coalition Government and outside. The special
committee has now been constituted under the
leadership of the Prime Minister and includes
representation of all the major political parties. In its
first meeting earlier today, the special committee
amended the terms of reference and decided to prepare
a work plan to complete the integration and
rehabilitation process within the next six months.

In view of the remaining tasks in the integration
and rehabilitation of the CPN (M) army personnel
remaining in the cantonments, we have requested an
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Nepal for another six months. We highly
appreciate the Council's support for the extension of
the mandate of UNMIN until 23 July 2009.

It is our intention to terminate the United Nations
monitoring requirements by that time. In fact, it is our
expectation that the monitoring requirements will be
substantially reduced as soon as we start the
09-21130

implementation of the political decisions on the
integration and rehabilitation process that will be
reached in the special committee. We are not
contemplating any interim or alternative monitoring
arrangements before the termination of the United
Nations monitoring presence, because that will only
contribute to further delay in the integration process.
But the Government of Nepal is committed to taking
the necessary measures to help assist the exit strategy
of UNMIN, bringing a logical end to the peace process,
especially the current monitoring arrangement, within
the next six months.

In this regard, we have no objection to the
Secretary-General's proposals for further downsizing
UNMIN and reducing the rank of head of Mission from
special representative to representative.

On behalf of the Government and the people of
Nepal, I would like to take this opportunity to place on
record our sincere appreciation and gratitude to Mr. Ian
Martin, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for the excellent manner in which he has
carried out the mandate of the Security Council in
assistance to the peace process, upon Nepal's request. I
would also like to thank his dedicated team at UNMIN
for the work it has done for Nepal.

Despite the various challenges, some of which
Mr. Martin just mentioned, Nepal's peace process has
come a long way since its inception in 2006 and has
completed several important milestones, such as the
election of the Constituent Assembly and the
declaration of Nepal as a federal democratic republic.
As we have always done so far, we are confident that
we will succeed in bringing the process to a logical
conclusion, resolving all the remaining issues through
dialogue and mutual accommodation. Though it has its
own characteristics and pace, Nepal's peace process
will succeed at the end, and the support of both
Mr. Martin and the Council will not be in vain.

Before concluding, I would like to express my
gratitude to each of the member States for its continued
support for the peace process in Nepal.

