Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In the six months since the previous briefing
(see S/PV.7698), significant changes for the better in the
political-military situation in Libya have not occurred.
The main issue remains the fragmentation of the country
and its governmental institutions, despite attempts
by the Presidency Council in Tripoli to consolidate
its authority. The composition of the Government
of National Accord has not yet been confirmed by
the House of Representatives in accordance with the
procedure set out by the Skhirat Agreement. We see
no alternative to continuing the intra-Libyan dialogue
under the auspices of the United Nations, and with the
participation of all active political forces in the country.

The continuing terrorist threat emanating from
Libya continues to keep tensions high for its neighbours.
Fighting this threat, in particular against the backdrop
of a failure to unite security structures, has been done
haphazardly. Localized successes are not a substitute
for a large-scale counter-terrorist campaign under
unified command. Possible foreign assistance in that
respect should not contribute to preserving internal
divisions in Libya, as otherwise the tragic mistakes
of the 2011 intervention will continue to weigh on this
long-suffering country.

We take note of the twelfth report of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) regarding
the situation in Libya. We note that it was submitted to
the Security Council on the eve of today's meeting. For
reasons we cannot fathom, that seems to be becoming
the standard practice. We believe that a full-fledged
discussion of a document by delegations requires
preparation. That is why such a late circulation of the
report raises doubts regarding the ICC's desire for
serious dialogue with the Security Council.

On the basis of the report, we are forced to note
the lack of progress on the main issues of the Libyan
dossier, such as the forced displacement of the Tuareg
people, torture, illegal detentions and abductions. The
Office of the Prosecutor continues to remove itself from
consideration of the issue of civilian deaths resulting
from NATO's 2011 bombings. We see no real steps
towards organizing the prosecution of the insurgents
for their alleged crimes: not a single case was initiated
in five years. The Office of the Prosecutor has adopted
a similar stance regarding Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant terrorists, who, by the way, for some reason
are referred to simply as "Islamists" in the report. In
that context, once again, there is nothing more than
an abstract intention to revisit possible proceedings in
the future.

In the light of repeated attempts to present the
Libyan dossier as a type of burden dropped upon the
Security Council, I should like to remind members that
in 2011 the main proponents of the idea of referring the
situation in Libya to the ICC were certain States parties
to the Rome Statute and the Office of the Prosecutor.
They should have recognized the financial and other
consequences of that step for the Court. That is why the
report's requests for the ICC to be materially supported
by the United Nations appears to be illogical.

By way of conclusion, we would like to again note
that the ICC's experience in Libya cannot in any way be
qualified as successful, whether in the administration
ofjustice and the prevention of new crimes or in terms
of contributing to national reconciliation. The situation
and the process of withdrawal from the Rome Statute
by a number of States deepens our doubts regarding the
usefulness of involving the ICC in any new cases.

