Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for
his briefing.

We welcome the opportunity to highlight the
importance and potential of sanctions, which comprise
one of the few non-violent tools that the Council has to
protect international peace and security. Someone once
said that patience is the art of concealing impatience.
There are times when I think that the saying can be
very appropriately applied to the United States. We
feel strongly about our principles and our sovereignty
because they come from us, the people. When we see a
threat to our national security or when we see violations
of human dignity, we want to act sooner rather than
later. Most often we stifle that urge and show patience.
However, beneath our patience is a fundamental
unwillingness to passively accept insecurity and

injustice. Sanctions require us to be patient, but
imposing sanctions is one of the most important things
that the United Nations can do.

When they are formulated with wide participation
and implemented swiftly and consistently, multilateral
sanctions are effective. An excellent example is the
sanctions that the Council recently strengthened against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and
their affiliated groups. The United States and Russia
worked together in formulating these sanctions and in
making sure that they are adapted to the latest terrorist
threat. To ensure that these sanctions are implemented
fully and fairly, the resolution reaffirmed our support
for the Monitoring Team. The vote approving them was
unanimous, and, because the Security Council spoke
with one voice, these sanctions are showing results.
The flow of funds and other support to these terrorist
groups has been reduced.

By the same token, when sanctions lack wide
support and when they lack enforcement, they are
meaningless. Worse than meaningless, they degrade
the credibility and effectiveness of the Council. Not
only do they fail to stop the threat they are supposed to
address, they make the next threat to peace and security
more likely. What could be the argument against seeing
that sanctions, once imposed, are enforced?
And yet the Council has been unable to come
together to agree on routine reporting on sanctions. Even
agreeing on a format to discuss cross-cutting sanctions
issues seems to be beyond our capability. When it does
this, the Council shoots itself in the foot. It takes away
from itself one of the best tools to achieve what we are
all supposed to be here to achieve: peace, security and
respect for human rights. If widespread support and
strict enforcement is the way to do sanctions right, the
way to do them wrong is unfolding right in front of us.

When a State Member of the United Nations is
subject to multiple Security Council resolutions and we
allow it to violate these resolutions with impunity, it
will not change its behaviour. When States Members
of the United Nations do not comply with the sanctions
levelled against an aggressor, the Council's threats
become hollow. When States Members of the United
Nations violate human rights and crack down on their
own people for exercising their God-given freedoms
and the Council says nothing, it loses credibility. When
the Council threatens again and again but refuses to
follow up, nothing changes. The United States prefers
to impose sanctions through the Security Council.
Security Council-imposed sanctions have or should
have universal reach. They represent our political unity.

But when the Council fails to act, the United States
is not going to wait. When the Council closes its eyes
to repeated violations of its sanctions resolutions, the
United States begins to lose patience. The United States
will act to address threats to our security. We will act to
defend universal human rights.

From Venezuela to Zimbabwe and from the situation
in Crimea to the war crimes in Syria, we will do what
we have to do to defend ourselves, our allies and our
values. That is the inevitable choice of a nation facing a
dire threat. It is the promise of a people no longer able
to conceal their impatience. And it is my great hope
that my country and the Council will continue to work
together so that we never reach this point.

