I would like to thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham for his briefing. My delegation takes note with concern of the information provided in the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/813) and the further updates by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs today. It is sad that we can grow accustomed to listening to these disturbing reports and numbers every month and still do nothing to help stop the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Syria. Viet Nam is deeply concerned over the insurmountable difficulties faced by the Syrian people as well as the increasing challenges to meeting their basic needs. There is no easy way to report the number of civilians killed and injured. Indeed, 369 is the number for this reporting period, half of them women and children, many of whom were killed or maimed by explosive devices. Zero damage to educational facilities in the reporting period is a good sign but needs to be sustained. It is our great concern that the fragile health-care system and overburdened indispensable health workers continue to be attacked, killed or injured by the hostilities and by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Catastrophic consequences cannot be avoided if the health-care system is not protected and strengthened. We are troubled by the worsening development of COVID-19 in Syria and its impacts on the already dire humanitarian situation in the country. This enemy threatens millions of Syrians in all areas by limiting humanitarian access, obstructing the humanitarian response and worsening the socioeconomic crisis and the economy's ability to recover. In addition, the pandemic has also been hindering dialogue and negotiation efforts to find a long-term solution to the suffering of the Syrian people. Just a few days ago, the long-awaited talks within the framework of the Constitutional Committee were, unfortunately, put on hold. Water and food are critical to the survival of human beings. We continue to be greatly concerned about the increasing food insecurity and repeated incidents that cause water shortages affecting millions and hundreds of thousands of people, respectively. Viet Nam would like to stress the following points. First, at this time it is important to ensure timely, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access in order to facilitate effective humanitarian operations to all parts of Syria. A sustainable, calm environment is greatly needed. Insecurity and the increasing violence and unrest in the north-west and the north-east, as well as other regions, need to be addressed to ensure that humanitarian aid reaches the people in need in a timely manner and in adequate quantity. We reiterate our support for the call by the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy for a nationwide ceasefire and call on the parties to fully respect international humanitarian law, particularly the obligations to protect civilians and civilian objects, and to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance. Regarding the implementation of resolution 2533 (2020), we welcome the steps taken by the United Nations and its implementing partners in addressing logistical challenges in order to maintain the provision of assistance into north-west Syria. We take note of the increase in cross-line deliveries to the north-east and encourage the Government of Syria and the relevant parties to continue their cooperation in that regard. Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian response, Viet Nam appreciates the efforts of United Nations agencies and international partners and donors in providing support to the Syrian people. We would also like to pay tribute to all humanitarian workers on the ground for their continued dedication in the face of great difficulties. We once again reiterate the importance of strengthening Syria's COVID-19 preparedness and response capability by providing the necessary technical assistance, medical supplies and personnel, as may be required. Early response can go a long way, including by improving testing capacity and implementing basic measures to avert a major outbreak. We also would like to call on all concerned parties to address the reported issues regarding the situation in camps for internally displaced persons. The water shortage caused by the disruption of the Allouk water station, affecting nearly half a million people in Hasakah, requires a timely and sustained solution. Last but not least, we call for continued international support for Syria in all areas and by all means in accordance with its needs. The humanitarian situation in Syria demands a long-term solution that brings about sustainable peace and development for all Syrian people. It is our firm belief that the only way to achieve this is to pursue a comprehensive political solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and in full accordance with international law.
