Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I thank Ambassadors
Peter Wittig, Hardeep Singh Puri and Baso Sangqu for
their comprehensive briefings and commend them for
their work chairing their respective Committees.

Portugal aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of the European
Union.

Following the order of the briefings we have
heard, let me turn first to the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). We very much appreciate
the high priority given by Ambassador Singh Puri to
enhancing transparency and public outreach and further
strengthening cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations. In this regard, we note
in particular the outcome of the special meeting on the
prevention of terrorism organized by the Committee
and the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
(CTED) last month in Strasbourg and hosted by the
Council of Europe. The preventative aspects of the
fight against terrorism reflected in resolution 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005) and highlighted more recently
in resolution 1963 (2010) should play, we believe, an
indispensable role in the general framework of any
comprehensive structural counter-terrorism strategy in
order to actively address conditions conducive to
radicalization, incitement and recruitment to terrorism.
In this regard, we congratulate the CTC for the well
designed set of thematic discussion panels, which were
attended at a remarkably high level and fruitfully open
to civil society experts.

We strongly believe that effective counter-
terrorism measures and respect for human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law are not only
complementary but mutually reinforcing. In the light of
that view, we encourage the Committee to continue to
incorporate the consideration of human rights and rule
of law issues in its country visits, preliminary

11-3390]
implementation assessment programmes and strategic
activity plans.

Along with its work in assisting Member States
on matters relating to the better implementation of
relevant Council resolutions, the Committee should, in
our view, continue, and even intensify, its regional and
thematic approach with a view to developing regional
capacities and networks, prompting multi-sector
cooperation between States and organizations involved
in dealing with challenges concerning terrorism threats
to their region. In this regard, we welcome the
initiatives by the Committee and CTED in South Asia
and the Sahel, which, together with the Horn of Africa
region, should be seen, in our opinion, as key priority
areas for further international coordinated engagement
in countering international terrorism.

With regard to the briefing on the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), I wish
to thank Ambassador Wittig for sharing with us his
useful and appropriate personal comments on the
Committee's current challenges. We welcome the very
relevant achievements and engagement of the Chair
regarding the ongoing process of review of several
categories of individuals and entities on the
Committee's consolidated list, as well as with regard to
their respective narrative summaries.

Following the adoptions of resolutions 1904
(2009) and 1267 (1999), the Committee has taken
significant steps to promote transparency and improve
the sanctions regime. The establishment of the Office
of Ombudsperson to assist the Committee in de-listing
requests was one significant landmark in this regard,
opening an important door to listed individuals seeking
the reappreciation of the measures that affect them and
to reassess and readdress the situation. Portugal
strongly supports Judge Kimberly Prost and commends
her for her strong commitment to carrying out an
important mandate.

The three comprehensive reports already
submitted are a testimony to the serious work done so
far by the Ombudsperson to collect all the relevant
available information on the cases in question and to
provide final observations with reasoned arguments
that merit serious consideration by the Committee. In
this regard, we also attach importance to a complete
and well-founded response of the Committee to these
observations.

11-3390]
In light of the upcoming draft resolution to renew
resolution 1904 (2009), we believe that improving the
Committee's procedures and working methods with a
view to underlining the preventive and temporary
nature of the sanctions regime with fair and clear
procedures and enhanced transparency, in line with the
thrust of the Monitoring Team's recommendations in
its recent report, will only reinforce its impact,
allowing for a stronger application of the sanctions
regime by States, thus rendering it more effective in
the framework of counter-terrorism. We look forward
to this future exercise and to engaging fully in its
negotiations.

In relation to the 1540 Committee, I wish to
thank Ambassador Sangqu for his report and his
leadership of the Committee during the few months
leading to the unanimous adoption of resolution 1977
(2011) last month, extending the mandate of the
Committee for the next 10 years. We feel that a good
compromise was reached. A decade will provide the
necessary continuity to effectively monitor and assist
efforts to prevent weapons of mass destruction from
falling into the wrong hands, while maintaining a wide
ownership of the process. With two comprehensive
reviews per cycle, regular assessment is ensured, as
well as the opportunity to adjust to new realities,
challenges and threats.

We welcome in particular the fact that the
resolution recognizes the significance of active and
enhanced cooperation with States and relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations to
promote the sharing of experiences, lessons learned
and best practices, as well as facilitating the provision
of technical assistance in order to meet all the requests
that might be presented to the Committee. Finally, we
support the establishment of a group of experts, and we
consider it essential to conduct a careful reflection in
the near future on its expertise requirements and on a
workable structure that will improve the Committee's
ability to carry out its mandate.

Allow me to say one last word to express our
appreciation for the close cooperation and coordination
among the three counter-terrorism committees, aimed
at facilitating the fulfilment of their mandates,
improving efficiency and maximizing results. In this
regard, we support the possible future co-location of
the groups of experts. We also commend the
committees' contributions within the framework of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF), and in this respect I wish to welcome the
outreach efforts of the CTITF and commend it and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
for their very useful briefings to the general
membership on the activities pursued, in cooperation
with States and regional organizations, in the context
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy.

