Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Iwould like first of
all to congratulate you, Madam, on your presidency and
to thank you for organizing this debate on an issue of
the utmost importance, given its harmful consequences
to the lives of so many people.

We thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
and detailed report on this issue (S/2015/289), and High
Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein
for his briefing. I also thank Mr. Karamoko Diakite for
sharing with the Council his direct experience of what
it means to live with conflict and violence resulting
from the proliferation of small arms.

Unfortunately, many small weapons fall into the
wrong hands, resulting in severe damage of alarming
proportions, the deaths of innocent people, violations
of human rights and huge destruction of property. In
many cases, perpetrators target even United Nations
peacekeepers supporting peace processes in several
Member States. Additionally, weapons are supplied
or sold to non-State actors to fuel conflicts against
established authorities and destabilize entire regions
and societies, leading in the final resort to the creation
of terrorist groups and armed criminal networks.

Angola was the victim of such deeds for many
years. An Angola non-State actor was for many years
armed and funded to challenge State authority, causing
death and despair that we were able to neutralize only
thanks to the support of the international community
and the resilience of the Angolan people and its will
to live in peace and freedom. Given the experience
we have lived through so recently in building a State
founded on the rule of law, as well as the situation
prevailing in so many African countries and other parts
of the world beset with conflict, I think we have, both
as the Council and individually, the moral duty and
political responsibility to openly oppose the supply of
small arms and light weapons to non-State actors, in
particular. Small arms in the hands of such people have
been the real weapons of mass destruction.

It is alarming that, as the direct result of more
than 250 armed conflicts and acts of violence recorded
over the past decade throughout the world, as reported
by the Secretary-General, nearly 55,000 people have
lost their lives every year and many thousands more
have been displaced from their areas of origin. Even
more alarming is the fact that, in many of these armed
conflicts, thousands of children have been recruited,
used sexually and forced to commit acts of violence.
The extensive availability of small arms and their
ammunition is a key facilitator of the destabilization
caused by armed conflicts, as well as organized
transnational crime and terrorism.

The trade and illicit flows of these weapons, which
fall too easily into the hands of criminal terrorists,
pirates and other armed groups, are the main cause
of the devastating situations prevailing in Syria, Iraq,
Libya, Yemen, Somalia, Mali and the Central African
Republic, among other countries. Corruption, theft and
the lack of appropriate mechanisms for the management
and control of weapons stockpiles, particularly in the
disarmament phase, have worsened the proliferation of
and illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and
their ammunition.

We therefore welcome the entry into force in
December 2014 of the Arms Trade Treaty, which we
signed in September 2013. The Treaty constitutes a
global control system for the transfer of weapons,
including small arms and light weapons. The Treaty also
complements and consolidates other legal instruments,
namely, the United Nations Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition. In that
context, we also welcome the role of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects and its International Tracing Instrument.
We would also like to highlight the role played by the
Regional Centres for Peace and Disarmament and by
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs in
the fight against the proliferation of illegal weapons, as
well as by other actors that have directly or indirectly
contributed to preventing weapons from falling into
the hands of non-State actors, rebel groups, criminal
organizations, pirates, terrorist groups and others.
As a country that experienced a devastating
civil was that lasted for more than 30 years, the
Government of Angola unequivocally supports all the
efforts of the United Nations and of the international
community with a view to preventing, combating and
eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. Following the adoption of the Arms Trade
Treaty, considerable progress has been made in our
country with respect to legislative and administrative
procedures, including the passing of a new law on
private security companies that aims to restrict the
use of weapons of war by such companies, a review
of legislation on the use and possession of firearms,
including hunting and recreational arms, the enactment
oflegislation on the registration and marking ofweapons
and the implementation of changes in functional
regulation of arms and national police depositories
and stockpiles. However, that success would not have
been possible without the cooperation of civil society
and non-governmental organizations (NGO) such as
the Council of Christian Churches of Angola and the
action of some NGOs such as the Halo Trust, which is
dedicated to the destruction of obsolete weapons and
to mine-clearance. In addition to those activities, there
has been increased involvement, especially by young
people, in conferences, debates and other forums with
the goal of adopting and disseminating international
laws in conformity with the United Nations Programme
of Action.

With regard to international cooperation, Angola
is a member of two subregional organizations, namely,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and the Southern African Development Community,
both of which have programmes to prevent, combat
and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our attachment to
international instruments on arms control. We stand
ready to continue to work with you, Madam President,
and the other members of the Council in order to reach
agreement on a draft resolution that takes into account
the burning problem of the proliferation of small arms
to non-State actors, which have been at the centre of
many conflicts in the world, some of which are on the
agenda of the Council.

