Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
comprehensive briefing delivered by Mr. Mark Lowcock
on the drastic humanitarian situation in Syria, which
has been exacerbated by severe weather conditions.

Peru follows with deep concern the development
of events in Syria and their impact on the civilian
population. The change in the balance of forces seen
in recent months has not been reflected to date in a
sustained cessation of hostilities, while much-needed
humanitarian assistance is still being provided in a
restricted manner. There are 11.7 million Syrians that
need it. We note with alarm that the control gained
by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in recent weeks over areas
in north-west Syria could lead to further escalations
of violence and suffering for civilians, given the
group's obvious disregard for international law and
international humanitarian law.

We believe that, given that sensitive scenario, it is
crucial to prevent Idlib from becoming the scene ofa new
humanitarian tragedy and a major factor of instability.
In that regard, Peru reaffirms its strong condemnation
ofterrorism and the importance of brining to justice the
perpetrators of such acts, while also emphasizing that
the fight against that scourge cannot be used as a means
to justify endangering the lives of more than 3 million
people, most of whom are women and children.

We also want to focus attention on the desperate
situation that 42,000 displaced people are facing
in Rukban, where food, clean water and medical
supplies are in short supply. Eight children lost their
lives in Rukban in the past month alone. Given those
grave circumstances, we urge the Syrian authorities
to expeditiously grant the respective authorizations to
the United Nations so that it can provide humanitarian
assistance in Rukban in a sustained manner. We also
underscore the main role of the State actors present in
the area to support those efforts.

In addition, we would like to highlight the
professionalism and sense of duty of United Nations
humanitarian personnel and humanitarian agencies
such as the Red Cross and Red Crescent, among others,
deployed in Syria. We believe that the international
community, and in particular the countries with the
greatest resources and those committed to peace and
stability, should support those efforts. In the immediate
term that means guaranteeing stable and predictable
funding for the 2019 humanitarian response plan
for Syria.

Lastly, in view of the uncertain scenario looming
over the Syrian people, we must recall the urgency of
making progress towards a political solution based on
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/20l2/522, annex). All Syrian parties, especially the
Government, must engage constructively to that end,
together with the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Geir Pedersen, to whom we reiterate our
full support.

