Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Mr. Michael
Keating, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his dedicated service, and wish him all the
best in his future endeavours. I am glad to once again
see Mr. Francisco Madeira, the Special Representative
ofthe Chairperson ofthe African Union Commission for
Somalia, with whom we met in Mogadishu during the
visit to Somalia ofthe Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia
and Eritrea. We also appreciate the very insightful
and informative briefing of Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka, the Executive Director of UN-Women. Lastly,
we welcome Mr. Abukar Dahir Osman, the Permanent
Representative of Somalia, to the Chamber.
I would first like to express my condolences for
the terrorist attack by Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu on
2 September, which killed a number ofpeople, including
children. That cowardly act of violence reminds us of
the fragility of the security situation in the country
and the need to make every effort to preserve its hard-
earned stability.

We welcome the recent positive momentum in the
Horn of Africa as we witness the historic rapprochement
among the countries of the region, led by the strong
political will for change displayed by Ethiopia's new
leader, and we commend the political leadership of
the region for initiating and promoting these positive
changes with the goal of steering their nations towards
a long-awaited peaceful and prosperous future.

On the political front, we note the progress made by
the Government of Somalia in revitalizing the high-level
political dialogue with the federal states, strengthening
reconciliation processes and State authority across the
country. In that context, we welcome the significant
outcomes of the National Security Council meeting
held in Baidoa in June, which reached key agreements
on the transition plan, revenue-sharing and the electoral
model for the 2020 one-person, one-vote elections.
We commend and wholeheartedly back the bold and
comprehensive reform agenda and development vision
of President Farmajo and Prime Minister Khayre,
and expect to see them consistently implemented.
We also support the initiative to create an inclusive
electoral system with the participation of women,
representatives ofthe whole of civil society and national
minorities. There can be no question that women must
be empowered to make a dynamic contribution to the
peace process and given a lead role in decision-making

and mobilizing the grass roots for community action.

Building consensus on those and other critical issues
is important as a basis for further progress, including
the conclusion of the constitutional review process
and the definition of Somalia's federal model. We
encourage the country's political leaders to overcome
their differences in a constructive and mutually
beneficial manner in the interest of the stability and
sustainable development of Somalia. We also welcome
the measures taken by federal constitutional bodies
to ensure the holding of a national constitutional
convention and provide an opportunity for an inclusive,
Somali-owned review process.

Furthermore, we would like to stress the importance
of the sustained and coordinated support of the
international community for the recovery and
stabilization process in Somalia. In that regard, the
Somalia partnership forum held in Brussels on 16 and
17 July was an important step towards the further
development of an international partnership to facilitate
the implementation of the transition plan and strengthen
Somalia's resilience in the face of humanitarian shocks
and catastrophes.

On the security front, we are concerned about the
persistent threats posed by Al-Shabaab and groups
with alleged ties to the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. We condemn all acts of violence, including
sexual and gender-based violence, that undermine the
fragile security and humanitarian situation and the
peacebuilding process.

We acknowledge the role of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and commend
AMISOM. and the various United Nations entities for
their dedication to the security of Somalia. The swift
implementation of the national security architecture
and the transition plan, with the coordinated support of
the international partners, will be critical.

At the same time, the transfer of responsibilities
from AMISOM. to the national security forces should
not create a security vacuum. The continued capacity-
building of the Somali National Army is essential for
greater effectiveness. We note with satisfaction the
efforts of the Government of Somalia in addressing the
issue of the proliferation of arms and demonstrating a
commitment to building its weapons and ammunition
management capabilities. Just two days ago, we were
briefed via video-teleconference by a national security
adviser to the Sanctions Committee on the status
of the issue, and we will continue to closely monitor
the process, since it has critical significance for the
country's security and stability.

On the humanitarian front, we call on the
international community to fill the gap in funding
the Somalia Humanitarian Response Plan in order to
address the issues of vulnerable internally displaced
people and broad climate-related consequences.
Kazakhstan, for its part, has been contributing to the
Plan's implementation by helping to alleviate drought
in hard-hit areas.

Finally, we would like to stress the importance of
ensuring Somalia's rapid economic recovery. In that
regard, we encourage the Government of Somalia to
take further concrete steps to implement fiscal reforms,
build institutions and improve economic performance.
We call on the international community to enhance its
support for the further development of Somalia and for
addressing the root causes of the crisis.

