Ms. Rasi (Finland): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European
Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia - and
the associated countries Cyprus and Malta, as well as the
European Free Trade Association countries members of
the European Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein,
align themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes the decision of the
Indonesian People's Consultative Assembly on 19 October
to declare as void the 1978 decree incorporating East
Timor into Indonesia. This decision is an important step
in the United Nations-led process to pursue arrangements
for a peaceful and orderly transfer of authority in East
Timor to the United Nations.

The European Union, together with the international
community, looks forward to a smooth and peaceful
transition of East Timor to full independence and trusts
that the Government of Indonesia will fully cooperate to
this aim. In this regard, the European Union welcomes the
decision by the Security Council to establish the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET).

We would also like to commend the successful
deployment of the International Force, East Timor
(INTERFET), and praise the contributions of those United
Nations Member States who have given troops and
material support to INTERFET. The participation of, and
lead taken by, regional States was particularly important.
The European Union wishes to pay tribute to those
countries in the region who have contributed to the
establishment of the operation. It clearly shows their
interest in the maintenance of peace in the region. In this
context, we recognize the importance of the continuing
cooperation of the Indonesian Government with the
international force. Furthermore, we would like to
emphasize the importance of a carefully managed
transition period from INT ERFET to the United Nations
peacekeeping force in order to ensure continuity during
this period.

 

The European Union remains concerned at the
humanitarian situation in East and West Timor. We call
upon Indonesia to cease all support to the militias in West
Timor and to curb their activities, to demobilize them and
to secure the border effectively. Furthermore, the European
Union underlines the importance of cooperation by the
Indonesian authorities with the international humanitarian
agencies, in particular the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, to ascertain the wishes
of those East Timorese in West Timor and elsewhere in
Indonesia, with a view to facilitating the earliest return of
those who so wish.

The European Union welcomed the resolution on East
Timor adopted by the Commission on Human Rights at the
special session and the subsequent decision by the United
Nations Secretary-General to charge the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mrs. Mary
Robinson, with the establishment of a commission of
enquiry to investigate alleged violations of international
humanitarian law in East Timor. We hope that Indonesia
will cooperate fully with the commission of enquiry.
Finally, we would like to commend the work of the
Secretary-General in pursuing the consultation process
towards the independence of East Timor, and we would like
to reiterate our high appreciation for the dedication and
courage of UNAMET in the implementation of its mandate.

The European Union will continue to follow the
situation closely and to support the work of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General. The European Union
will take its part in further assisting East Timor in its
rehabilitation and transition to independence.

