Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation)(interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation is pleased to note
that the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti
(UNTMIH), which played a significant role in
strengthening the bases of constitutional democracy, has
successfully fulfilled the tasks entrusted to it by the
Security Council under resolution 1123 (1997). The
United Nations military operation has been completed. A
stable, albeit fragile, situation is being maintained in
Haiti.

The Haitian National Police continue to gain
experience. Events in that country, as we have repeatedly
pointed out, did not and still do not pose a threat to
regional peace and security. The situation in Haiti is
marked by a complex transition to democracy, which
unfortunately does not have firm roots in Haitian society,
and has been exacerbated by a prolonged social and
economic crisis. In this context, resolving the problem of
Haiti's economic rehabilitation and reconstruction takes on
particular importance. We are convinced that only by
successfully carrying out that task can we create a truly
firm basis for the strengthening of democracy in that
country. The international community will in future have
to supply technological, economic and financial assistance
to support political stability and balanced development,
democratic institution-building and respect for human
rights.

We are not against maintaining a United Nations
presence in Haiti, but with the proviso that it is conducted
in keeping with today's real requirements. In our view, the
peacekeeping role of the United Nations in Haiti has been
successfully fulfilled. At the same time, we have taken
into consideration the request of President Rene Preval
and the recommendation of the Secretary-General, as well
as the views of the group of Friends of the Secretary-
General for Haiti. We have accommodated their wishes
and are prepared to support the proposal to establish a
new United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
(MIPONUH) in order to continue international assistance
to strengthen the Haitian National Police, but with the
clear understanding that the new operation will, as the
draft resolution provides, have a clearly defined mandate
limited to a single one-year period ending on 30
November 1998. In our View, future assistance to the
Haitian National Police should be provided through the
United Nations special agencies and programmes, inter
alia, the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), international and regional organizations and
bilateral channels by interested countries.

 
We also deem it appropriate to note that in the context
of the Haitian operation we cannot forget the acute financial
crisis the United Nations is experiencing, the reasons for
which are well known to all, namely, the problem of non-
payment by a number of States Members. Even this
comparatively small new Mission in Haiti is still very
burdensome for the lean United Nations peacekeeping
budget. In this connection, I would emphasize that the
Russian Federation has no debts with regard to the Mission
in Haiti, and we hope that other States will discharge their
obligations. We welcome the additional voluntary
contributions by interested States to ease the financial
implications for the United Nations of carrying out this new
operation. We are grateful to the sponsors of the draft
resolution for having taken our proposals into account in
the draft.

In View of that and the points I made earlier, and in a
spirit of compromise, our delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution.

