Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I, too, would
like to thank the Secretary-General's Special Adviser,
Jack Lang, the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs and the Permanent Representative of Somalia
for their briefings this morning, and Jack Lang for his
report (S/2011/30) presenting a plan in 25 proposals. I
also take this opportunity to express the United
Kingdom's continued appreciation for the contribution

of the United Nations and its agencies to the
international effort to combat piracy off the coast of
Somalia.

The United Kingdom agrees with Mr. Lang's
assessment of the seriousness of the threat posed by
piracy, which has also been spelled out very clearly by
Ambassador Churkin and Ambassador Rice, and we
also agree on the need for an urgent solution. We
welcome Jack Lang's proposals for action, many of
which we have been supporting through the work of
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.
We agree in particular on the primary importance of
securing additional prison capacity as a key measure to
facilitate the prosecution of greater numbers of
suspected pirates apprehended at sea.

I turn first to the proposals in the report dealing
with options for prosecution and imprisonment. As
noted in the report, the international community's
efforts to date have focused on agreements with
regional States to accept suspected pirates for
prosecution and imprisonment. We believe that, in the
short term, this must continue to be our focus. The
European Union is moving towards concluding an
agreement on prosecution with Mauritius, and
negotiations are likely to resume soon with Tanzania
on a similar agreement, which is most welcome.
Discussions will also be taken forward in March, under
the auspices of the Contact Group, on post-trial
transfer agreements between Seychelles and both
Somaliland and Puntland.

However, we agree with Mr. Lang that it is vital
that work continue in parallel to develop judicial and
penal structures in Somaliland and Puntland in line
with current, well-planned and executed United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
programmes. The establishment of effective Somali
court and prison structures is the best long-term
solution, as it will provide the region with a sustainable
capability to deal with the problem of piracy, which is
likely, unfortunately, to endure for years to come.

As for the proposal to establish a delocalized
Somali court in Tanzania, we understand this to be a
temporary measure until local Somali courts are
established. However, we are doubtful that it would be
possible to have such a court operational within the
timetable envisaged.

Implementation is clearly linked to the
completion of other proposals in the report, including
prison facilities in Somaliland and Puntland; prisoner
transfer agreements between Tanzania and Somalia;
and the UNODC project to update Somali counter-
piracy law. Strong cooperation between the
Transitional Federal Government and Somali regional
authorities will also be required.

Even with the highest degree of international
political will, we believe that it would take time to
conclude the necessary legal agreements, recruit and
train staff, and identify and equip suitable premises for
a delocalized court. We also note that the cost and
timing assessments appear to be based on a working
assumption that such a court could use the premises
and detention facilities of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), but those premises will
be required by the Rwanda Tribunal and the ICTR
residual mechanism for the foreseeable future. We are
open to discussing this proposal further, but we would
need a more detailed assessment of costs and
feasibility before reaching a considered view.

There are a number of recommendations in the
report aimed at facilitating the domestic prosecution of
piracy and enhancing judicial cooperation. We agree
that all States should be encouraged to adopt laws
naming piracy as a crime of universal jurisdiction in
their domestic law. We would welcome further
information on the proposals for a legal framework for
detention at sea - that is proposal 7 - and the idea of
a "model case report", which is proposal 8. We support
discussion within the Contact Group of other practical
measures to facilitate the conduct of prosecutions,
including the provision of testimony by seafarers -
that is proposal 10.

In relation to the proposals to enhance the self-
protection of ships - proposals 1 and 2 - we
welcome work taken forward by the shipping and
insurance industries to certify compliance with
elements of best management practice, including
registration with the Maritime Security Centre - Horn
of Africa. But we agree that more needs to be done on
this through the Contact Group, in liaison with the
International Maritime Organization.

The United Kingdom has also been active as
chair of working group 1 of the Contact Group in
promoting cooperation with the Somali regional
authorities in Puntland and Somaliland - that is
proposal 4. The Kampala process was created as a
means of implementing capacity-building programmes
by creating a technical cooperation mechanism through
which the Transitional Federal Government, Puntland
and Somaliland could discuss how to cooperate with
each other as well as enable foreign assistance to their
counter-piracy efforts.

In conclusion, we agree with the Special
Adviser's overall assessment that there must be a
comprehensive approach to tackling piracy off the
coast of Somalia through the political, economic,
security, jurisdictional and correctional tracks. We
welcome the agreement by regional ministers to a
regional action plan on maritime security in Mauritius
in October 2010, as well as the consistency between
the main elements of this action plan and the key
recommendations of the Contact Group's own needs
assessment report, agreed in January 2010. We must
generate the political will to implement the necessary
measures as a matter of priority and ensure the
coordination of actions of States and international
bodies. We agree that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga, and the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia have an important role to
play in this regard, and remain grateful for their
continued close cooperation with the Contact Group,
which retains the key coordination role across the
region.

