Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I too
wish to convey very warm congratulations to Mr.
Nebojsa Covie, Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia and
President ofthe Yugoslav-Serb Coordination Centre for
Kosovo and Metohija. I welcome to our discussion
today the participation of an eminent Yugoslav political
leader responsible for Kosovar questions.

I would also like to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for
his briefing, which highlighted the successes achieved
by the United Nations in Kosovo since his last briefing,
on 25 February. Those successes are particularly
important, as they were achieved in a short span of
time.

France of course supports the detailed statement
to be made in due course by the Permanent
Representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union. In my national capacity, I should now like to
take up some issues to which France attaches particular
importance.

The election of Mr. Ibrahim Rugova to the
presidency of Kosovo and the creation of a coalition
Government under the leadership of Mr. Bajram
Rexhepi are the most significant developments of
recent weeks. I congratulate Mr. Rugova and Mr.
Rexhepi on their election. It is also fitting to welcome
the personal contribution of Mr. Michael Steiner to this
success.

The political agreement concluded under the
aegis of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General will render viable the Constitutional
Framework for Provisional Self-Government. The
elected leaders ofthe Povratak coalition must play their
part in the Self-Government, in which the
Constitutional Framework has given them a full role to
play - as well as in the Kosovo Assembly, in which
Povratak is an important political force. They have that
responsibility to their electorate, but also to Kosovo as
a whole, which must be fully developed within the
framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework. We support the actions by
the Special Representative to break the current
deadlock.

A considerable amount of work awaits the
Government of Kosovo. The daily administration of
Kosovo is now its responsibility. It must therefore
become involved in the details and tasks of
management, without delay. The welfare of the entire
population depends on the quality of its judgement and
the soundness ofits decisions. The stakes justify its full
shouldering ofthe responsibilities which fall to it under
the Constitutional Framework.

It is important that, in exercising its functions, the
Government of Kosovo be guided by concern for the
common interest. Public activities must be carried out
to benefit all residents, including minorities. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General will
ensure this in implementing the provisions of the
Constitutional Framework and of resolution 1244
(1999).

Everything possible should be done to improve
the lot of the members of Kosovo's minority
communities. Economic development and
strengthening security will be decisive in bringing
down the emigration rate, which is too high.

In parallel, because of its symbolic importance
and its human implications, the issue of returns should
continue to receive attention. We expect the Kosovar
leaders of Albanian origin, who are cooperating
actively with the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) at all
levels, including the local level, to ensure that the
projects under way are completed. The mobilization of
everyone around this cause is essential. We welcome
the appeal launched by Mr. Rexhepi in Kamenica to
free the province from intolerance and to integrate the
minorities living in enclaves. This path should be
pursued so as to ensure tangible results.

More generally, it is important that the agreement
concluded on 5 November between Mr. Haekkerup and
Mr. Covic' be implemented fully. We already see the
results with the transfer of the last Albanian prisoners
from Serbia to Kosovo. The settlement of this matter is
a definite success that illustrates the usefulness of close
and confident cooperation between UNMIK, the
elected Kosovar representatives and the competent
Yugoslav authorities on practical matters of common
interest. We look forward to Mr. Covie's continued
involvement in the implementation of the agreement of
5 November by way of dialogue with UNMIK and
soon, we hope, with the institutions of the Provisional
Self-Government.

The agreement concluded in Belgrade on 14
March under the aegis of Mr. Javier Solana with regard
to relations between Serbia and Montenegro will help
strengthen stability in South-East Europe and draw that
region closer to Europe. We welcome the political
courage of the signatories, which is exemplary. The
agreement does not change the identity or the
international personality of the State. Therefore, the
international obligations and laws relevant to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, in particular resolution
1244 (1999), will continue to apply to the common
State of Serbia and Montenegro

