Ms. Gomes (Portugal): The International Tribunal
for Rwanda was established in 1994 to prosecute persons
responsible for genocide and other serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
creation of this Tribunal should be seen as part of the
response of the international community to the tragedy
that occurred in the Great Lakes region. It is no doubt
contributing to the restoration of peace and justice in that
region.

But the International Tribunal was meant to serve,
above all, as a means to enable as much as possible the
redressing of the gross violations perpetrated. We cannot
forget how important this is for those who survived and
suffered the effects of those blatant human rights
violations. We also recognize that the trials of the persons
responsible for them will serve as a clear signal to the
international community: crimes such as those perpetrated

 

in Rwanda are simply not admissible and will not be
tolerated; impunity cannot continue.

The same views and goals lead us today to adopt this
draft resolution. Justice has to be done, and has to be done
without delay. Those accused must be tried fairly and
promptly. We are extremely concerned about the large
number of people detained and waiting for trial in Rwanda.
The Council is aware of its responsibility to ensure these
rights of the accused and does not forget that justice
delayed is justice denied.

We know the difficulties faced by the International
Tribunal, and we recognize the efforts put forward by all its
magistrates and personnel to overcome them. We believe
that the Council, in establishing this important judicial
mechanism, cannot overlook the need to continue to
provide them with the necessary means to carry out their
tasks.

The creation of a third Trial Chamber, which is the
object of the draft resolution before the Council, is the
appropriate response at this moment. We are confident that
this measure will result in improving the efficiency of the
Tribunal. In taking this measure, we are also contributing
to redressing a horrifying tragedy and thus to the restoration
of peace, justice and security in the Great Lakes region.

