Mr. Oshima (Japan): We appreciate the fact that
non-governmental and civil society organizations are
playing key roles in development, humanitarian relief,
human rights and other activities. World leaders
acknowledged this in their world summit outcome
document last week by welcoming

"the positive contributions of the private sector
and civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, in the promotion and
implementation of development and human rights
programmes" (General Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 172)

and stressed the importance of their continued
engagement.

Similarly, in today's world, non-governmental
and civil society organizations also play a significant
role in conflict prevention and resolution and in the
pacific settlement of disputes. My delegation is
therefore very grateful to the Philippines, under the
distinguished leadership of Foreign Minister Romulo,
for the timely initiative to organize this meeting. I wish
also to thank the three guest civil society groups for
their contribution to the debate.

The causes of many of today's conflicts are often
highly complex, multifaceted and intertwined.
Consequently, their prevention and resolution requires
a comprehensive strategy and approach that effectively
address all related issues and phases of conflict
involved. To that end, the efforts at conflict prevention
and resolution undertaken by Governments and
international interlocutors such as the United Nations
can be made more effective if they are reinforced or
supplemented by the parallel efforts of civil society
organizations.

A variety of civil society organizations and
groups, such as traditional community organizations,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), academe,
religious organizations and other social groups have
been making their unique contributions, bringing their
individual capacities, experience and resources to bear
in preventing, mitigating or otherwise addressing
causes of conflicts.

For example, traditional organizations can
support the peace process by mediating among the
parties to a conflict. Academe can play a useful role in
promoting confidence-building measures. In the field
of humanitarian assistance and human rights,
international and national NGOs lead the way on the
ground. In efforts at poverty eradication and
sustainable development, the nurturing of the private
sector must be an important aim, given its key role in
the pursuit of sustainable growth and development.

For these reasons, it is clear that dialogue and
interaction between the Security Council and civil
society must be strengthened. In fact, as has been
mentioned by previous speakers, the Panel of Eminent
Persons on United Nations-Civil Society Relations,
chaired by former President Cardoso of Brazil,
recommended in its report of June 2004 that

"Security Council members should further
strengthen their dialogue with civil society, with
the support of the Secretary-General" (A/58/817, p. 46).

We agree with that recommendation. For some
years the Security Council has been carrying on a
dialogue with groups representing civil society under
the Arria formula, which is a welcome process whose
potential should be further exploited. Furthermore, in
dealing with country- or region-specific conflicts, the
Security Council has engaged during field missions in
interaction with local civil society leaders, local and
international humanitarian NGOs and other groups that
represent, or are operational in, the affected countries
or regions.

In the same vein, we are pleased to note that a
number of encouraging activities are already in place
or envisaged for the future. For example, concerning
conflict prevention in Africa, the Security Council's
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa has held seminars inviting the
participation of civil society organizations, and this is
commended. In the field of United Nations
peacekeeping and in other peace operations, too, the
support and cooperation of civil society is often
critically important for their success. With that in
mind, my delegation is planning to convene an
informal meeting of the Security Council Working
Group on Peacekeeping, which I chair, inviting civil
society groups to present their views and engage in
dialogue with Member States on relevant issues.

Civil society is also expected to play a key role in
promoting human security. For the first time in United
Nations history, the concept of human security is
reflected in as important a document as the 2005 world
summit outcome document, adopted last week. In
paragraph 143 of that document, world leaders stressed
"the right of people to live in freedom and dignity, free
from poverty and despair".

Leaders recognized

"that all individuals, in particular vulnerable
people, are entitled to freedom from fear and
freedom from want, with an equal opportunity to
enjoy all their rights and fully develop their
human potential."

The concept of human security calls for a
comprehensive effort to address the various threats that
individual persons and local communities face, and to
that end the active involvement of civil society is
critically important. The United Nations Trust Fund for
Human Security was established in part precisely to
achieve that objective, namely by supporting projects
of relevant United Nations agencies that specifically
promote partnership with civil society groups, NGOs
and other local entities. The Trust Fund that Japan has
been promoting has funded 133 projects in 104
countries to date, including such projects as a local
partnership for urban poverty reduction in Cambodia,
assistance to local community learning centres in
Nepal, rebuilding of local communities in north-east
Sri Lanka, and support for the coping mechanisms of
crisis-affected Congolese households.

In conclusion, through today's discussions, we
are again reminded of the important role played by
civil society in conflict prevention and settlement. As
we follow the outcome document and rise to the
common challenges of the day, the Security Council
must further strengthen dialogue with civil society. We
support all efforts that take us in that direction.
