Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of today's meeting and Mr. Lacroix's
important briefing.
Peru is carefully monitoring the worrying events
that have resulted from the discovery of underground
tunnels, allegedly dug by Hizbullah, running beneath
the Blue Line between Israel and Lebanon. In that
regard, we must first acknowledge Israel's legitimate
right to defend itself against threats or violations of
its security, sovereignty and territorial integrity. In
this case we believe that should entail deactivating the
tunnels, avoiding further escalations or problematic
situations and obtaining explanations and satisfaction
of the issue.

We underline how vital it is that both the Lebanese
and Israeli authorities fully respect the Blue Line, in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1701
(2006). We also stress how important it is that the
Lebanese Government exercise full control over its
entire territory and that no arms or authority other
than those of the Lebanese State itself be permitted, in
accordance with the Taif Agreement and the relevant
Council resolutions.

We want to highlight the important role played by
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
in preventing any potential incidents between the Israeli
and Lebanese armed forces while the destruction of all
the tunnels is in progress. We have taken note of the
UNIFIL investigations confirming the existence of
four tunnels, two of which cross under the Blue Line in
clear violation of resolution 1701 (2006). We emphasize

the importance of conducting such investigations in an
independent and timely manner, as well as ensuring that
the Force has adequate resources for that purpose, in
addition to the cooperation of the authorities and armed
forces of both countries. We also underscore the need
for the parties to exercise restraint and, bearing in mind
the gravity of the matter in question, reaffirm their
commitment to strictly adhering to the Taif Agreement
and resolution 1701 (2006), among other things, as well
as to fully respecting the Blue Line.

