Mr. Danon (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Uruguay on its becoming a member
of the Security Council and for a successful month
as Security Council President. That is no easy task,
and you, Mr. President, have performed it well. As
we begin this new year with a new Security Council,
please allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate
the new members. On behalf of the State of Israel, I
wish them much success. The challenges facing the
new Council are vast and complex. The international
community looks to the Council to deal with the new
and unprecedented threats to global order and stability.
The lives and the future of millions of people are at
stake in the current confrontation with the forces of
anarchy and instability.

Nowhere is that more true than in the region I come
from. Whether it is the crisis of failed States or the rise
of radical terror groups, the Middle East is ground zero
in the battle for the triumph of the civilized world. As
a small nation located in the heart of the Middle East,
Israel is on the front lines. When Israelis, my people,
look around them, they see the brutal civil war in Syria,
and they see the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in
the Golan Heights and on the border with Egypt. They
see Hizbullah strengthening its position to the north,
and Hamas turning Gaza into a staging ground for
terror.
Hamas does not hide its intention to prepare for
the next round of violence, and continues to build up
its terror infrastructure - above ground and below.
Its officials boast of rocket factories operating day and
night. They are upgrading their arsenal with longer-
range missiles. Hamas is also rebuilding its network
of terror tunnels. Those tunnels are an underground
expressway of terror, leading straight into the heart of
Israeli towns and cities.

Israeli security forces only recently uncovered
Hamas terror cells that were planning to commit a
wave of shootings, kidnappings and suicide-bombings.
Even as Hamas plans attacks against Israeli citizens,
and despite the constant threat of rocket attacks, Israel
is taking steps to improve the well-being of the people
of Gaza. In the past year alone, we invested millions
of dollars to triple the capacity of the Gaza crossings,
allowing 1,000 trucks filled with building materials and
goods to enter the Gaza strip every day. However - and
we all know this - Hamas shamefully seizes supplies
intended to help the people of Gaza in order to build its
terror infrastructure. Let us all face reality: the greatest
opponent of the well-being of the people of Gaza is
Hamas.

While Israelis live under the shadow of the threat
from Hamas in the South, they also see the dark cloud of
Hizbullah in the north. That terror group is committed
to the destruction of Israel, and grows stronger and
more sophisticated every day. As we speak, Hizbullah
has over 100,000 rockets ready to be fired at Israeli
cities. Hizbullah has long-range missiles that can target
any place in Israel, and has obtained advanced strategic
weapons systems. Hizbullah's actions demonstrate
their disregard for human life. Hizbullah has embedded
most of its military infrastructure in the villages of
south Lebanon, storing weapons in private homes and
stationing missiles next to kindergartens.

Take, for example, the small town of Muhaybib,
in South Lebanon, where Hizbullah has nine arms-
storage sites, five rocket-launching sites, four infantry
positions, three underground tunnels, three anti-tank
positions and a command post in the centre of the
village. The town, of only 90 houses, has 25 military
sites. Take another village, the larger village of Shagra,
with a population of about 4,000 people, where the
Israeli Defense Forces has identified 400 military sites.
Hizbullah has transformed those villages into terror
outposts. That is the true face of Hizbullah - a brutal
organization that deliberately targets Israeli civilians
and uses Lebanese civilians as human shields. That is
the definition of a double war crime.
Israel has repeatedly warned the Council about
the threat of Hizbullah, and called for action. Once
again, let me say it clearly: Hizbullah is preparing
for another round of fighting. It must be disarmed,
and the Government of Lebanon must fully abide by
its international commitments and fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006). Make no mistake, Israel has the
means to defend itself. We will take all the necessary
measures to protect our people.

The Islamic Republic of Iran is the link between
the threat of Hamas and the danger of Hizbullah.
Wherever terror exists, Iran looms. Iran is the primary
destabilizing factor in the Middle East. It funds
instability and chaos throughout the region. Iran also
has a proven track record of defying the Council's
resolutions. When it comes to Iran, the challenge for
the Council at this critical time is to be vigilant and to
be brave - vigilant to monitor all of Iran's actions and
brave to respond forcefully to each and every violation.

For Israel, there is no greater challenge than the
challenge of peace. The road to peace is long and
difficult, but Israel is committed to making every
effort. Every difficultjourney begins with a single step.
Sitting down and talking is the first step to peace, but
the Palestinians refuse to come to the table. What does
Israel want? Simple: we want peace with security. That is
the only peace that will last. And the Palestinians? They
demand concessions without negotiations. They want
to be rewarded for their unilateral actions. Rewarding
the Palestinian Authority (PA) will only push the
Palestinians further from the negotiating table. Prime
Minister Netanyahu has called on President Abbas and
the Palestinian Authority to resume negotiations, but
they continue to refuse. Sadly, when the PA leadership
is not negotiating, it is inciting.

Recently, after another brutal attack against
Israelis, Jibril Rajoub, Deputy Secretary of the Fatah
Central Committee, declared,

"Whoever carried out individual acts of heroism,
we in the Fatah movement bless and encourage
them. We consider them heroes and a crown on the
head of every Palestinian."

Who are those "heroes"? They are the Palestinian
who stabs a young woman walking down the street,
and who runs over an old man with a car. Instead of
working to improve the lives of the Palestinians, the PA
encourages terror by providing stipends for terrorists
and their families; the more horrific the attack, the
higher the reward. Payments can be as high as $3,500
per month - that in a place where the average salary
is just over $600. Numerous terrorists have admitted to
committing heinous acts of terror in order to qualify for
a lifetime stipend "awarded" only to those who spent at
least five years in an Israeli prison. For the Palestinians
terror pays. It is their leadership that rewards the taking
of innocent life with dollars and cents.

Even toys are used as tools to poison children's
minds and encourage Violence. Israel recently stopped
a shipment of thousands of dolls dressed as terrorists,
with stones in hand, destined for children in the West
Bank. The "educational" purpose of those terror dolls
is clear, that is, to serve as role models for young
Palestinians.

Such incitement is at the root of the wave of terror
Israel is facing. The challenge for the Council is to
ask the difficult questions. Why does the Palestinian
Authority refuse to condemn acts of terror against
Israelis? Why do they refuse to sit down to negotiate?
Most important, what do the Palestinians really want?
If the Council believes that the answer is peace, then
call on them to condemn acts of terror. Demand that
they stop incitement. Stop giving them incentives to
avoid a real dialogue. And insist that they return to the
negotiating table.

The greatest challenge facing the world today
is the plague of international terrorism and violent
extremism. From Paris to Jakarta and from the Sinai to
San Bernardino, the peace and security of the civilized
world is under threat. Every day, the cruel hand of
terrorism strikes somewhere in the world, killing more
innocents, destroying more families and undermining
more communities. As the Council assumes the
grave responsibility for maintaining global peace and
security, it must present a united front against terror. In
that spirit, the Council adopted resolution 2249 (2015)
in the aftermath of the terror attacks in Paris. The
resolution declares

"any acts ofterrorism are criminal and unjustifiable
regardless of their motivations, whenever and by
whomsoever committed" (resolution 2249 (2015),
thirdpreambular paragraph).

I repeat, "whenever and by whomsoever committed".
Yet the international community has made one
exception. There is one place in the world where that
absolute ban on terrorism can be ignored. Once again,
the State of Israel is singled out and treated differently
from all other nations in the world. During the past four
months, Israelis have been stabbed in their homes, shot
at in the streets and run over by terrorists using cars
as weapons. Over the course of this wave of violence,
30 people have been killed and hundreds have been
injured. During the same period, the Council has
adopted 12 resolutions against terrorism and condemned
terrorist attacks in France, the Sinai, Lebanon, Mali,
Tunisia, Turkey, Iraq, Syria, Nigeria, Burkina Faso,
Somalia and the Sudan. Not once were the lives of
Israelis murdered by terrorists recognized by the
Security Council - no condemnation, no expression
of solidarity, not even a statement of concern. The facts
do not lie. The Security Council has been hypocritical
when it comes to Israel. I would like to take a moment
to tell members about one of the many Israeli Victims
whom the Council has not seen fit to even mention.

Dafna Meir was a 38-year-old Israeli woman
murdered by a Palestinian terrorist. Let me tell the
Council a little about the kind of person Dafna was. She
was a dedicated mother of six children, including two
brothers aged 4 and 6, whom she and her husband had
adopted. Dafna was a nurse in Soroka hospital in Beer
Sheva, where she treated Jewish and Arab patients. A
few days before the horrific attack, Dafna composed a
prayer asking God to give her strength to help people.
Let me read to the Council a few words.

"May it be Your will to grant me the ability to give
medications to Your people and to the members of
other nations who are in the devoted care of Your
faithful messengers who continue their holy work
day and night."

Last week, a terrorist attacked Dafna with a knife
at the entrance to her home. In order to protect her
children inside, Dafna heroically fought the terrorist
until he fled. Tragically, Dafna Meir died of the knife
wounds, in front of the children she fought to protect.
The Council's decision to ignore the murder of Dafna
Meir and of the other Israeli victims of terror is no
simple oversight, it is the direct result of allowing
cynical political considerations by some to take priority
over the lives of people.

The challenge for the Council is to chart a new
course. No more business as usual when it comes
to terror against Israelis. The fear is the same fear.
The pain is the same pain. The response must be the
same response. Terror is terror is terror. If we want to
succeed in these immense challenges, we must stop the
hypocrisy and the double standards. The Council must
condemn Palestinian incitement against Israelis. Such
words of incitement lead directly to bloodshed and the
death of innocent people. We must take a firm stand
against all acts of cruelty and terror, without asking
where those acts took place or who the Victims are.
This is a challenging and critical year for the
Council, for the region and for Israel. The terrorists
seek to undermine our values and to dictate how we live
our lives. Those extremists stand against everything we
believe in, but if we stand together, they will fail. For
the future of the region and the future of the free world,
we must join together to defeat the forces of evil and
intolerance.

