Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
The efforts to restore normalcy in Angola have gone
forward a long way. Most of the provisions of the Lusaka
Protocol have been implemented. What remains to be
accomplished is little. Perhaps this little that remains is
what those who do not want peace in Angola are clinging
to, including UNITA. The task of disarming the
combatants is nearly completed, together with their
reintegration in society. Government authority has been
extended to almost all the territory except the territories
under UNITA control.

Recognition of UNITA as a party in the political life
of the country has been accomplished. UNITA leaders
have arrived in the capital, Luanda, to assume their tasks,
including Government and diplomatic positions. However,
each time that the crisis in Angola nears a final solution
and normal life begins to return, UNITA comes along to
attempt a reversal.

 

Thus, it dissipates the hope of attaining a definitive
solution to the crisis there. UNITA also undertakes actions
which run counter to the spirit of the agreements reached
between the two parties, especially the Lusaka Protocol.
Examples of this are the maintenance of a military force
and the perpetration of armed attacks against United
Nations staff, which my delegation condemns. My
delegation demands that these attacks be immediately halted
and that UNITA respect its commitments towards the peace
process in Angola.

The peace process in Angola has reached a crossroads.
Therefore, my delegation urges both parties, particularly
UNITA, to refrain from using force because of the
nefarious consequences that this may have for the peace
process, which could send us back to the starting point.

In its conviction in supporting the peace process in
Angola, the delegation of Bahrain will support the draft
resolution before us. We all hope that UNITA will comply
with its commitments as soon as possible, and that that will
be before 23 June, the date stipulated in the draft
resolution.

