Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to very warmly thank your delegation,
Madam President, for having organized this meeting
and to particularly thank Under-Secretary-General
Gambari for another of his extremely insightful
briefings on the political and humanitarian situation in
Angola.

This meeting of the Security Council is probably
the last at which I will be taking part in an affair in
which I have been intimately involved in my capacity
as Chairman of the Committee on sanctions against
Angola.

Before commenting on the remarks of Minister
Albino Malungo, as well as on the briefing by Under-
Secretary-General Gambari and the report of the
Secretary-General of 12 July, I would like to take this
opportunity to step back and try to put the situation in
Angola into perspective.

When Canada became a member of the Security
Council some 19 months ago, Angola was one of the
priority items on the Council's agenda. The political
and security situation was so negative, and the United
Nations' reputation in the eyes of the Angolan
Government was in such a miserable state that we were
indeed getting ready to put an end to the activities of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA), which was the fourth United Nations force
to be deployed in Angola. UNITA, which was at the
very heart of a major counter-attack, had such a strong
position that they openly defied the United Nations;
indeed, they had the audacity to shoot down two United
Nations planes, killing 23 people. Militarily, UNITA
was planning attacks at less than 50 kilometres distance
from Luanda. The peace prospects based on the Lusaka
Protocol, a peace in which the United Nations Member
States had invested so much, were quite dim.

Despite numerous and onerous United Nations
missions and years of Security Council-imposed
sanctions against UNITA, the international community
had not succeeded in making any contribution to the
restoration of peace in Angola. UNITA exercised -
and, to a lesser extent, still exercises - control over
vast areas of the country, where they exploited
diamonds, the sale of which provided them with
abundant military supplies. Jonas Savimbi had made
systematic use of the hard-won periods of peace
between the Bicesse Agreements in 1991, the
internationally recognized elections in 1992 and the
Lusaka Protocol of 1994 in order to re-arm UNITA and
to pursue his own military objectives, in violation of
the very commitments into which he himself had
entered.

Nonetheless, we jointly decided not to act upon
this blatant non-compliance with the wishes of the
Security Council. We also jointly acquiesced in letting
the Angolan population suffer the consequences of the
endless civil war. More specifically, for what must
have seemed an eternity to the Angolan people, we
made very little effort to ensure the effective
implementation of the sanctions that the Council had
imposed against UNITA.

(spoke in English)

It was in such dire circumstances, in which the
Angolan people and many in the international
community were questioning the utility of maintaining
the immense effort expended since 1975 in the Security
Council's endeavours to bring durable peace to Angola,
that the Council took the decision to go back to basics.
In order to stop the cycle of conflict, the key link in
that cycle had to be broken. I am, of course, referring
to the diamonds-for-arms link which had allowed
UNITA to maintain its war effort with utter impunity.

Early in 1999, the Security Council took the
unprecedented step of creating an independent Panel of
Experts to collect specific information on
compliance - and non-compliance - with the
provisions of the sanctions regime that we had
progressively put in place over six years. Due in large
part to the outstanding work of the Panel of Experts
and to the Council's firm and clear-eyed subsequent
steps, especially the adoption of resolution 1295
(2000), this body can now say that, for the first time,
sanctions against UNITA are having real impact, as I
think the minister just indicated, and, perhaps as
important, are being taken very seriously both inside
and outside of Angola. The well established culture of
impunity is thus at an end. Yet sanctions cannot
become fully effective overnight, and UNITA still has
access both to diamonds and to people who will sell
arms in exchange for diamonds. Thus, hostilities
continue.
There is a very direct link between UNITA's
belligerence and non-adherence to its obligations under
the Lusaka Protocol and the grave humanitarian
situation in Angola. The Council, once again, must
demand that UNITA and Jonas Savimbi honour the
terms of Lusaka. We thus completely concur with the
Secretary-General, and with the oft-repeated
declarations of this Council, that the primary
responsibility for the appalling humanitarian situation
in Angola lies squarely with UNITA.

Given UNITA's utter refusal to abide by its
commitments, the Government of Angola has had no
option but to seek to defeat Savimbi militarily. We
understand the Government's rationale, even while we
regret that the enormous resources required to maintain
such a campaign are not being devoted the pressing
need to improve Angola's infrastructure to help
alleviate the dire humanitarian situation in that country.

Turning to the here and now, Canada especially
welcomes the designation of a head for the United
Nations Office in Angola. This has taken a long time. It
is a much overdue first step required to strengthen the
leadership role of the United Nations and to re-
establish the Organization's credibility in the eyes of
the Government of Angola.

We remain acutely concerned by the dire
humanitarian situation in Angola, with nearly 2.6
million internally displaced persons and 3.7 million
war-affected persons. We are especially concerned by
the Secretary-General's information, set out in
paragraph 25 of his report and just echoed by Mr.
Malungo, about an impending food pipeline breakdown
anticipated to occur late next month or in early
September because of a lack of timely and significant
contributions to the World Food Programme. In this
context, we wish to call on the donor community to
give serious and urgent attention to this issue.

The tenuous security situation prevailing
throughout much of the central highlands and the
border areas has compounded the plight of Angola's
civilian population and has rendered the cost of
humanitarian assistance - which must almost entirely
be flown in - all but prohibitive. We would again
strongly urge the Government of Angola to do
everything in its power to enable ground access to
urban centres in those areas, and we call on both the
Government and UNITA to respect fully the safety and
integrity of humanitarian convoys and workers. We
must note, however, that, while the Government of
Angola has not always provided the support to the
humanitarian effort that we have deemed appropriate,
UNITA's cooperation has been all but non-existent;
UNITA has been offering only violence and death to
those who wish only to bring succour to Angolans in
all parts of the country.

Canada wishes to welcome the efforts of the new
United Nations Development Programme resident
coordinator to improve overall coordination of
humanitarian assistance activities and to adopt an
integrated approach to assisting internally displaced
Angolans. We note that an action plan has been
developed by the Government of Angola with the
United Nations and with non-governmental
organizations as a follow-up to the rapid needs
assessment undertaken in April, and we urge the
Government to give implementation of the plan its full
and urgent attention. Canada would also like to
underline the importance of improving the system for
the registration of newly displaced persons as a key
protection tool, and welcomes the development of draft
minimum standards for resettlement.

Regarding human rights in Angola, we remain
troubled by the current situation, and we urge the
provision of additional resources to the Human Rights
Division of the United Nations Office in Angola to
allow it to expand its presence and operations. The
Human Rights Division has done some outstanding
work in promoting and protecting human rights in
Angola under very difficult circumstances. We invite
the Government of Angola to do everything in its
power to facilitate investigations done on the ground
by its staff, including with respect to the need for prior
notification to travel outside Luanda. In this regard, we
welcome the Angolan Government's efforts to develop
regular procedures for redressing human rights abuses
with the support of the international community and,
again, regret the fact that no such procedures exist with
respect to the pervasive human rights abuses we have
every reason to believe, but cannot know, are occurring
within the territory still controlled by UNITA.

Canada wishes particularly to reiterate its concern
at serious and well documented allegations of extra-
judicial killings in the border areas with Namibia and
with Zambia, and in some newly taken areas in the
interior. We strongly urge the Government of Angola to
undertake an official investigation into those
allegations and to punish the guilty parties should such
abuses be substantiated. It is only in this way that the
effective extension of State sovereignty into areas
formerly occupied by UNITA can be accomplished in a
climate of trust and reconciliation. We are encouraged
in this regard by recent events organized by civil
society and church organizations in Angola to publicize
the need for peace, dialogue and reconciliation.

The last 19 months in Angola have known some
very dark days, often suggesting the bleakest of futures
for a lasting peace in Angola. Regrettably, for much of
the population of Angola, those adjectives cannot yet
be dropped from our vocabulary, and this in one of the
world's most resource-rich countries. Fortunately,
however, there is now more than a glimmer of hope on
the political and security front, a glimmer that we in
this Council must not squander.

I hope that the Security Council has learned the
hard lessons of our Angolan experience over the past
seven years, and that the Council will apply them
without its usual trepidation, in Angola and in the
many other circumstances in which they now apply and
will apply in the future. There is no point - no
advantage to anybody - in enacting measures within
the Council which the Council does not collectively
intend to enforce. Politically expedient measures which
are certain to remain dead letters are deeply
destabilizing to fragile geopolitical situations and are
only likely to exacerbate the damage being done to
people, and of course to the reputation of this
Organization.

Let us agree not to adopt measures that we do not
intend to enforce with vigour and tenacity. Let us also
agree that any measures ought to be enforceable, for
even with the best will in the world the Council cannot
demand compliance with measures that are
insufficiently clear or precise, or are simply
unenforceable. To do otherwise would be dishonest,
destabilizing and destructive.

Keeping in mind the future and the well-being of
civilians, Canada, and I personally, will remain
committed to ensuring that a political solution becomes
a viable option for the parties to this terrible and
wasteful conflict in Angola.

