Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We would also like to
join others in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock and Under-Secretary-General Virginia
Gamba for their briefings.

The humanitarian situation in different parts of
Syria remains dire due to military operations, including
in the south-west. Civilian casualties, destruction
of humanitarian facilities and displacement remain
alarming, as the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/724) of 20 July explained. We reiterate our call
for an end to the hostilities, which are worsening the
humanitarian crisis. While we express our appreciation
to the United Nations and its humanitarian partners
for continuing to reach millions of Syrians, as stated
by Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, it is critical to
ensure quality access, in particular in some areas that
have seen a change of control, in order to provide aid
to all Syrians on the basis of their humanitarian needs.
Access challenges - including the curtailment of cross-
border operations due to lack of security assurances in
south-west Syria, as stated in the most recent report of
the Secretary-General - should be addressed so that
safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access
can be ensured.
Furthermore, the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure is indispensable to alleviate the suffering
of civilians, including children. While it is known that
all Syrians have been suffering because of the ongoing
humanitarian tragedy, children have been among
the most vulnerable groups. They have been killed,
injured and displaced and have experienced enormous
emotional, psychological and physical suffering.

We all agree that the future of Syria will be in
the hands of today's children. Hence, they should be
protected from any violence and be allowed to get
humanitarian aid. In that regard, we thank the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners for providing
children with targeted assistance. However, ultimately
it is the restoration of peace that can save and protect
Syrian children from their unspeakable agony and
allow them to realize their potential.

As we have been repeatedly stressing, ultimately
it is a Syrian-led comprehensive political dialogue
facilitated by resolution 2254 (2015) that can address
the humanitarian tragedy in Syria.

