Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor
Bensouda for her useful briefing.

Ukraine remains deeply concerned about the
increased violence and insecurity in Darfur, the
growing number of internally displaced persons and
the restriction of humanitarian access to conflict areas,
where a vulnerable civilian population resides.
We strongly condemn the aerial bombardments
and ground attacks, which have resulted in hundreds
of civilian deaths and destroyed Villages, as well as
incidents of attacks on humanitarian aid workers and
peacekeepers. We are no less concerned about reports
of continued Violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights, in particular sexual violence and
gender-based crimes.

Article 27 of the Rome Statute provides that the
Statute shall apply equally to all persons without any
distinction based on official capacity. In particular, in
their official capacity as a Head of State or government,
a member of a Government or Parliament, an elected
representative or a Government official shall in no
case be exempt from criminal responsibility under
the Statute. In that regard, we believe that the arrest
warrants against suspects in the ICC's investigation
into the situation in Darfur should be carried out and
that the Sudan must strictly comply with its obligations.

The failure of some State parties to the Rome
Statute to carry out their obligations remains another
obstacle towards delivering justice. We need to pay
particular attention to these facts in the light of the 11
judicial decisions on the issue of non-compliance and
requests for appropriate action to be taken regarding
State parties, as well as non-State parties, that have
failed to execute the ICC arrest warrants.

However, irrespective of being party or non-party
to the Rome Statute, States Members of the United
Nations should consolidate their efforts in the fight
against impunity. By failing to bring those responsible
for the gravest crimes to justice, the international
community implicitly encourages violence in the rest
of the world.

We call on all State parties to the Rome Statute
to promote cooperation and carry out the arrests of
individuals wanted by the ICC in the Darfur situation.

Finally, we would like to express our support to the
Office of the ICC Prosecutor in its work.

