Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
at the outset thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting in the form of an open briefing, which
enhances the transparency of the work of the Security
Council. This makes it possible for all of the Members of
the United Nations to have access to the information
provided to us.

We have read attentively the report of the Secretary-
General of 24 March on developments in Guinea-Bissau,
and we would like to thank Mr. Prendergast for his
informative presentation.

The second round of elections, held in January, and
the investiture of the new constitutional President of
Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Kumba Yala, marked the close of the
country's transitional phase, as provided for in the Abuja
Accord.

Today we can state that this transitional phase has
been successful. As emerges from the report of the
Secretary-General, and from what we have heard from
Mr. Prendergast, the general situation in Guinea-Bissau
has improved. The rule of law has been restored to the
country; relations with neighbouring countries are
developing positively; and the humanitarian situation has
improved, with the return of a large number of refugees
to the country and of many internally displaced persons
to their homes.

This has been possible thanks to the efforts of many
people, first and foremost those of the people of Guinea-
Bissau themselves. But we would also like to mention in
particular the Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Samuel Nana-Sinkam, and the personnel of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS), among others.

Although, as we said earlier, the transitional phase
has concluded, the tasks that the new Government must
still face are daunting. As the report of the Secretary-
General indicates, new relations must be established
between the civilian Government and the armed forces,
which must respect civilian authority; the problem of
small arms must be addressed; the judicial system needs
to be improved; and basic socio-economic needs must be
met.

Successfully meeting these challenges will be a test
for United Nations peace-building activities. UNOGBIS,
whose revised mandate has been extended for a year as
of 31 March, has a fundamental role to play in supporting
the new Government of Guinea-Bissau. We urge the
international community to give these tasks all the
necessary support. We pledge our own support here in the
Security Council.

Finally, we would like to lend our support to the
draft presidential statement that has been prepared by the
delegation of Mali.

