Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2139 (2014), on Syria. Today, the Council has
finally shown that, whatever its political differences
over Syria, it was not entirely indifferent to the
devastating humanitarian crisis. We applaud the efforts
of Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg in leading the
negotiating process.

It has been nearly three years now since the Syrian
people bravely stood up to demand their legitimate and
universal rights. Since then, Al-Assad has waged a
brutal war against his own people. He is responsible for
the biggest humanitarian crisis in the world and some of
the worst human rights abuses in the world.

Four-and-a-half months ago, the Security Council
adopted a presidential statement (S/ PRST/2013/ 15) that
was designed to alleviate the humanitarian impact of
this conflict. The Council urged all parties, in particular
the Syrian authorities, to take a number of specific steps
to improve access and to protect civilians. But not only
has that statement been roundly ignored by the Syrian
regime; the situation has got drastically worse.

My Russian colleague suggests that there has been
humanitarian progress, but the reality on the ground
tells a very different story. There are now 9.3 million
people in need - an increase of more than one third
since 2 October. Over the same period, the number of
internally displaced persons has risen by 50 per cent,
to 6.5 million people. And an estimated 140,000 people
have been killed since the crisis began - an increase of
40 per cent since six months ago.

Last week, Valerie Amos came to the Council
and laid bare the scale of this humanitarian crisis
(see S/PV.7109). She called on the Council to take
urgent action to improve the reach of humanitarian
organizations. Today, the Council has answered that
call. We hope that the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014)
will lead to action on the ground, bringing some relief
to the millions of Syrians in dire need of humanitarian
assistance.

The resolution demands that the Syrian regime
lift the siege of besieged areas, end the abhorrent and
indiscriminate use of barrel bombs in populated areas
and allow the United Nations and its partners to deliver
aid across borders. The Syrian regime must immediately
comply with those demands. To cite just one example,
more than 1 million people in the most extreme need
would immediately benefit from United Nations aid
delivered across borders. The Security Council will
review the humanitarian situation every 30 days and,
as the resolution makes clear, we fully intend to take
further steps if the demands set out in the resolution
are ignored.

Although this resolution is an important step
forward, we know that only an outcome on the political
track will provide a lasting solution to the humanitarian

crisis in Syria. The United Kingdom will intensify its
support with our allies for the "Geneva II" process
to bring about a political settlement of the conflict
in Syria. The international community must apply
the same sense of unity in support of the Geneva 11
negotiations as it has shown today.

The message from the Council to the Syrian regime
is clear: end the killing of your own people; stop the
aerial bombardment, in particular barrel bombs; lift
the sieges; and allow humanitarian aid to reach those
in desperate need.

