Ms. Mbela (spoke in French): I would first like
to thank the Ambassador of China for inviting me
to address the Security Council on behalf of my
organization, the Congolese Association for Access
to Justice.

I am Josephine Mbela and I am a human rights
lawyer in charge of advocacy and administration within
the Association. It is a non-governmental and apolitical

organization that works to promote and protect human
rights, the primacy of the law and the consolidation of
the rule of law. It provides legal and judicial assistance
to victims of rights violations, particularly before the
United Nations human rights protection mechanisms. I
will focus on three points during my briefing: first, the
political and electoral situation; secondly, the human
rights situation; and, thirdly, the low participation of
women in the electoral process.

First, with regard to the political and electoral
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the political climate remains tense 41 days on the
eve of the elections scheduled by the Independent
National Electoral Commission, due to the failure to
fully implement the Saint-Sylvestre agreement of
31 December 2016, mainly with respect to political
de-escalation measures.

To date, the Association has remained alarmed by
the detention of 51 political prisoners, including the
young Eugene Diomi Ndongala, Jean-Claude Muyambo
and Gerard "Gecoco" Mulumba Kongolo. And we note
that of the 51 political prisoners, 46 have benefited
from the amnesty accorded in 2014, although they
have not yet been released. To that we must add the
28 citizen movement activists, including Carbone Beni
and Gloria Senga.

It is also worth noting that four opposition media
outlets are still closed in Lubumbashi, namely, Radio
Television Lubumbashi Jua, Nyota Radio Te'levision,
Television Mapendo and La Voix du Katanga. Several
leaders were forced into exile, including Moise
Katumbi, Musanya Mouissy and Oscar Rashidi Akidi.
The electoral process has been marred by strong
political tensions resulting from the Independent
National Electoral Commission imposing the use
of voting machines, even though article 237 ter of
the electoral law bars electronic voting and there are
approximately 10 million voters without fingerprints
on the electoral register.

Secondly, the human rights situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo also remains a cause
for much concern, insofar as it has been punctuated by
insecurity and a growing number of incidents of sexual
violence in the Kasais, the resurgence of massacres of
civilians in Beni, diminishing civil liberties, arbitrary
arrests and detentions accompanied by acts of torture and
mistreatment by security services and law enforcement,
and the use of justice for political purposes. Finally,

the senior-most officials responsible for human rights
violations, including the security agents responsible for
the arbitrary arrests and detentions, enjoy impunity.
More concretely, three days ago three activists from
the youth movement Lutte pour le Changement were
arrested in Goma by the security services because they
were peacefully demonstrating at the university. There
are also seven members of the citizen movement Les
Congolais Debout that have been held incommunicado
for two months in the prison of the national intelligence
agency for raising awareness among citizens about
the use of voting machines. Twenty-two members of
the various citizen movements have been arrested for
holding demonstrations to demand that the girls that have
become victims of sexual violence in the Kasais receive
treatment. Finally, 17 other members of the movement
Vigilance Citoyenne were arrested for demonstrating
and encouraging the people towards civic engagement
and the fight against corruption. Those are some cases
of human rights violations for which we call upon the
Government to ensure their release.

Thirdly, I now turn to women's participation in the
electoral process. Women are the least represented in
political and administrative functions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Law No. 15/013 of 1 August
2015, on the implementation of women's rights and
gender equality, has not been upheld, particularly when
drafting the lists of candidates for the political parties
for the various elections that were held, as the electoral
law does not make that obligatory. To be more precise,
while women make up 51 per cent of voters registered
in the electoral roll, they represent only 12 per cent
of the candidates, which is less than the 30 per cent
recommended by the gender parity law.

However, working as a human rights defender is
especially perilous, specifically for a woman like me,
who has chosen to defend equal rights for all, including
the right to live in dignity, especially in a country
plagued by strong tensions such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as given my work as
a former member of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). I am committed to that challenge
despite the risks posed by continuing my fight for the
well-being of the people of all political leanings.

All that notwithstanding, our Association calls
upon the Government ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo to implement political de-escalation measures
by releasing all political prisoners and prisoners of
conscience to ensure the opening of a space for the
exercise of public freedoms for all political and social
movements; ensure effective protection of persons
and their property; fight against the impunity of the
senior officials of the security services; guarantee
equal opportunities for all candidates; and promote
women's leadership in public affairs management by
implementing the gender parity law. We call upon the
Independent National Electoral Commission to quickly
reach consensus with all stakeholders in the electoral
process on the conditions for the use of voting machines
and the fate of voters without fingerprint records.

We call upon MONUSCO to step up its patrols in
the areas affected by the massacres, particularly Beni
and Lubero, in order to prevent recurrent attacks by
elements of the Allied Democratic Forces. We also call
upon MONUSCO to continue to renew its readiness to
provide logistical support to the Independent National
Electoral Commission. We call upon the United Nations
Joint Human Rights Office to continue its monitoring
throughout the process.

Lastly, our Association calls upon the Security
Council to remain galvanized on the issue of the
protection of civilian populations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in general, and Beni in particular;
the implementation of the Saint-Sylvestre agreement
by the Congolese Government; and the fight against
impunity for a successful conclusion of the electoral
process by 23 December.

