Ms. King (Australia): Australia would like to
thank Guatemala for holding this important debate
and welcomes Guatemala's accession to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
We thank the Secretary-General, President Song and
Mr. Mochochoko for their briefings today.

Australia has been a steadfast supporter of the
Court since its inception. Ensuring accountability
for international crimes is a key component of
peacebuilding, as well as conflict prevention. Our
experience in providing support to States transitioning
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding has taught us that
peace and justice are both fundamental to establishing
sustainable security in all societies.

Australia recognizes that there will be different
views on the appropriate time to press for accountability,
particularly when delicate political settlements to end
conflicts are being negotiated. Nonetheless, combating
impunity and acknowledging the wrongs of the past are
important factors in establishing lasting peace based on
respect for human rights and the rule of law - a point
underscored in the World Development Report 2011 of
the World Bank.

On that basis, Australia views the ICC as a vital
partner for the Security Council. We welcome the
evolving relationship between the Court and the Council,
particularly the increased attention being given to the
ICC in the Council's country-specific and thematic
resolutions and statements. Effective coordination
between the ICC and the Council is essential in order to
send a clear message that those who commit the most
serious international crimes will be held to account.
It is important to ensure that the separate efforts of
the two bodies, which have, after all, very different
mandates, have a multiplying effect and that they are
able to work together to end impunity for these serious
crimes. As President Song said this morning, there is
a clear rationale for the Court's relationship with the
Council.

For our part, Australia wishes to offer some
suggestions for how the Court and Council can work
most effectively together. It is critical for the Security
Council to speak with one voice on the question of
accountability. As the independent international
commission of inquiry has shown, there is a body of
alarming evidence to suggest that the most serious
international crimes have been committed in Syria.
In such circumstances, the Council, as the ultimate
guardian of international peace and security, has
an important role to play, and we urge it to consider
referring the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court. This would send an important message
that there will be no impunity for those who commit
the most serious crimes of international concern and
that the Syrian people can expect justice for the crimes
committed.

Of course, ICC referrals must not be used as a
substitute for the Council's exercise of its broader
responsibilities. We also urge the Council to be vigilant
about referring situations such as that of Syria to the
Court without taking complementary action, where
appropriate. Indeed, once the Security Council has
referred a situation to the ICC, it is crucial for it to give
the work of the Court ongoing support. Such support
will maximize the prospects of States that cooperate
with the ICC and ensure that the objective of the referral
is achieved. Such support is most necessary when the
Court notifies the Council that a State has failed to meet
its obligations to cooperate with the Court. Looking
forward, it is also important that any future referrals by
the Council be precisely drafted so as to clearly identify
States' cooperation obligations.

Of course, cooperation between the Council and
the Court should not be limited to situations where the
Council has referred a situation to the ICC. In many
scenarios, situations before the Court also feature
on the Council's agenda and cooperation in such
situations is equally important. The decision of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Cote d'Ivoire to lift
the travel ban on Laurent Gbagbo to enable his travel
to The Hague is an example of the importance of such
cooperation. More generally, sanctions committees
covering situations that are before the ICC should give
close consideration to the question of whether indictees
should also be designated for sanctions purposes.

Finally, Australia recognizes that cooperation is a
two-way street. For that reason, we encourage the Court
to continue to engage with the Council through regular
briefings and the provision of detailed advice on the
support it looks to the Council to provide. We welcome
this debate as a very important contribution to further
exploring how the ICC and the Council can better
collaborate to achieve the goal of ending impunity for
the most serious crimes, and, in the process, contribute
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
We should continue this discussion.

