Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I also thank Under- Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing. He mentioned the experience of United Nations officers and humanitarian officials for more than nine long years in Syria. Through him, we send our thanks to them for the job they have to do in such terrible circumstances. We are appalled by the significant escalation in the Syrian regime's and Russian violence in Idlib. We remain deeply disappointed that the 12 January ceasefire barely lasted a couple of days. The human cost of the military escalation is awful. Since 1 December 2019, more than 140 civilians have been killed by Russia and the regime. Since 29 April 2019, more than 1,500 civilians have been killed in north-west Syria, with approximately half of all casualties being women and children. More than 358,000 people have been displaced as a result of the escalation in violence, and the United Nations now anticipates the possible further displacement of another 500,000 people in front-line areas. The population density within thatever- reducing pocket is already greater than in Gaza. The humanitarian system is overwhelmed. Those innocent civilians are in urgent need of food, shelter, water, health and winterization assistance. But we continue to see air strikes and shelling on civilian infrastructure. I remind all parties, including those around the table, yet again, of their obligation to comply with international humanitarian law. On 11 January alone, 26 communities in Idlib were affected by air strikes. Targets included schools, hospitals and camps for internally displaced people.As recently as three days ago, an air strike disabled Al-Eman hospital in Sarja. Having repeatedly called for scrutiny of such attacks, we once again welcome the Secretary-General's board of inquiry that is investigating some of the past attacks in Idlib. We call on the Secretary-General to make its findings public. Let me also restate our call for a full cessation of hostilities and a recommitment to the de-escalation agreement. While all eyes are on the north-west, we must not neglect those in other parts of the country who are deliberately being denied humanitarian assistance. As we all know, because of the decision by China and Russia to veto a humanitarian draft resolution, the United Nations can no longer use the border crossings into the north-east and south of Syria. The Russian Ambassador argued that the crossing in north-east Syria was not needed because humanitarian assistance could be provided from Damascus. However, the truth is that the regime is not providing these people with the aid that they require, or allowing the United Nations to do so. It is not just the north-east - communities in former opposition-held territory, such as eastern Ghouta and eastern Aleppo, are not receiving regular needs-based, quality humanitarian assistance. The Syrian regime believes that those communities are not aligned with its own politics, and so it punishes them for their perceived disloyalty by preventing them from receiving food and medicine. Russia and China, having acted to prevent life-saving aid reaching those in need, should now act to ensure aid can be delivered. We look to the United Nations, including through the Secretary- General's upcoming report in February, to highlight the gaps and challenges in the humanitarian response and help us to find a solution so that aid can be delivered where it is needed. The United Kingdom has long supported the provision of humanitarian aid to all of Syria, including the parts under the control of the Syrian authorities. Indeed, the United Kingdom has contributed over $4 billion since 2012. I note that 60 per cent of all contributions to the United Nations humanitarian response plan in 2019 came from the United States, the United Kingdom and Germany. It is incumbent upon us to ensure that aid is provided on a principled basis and is getting to those who most need it, wherever they may be. The United Kingdom is grateful for the continued work of the United Nations to find a solution for the people of Rukban, in what remain extremely challenging TAM conditions. More needs to be done in order to ensure the safety of the remaining residents in Rukban and those who have been leaving to seek shelter elsewhere. There has been no humanitarian assistance to Rukban since the end of September, and then we were able to provide only one month's worth of supplies. We are also concerned about the fate of some who have left the camp voluntarily. The United Nations must have permanent and open-ended access to shelters in Homs and the final destination points of internally displaced persons from Rukban. That will ensure adequate monitoring and reporting on conditions, particularly on protection and human rights issues, and we would welcome the United Nations incorporating that into its regular reporting and keeping the Council apprised. In conclusion, the humanitarian situation in Syria remains, as Mr. Lowcock said, dire and deteriorating. The situation in Idlib is particularly worrisome, as Russia and the regime bomb civilians in the area. I hope my Council colleagues will join me in calling for an immediate ceasefire there, reiterate the importance of cross-border aid and call on the regime and those allied to them to let the United Nations do its job to save lives.
