Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
am grateful to you, Mr. President, for having organized
this important debate under your presidency.

The Secretary-General has forcefully emphasized
that the fight against AIDS must remain at the heart of
our concerns. We unreservedly support the decisive
effort he is making so that the United Nations devotes
itself to that through every possible means.

Unfortunately, since the adoption of resolution
1308 (2000) in July of 2000, AIDS has continued to
decimate entire populations. Generations of men and
women have been struck down in the prime of life.
Countless children have become orphans. Societies
have been greatly destabilized and damaged. We know
about the consequences of the pandemic on society,
public administration and infrastructure - including
health and medical infrastructures - agricultural
production and education. We know that in certain
regions, and particularly in Africa, the situation has
become dramatic.

Nevertheless, there are signs of hope that lead us
to think that the progress of the disease may perhaps
not be an insurmountable inevitability. Awareness of
what is at stake is now universal, as illustrated by the
General Assembly's high-level meeting in September
we are beginning to see an impact on our national
policies of the progress we are making in international
forums. I am thinking in particular of the
implementation of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria and the decisions of the
World Trade Organization to provide the poorest
people with access to medicines.

The fight against HIV/AIDS calls for exceptional
mobilization, for which we are all responsible. We
must redouble our efforts to meet the commitments we
assumed together at the United Nations in 2001. The
Council is aware of the commitment of France and of
Europeans in this regard. The President of the French
Republic reiterated as much during his address to the
General Assembly last September when he spoke about
what the Director-General of the World Health
Organization has called a global health emergency.

The Security Council must continue to play its
full part in this collective endeavour. We recall the
important meeting held on 10 January 2000 devoted to
the impact of AIDS on peace and security in Africa.
Resolution 1308 (2000) is part of the follow-up to that
meeting, and our first responsibility is to apply it
rigorously. We must therefore regularly monitor the
situation. In that regard, we are grateful to Mr. Peter
Piot and Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for their tireless
efforts and their quite comprehensive presentations.
France is of course pleased at the measures undertaken
and the activities pursued, as well as at the
coordination demonstrated by all actors. That must be
relentlessly pursued.

We are also working on this issue as it concerns
us. The fight against HIV/AIDS infection is a priority
of France's army. As the Council is aware, the French
army is present in many areas especially affected by
the pandemic. France is associated with the guidelines
and programmes developed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). We have prepared
national programmes based on long-term strategies that
are in keeping with resolution 1308 (2000).
Prophylactic measures based on a set of individual and
collective steps - and essentially on the effectiveness
of training, prevention, detection and voluntary
confidential counselling - today constitute one of the
most important aspects of training armed forces for
peacekeeping operations. France will continue those
activities. Of course, we will also continue to support
the activities of the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS, DPKO and all others concerned. France
is prepared to share our expertise and experience
insofar as it can contribute to improving the
coordination of our efforts. For its part, it is important
for the Security Council to continue to follow up the
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000).

Moreover, we are all aware of the geo-strategic
stakes involved in the AIDS pandemic. This is
undoubtedly one of the most fundamental and urgent
threats that our world must face. In several regions
AIDS hampers not only progress and development, but
also peace and security themselves. In turn, violence
and instability increase the risk of exposure to the
disease. Combating AIDS must therefore become an
important aspect of our efforts to prevent conflict and
provide for the future of societies emerging from
conflicts.

We know that United Nations agencies have quite
often integrated this priority into their activities and
programmes. That must become systematic - of
course, while taking into account the specific
characteristics of each situation. We must also continue
to pursue our work with regard to the links between
AIDS and peace and security. The Secretary-General
could include a specific chapter on this subject in his
annual report. I also note with interest the suggestion
of my British colleague that a formal report be issued
by the Secretariat in 2004 on the implementation of
resolution 1308 (2000). Lastly, I would suggest that the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
together consider means of more effectively responding
to these challenges. In that way, we would be
augmenting our contribution to the essential
mobilization in which we must all engage.

