Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Ms. Sellassie for her
briefing, which reflects the evolution of the situation
in the Sahel region in all its manifold aspects, as well
as the main challenges and the steps being taken to
implement the United Nations integrated strategy in
the Sahel. The events in this turbulent area should
be the focus of constant attention on the part of the
international community.

The closely interrelated issues of improving the State
administration system, finding effective responses to
security problems, providing sustainable development
and addressing humanitarian challenges require
reliable collaborative efforts. In that regard, we believe
that Ms. Sellassie's mandate should enable management
of the strategy to be centralized in one place, or we
will have to forget about the strategy's comprehensive
nature. We cannot allow a practicable initiative to fall
to pieces. Moreover, it would be a fundamental error to
see the Sahara-Sahel region as a field where donors can
compete for spheres of influence.

The leading role in implementing the strategy
should belong to the States of the region themselves.
The role of the Ministerial Coordination Platform for
the Sahel is particularly important in that regard. We
believe that regular meetings in its format will help
achieve the desired goals and bring concrete results.
Another important element, in our view, is the Group of
Five Sahel, which is intended to be a kind of nucleus for
promoting and achieving major initiatives. Integrational
organizations, with the African Union at their head,
also play an irreplaceable role. United Nations bodies,
particularly their regional offices, also have important
functions.

The whole complex of security threats in the
region is a source of never-ending worry. The belt of
instability it represents across the continent is merging
with the highly turbulent Middle East region, and the
poorly controlled desert spaces of the Sahel serve
as an excellent bridge for terrorists and criminal
elements. The so-called Arab spring and outside
military intervention in Libya have had extremely bad
reverberations in the Sahara-Sahel. Mali found itself on
the verge of collapse, and only very recently have some
of the preconditions for normalizing the situation begun
to emerge. The threat posed by Boko Haram continues
its inexorable spread, producing a constant flow of
fresh victims among civilians. Political instability
and countless social ills are fueling negative trends
and increasing radicalization among young people. It
is therefore particularly important to respond swiftly
and appropriately to dangerous incidents in the political
arena, such as the recent events in Burkina Faso.

At the same time, we do not agree that interference
is needed in the internal affairs of States in the region
or their electoral processes on the pretext of preventing
possible crises and on the basis of contrived, ambiguous
and politically motivated concepts such as early
indicators. We hope that consistent implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy, with the
participation of interested partners, will contribute
to overall improvement of the situation and raise the
standard of living of the people in the region.

