Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I think it is most
appropriate that Under-Secretary-General Oshima's last
briefing to this Council should be on the issue of
protection of civilians in armed conflict. No one in the
United Nations system, I think, has done more to put
the protection of civilians in armed conflict high on the
United Nations agenda than Kenzo Oshima. This has
truly become his flagship issue and we are looking
forward to the finalized road map to be submitted by
December, as announced by Mr. Oshima.

Despite impressive progress within the United
Nations system itself, we cannot overlook the fact that
we confront massive challenges on the ground. In the
face of mass killings of civilians in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to name just one of the most
shocking examples of blatant disregard of international
humanitarian law, there is no reason whatsoever for
complacency. Without secure access to areas of crisis,
there is no way of effectively delivering humanitarian
assistance by the international organizations or by non-
governmental organizations, which play an ever
increasing role in this.

Over 90 per cent of all victims of armed conflict
today are civilians and, very often, the most vulnerable
members of society - children and women - are
most seriously affected. Unfortunately, we see no sign
of this trend abating. In asymmetric conflicts, such as
in the cases of failing States or terrorism, civilians are
very often the main target of attack. The Council has
stated time and again that it is primarily the
responsibility of the belligerents themselves to respect
their obligations with regard to the protection of
civilians.

In this context, it is, in our view, of utmost
importance that all States sign and ratify the core
humanitarian legal instruments, including the
Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions of
1977. However, those belligerents who violate the
obligations today will not even begin to heed these
obligations tomorrow if the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, do not send them a
strong message that the protection of civilians is our
top priority and that we will not sit idly by when the
most basic rights of the most vulnerable are violated.

We must persevere both in the Council and in the
wider system in our efforts to further prioritize and
mainstream the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Here, we share the questions and concerns
raised by Ambassador Greenstock. Only by further
prioritizing and mainstreaming the protection of
civilians in armed conflict will our efforts to ensure
that all belligerents adhere to their international
obligations bear fruit.

In conclusion, allow me to thank Mr. Oshima for
everything that he has done and congratulate him on
the success in his work so far. We wish him well. We
would also tell him that we will continue to support the
important work of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

