Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Ijoin others in
welcoming Baroness Ashton to the Council and thanking
her for giving us her briefing today. These meetings are
an important step in broadening and strengthening the
European Union's relationship and collaboration with
the United Nations and in highlighting areas where
the European Union (EU) and the United Nations are
already cooperating successfully in pursuit of their
shared objectives.

In Syria, where the situation continues to worsen,
the United Kingdom and, indeed, the European Union
have remained steadfast in our support of Joint Special
Representative Brahimi and his plan to take forward
the establishment of a transition Government with full
executive powers. We encourage others to do the same,
recognizing that Al-Assad cannot be part of such a
transition if it is to realize the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people.

In support of transition, the European Union has
introduced measures against the Al-Assad regime,
imposing sanctions against those responsible for
the violence and repression and applying increased
economic pressure on the regime. The United Kingdom
and the European Union have also provided substantial
humanitarian assistance to the people of Syria through
our financing of United Nations humanitarian appeals.
We now need to find innovative ways of allowing
humanitarian personnel to deliver assistance to those in
need to alleviate the appalling situation on the ground.

In Mali and the Sahel, the international community
has united to face the challenge posed by violent
extremism. Building on the success of French-led action
in support of Mali's territorial integrity, the Council is
working towards the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation once conditions are right. The
European Union will deploy a military training mission
to build the capacity of the Malian armed forces to
deliver stability in support of democratic governance.

European Union action in Mali, founded on its
comprehensive strategy for security and development
in the Sahel, continues to support those efforts by
delivering vital humanitarian assistance and building
security and development for people in Mali and across
the region.

In all those endeavours, the European Union works
hand in hand with the United Nations, particularly the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Romano Prodi, and
with the Special Representative for West Africa, Said
Djinnit.

The European Union and the United Nations
are also working closely to implement resolution
1325 (2000), including promoting the role of women
in peacebuilding and tackling impunity for sexual
violence. In Mali, the United Kingdom will contribute
human rights experts to the European Union military
training mission to provide specialist training to the
Malian armed forces on preventing and responding to
sexual violence. The new United Nations Office in Mali
will have a strong human rights component, which we
hope will also focus closely on issues of gender and
sexual violence.

In Somalia, international action in support of the
Somali Government has already delivered significant
gains. Here the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) has led the fight against extremism, in the
form of Al-Shabaab, but has been supported by both
the European Union and the United Nations through
troop salaries from the EU Africa Peace Facility and
logistical support from the United Nations Support
Office for AMISOM.

That is a good example of the EU and the United
Nations working together to make a difference and to
address a major challenge to international peace and
security. The European Union is making a further
contribution by providing training for 3,000 troops to
build up Somalia's own armed forces to fight alongside
AMISOM.

We now have a real opportunity to make progress
in Somalia, which we look to the United Nations, the
African Union and the EU together to seize in the
coming months.

As many of us in this Chamber have noted already,
2013 will be a critical year for the Middle East peace
process. The European Union has worked closely with
the United Nations as members of the Quartet on a
number of initiatives, including delivering practical
assistance to the Palestinian State-building programme
and calling on Israel to ease restrictions on movement
and access to the West Bank and Gaza. The EU rightly
continues to underline that a political solution must be
reached and remains committed to working with the
United Nations, other Quartet members and the wider
international community to make progress.

The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the
tireless efforts of Baroness Ashton in support of the
E3+3 negotiations with Iran and the continued work
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
The countries of the E3+3 are scheduled to meet Iran
in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on 26 February, to present a
balanced and credible offer. The onus is firmly on Iran
to come to the next talks ready to negotiate seriously
and to take concrete steps to respond to international
concerns over its nuclear programme.

The Security Council has adopted six resolutions
on the Iranian nuclear issue, four of which contain
sanctions. European Union countries have fully
implemented those measures and have agreed further
sanctions in support of the E3+3 Governments"
dual-track strategy of pressure and engagement.

We also welcome Baroness Ashton's engagement
in driving forward the European Union-facilitated
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo. It is important
that the momentum is maintained to get both countries
to reach the conditionalities set out in the December
General Affairs Council conclusions, notably with
regard to northern Kosovo. That process of dialogue
offers the best prospect for consolidating recent
progress and generating the necessary understandings
and cooperation between Serbia and Kosovo, from
which both countries and the region as a whole will
benefit.

If recent history has taught us anything, it is that
the international community acts most effectively
where it acts coherently. Action by the European Union
and cooperation between the European Union and
others, including the United Nations, continue to make
an important contribution to those efforts.

