Mr. Auvaart (Estonia): It is regrettable that this serious discussion about the use of chemical weapons was derailed at the beginning of this meeting by the presidency. With regards to procedure, we concur with the substantive statements made today by the representatives of the United Kingdom and Germany. I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). We note that, once again, the monthly report (S/2020/961, annex) of the Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) states that the outstanding issues relating to Syria's chemical weapons declaration remain unsolved. This means that, after six years, we still lack the assurance that Syria has declared and destroyed all of its chemical weapons and their production facilities. We cannot be sure that new attacks will not happen again. In fact, that risk remains high. Independent United Nations and OPCWfact- finding missions have confirmed the use of chemical weapons in Syria on numerous occasions since Syria provided the declaration. The United Nations- OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism and the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) have now confirmed the use on seven occasions of chemical weapons by the Al-Assad regime against the Syrian people. The Syrian regime's non-compliance with its international obligations therefore continues to pose a direct threat to the Syrian people and international peace and security. In these circumstances, the Security Council has a responsibility to act and respond. Estonia welcomes the OPCW Executive Council decision of 9 July, which addressed in a responsible and robust manner Syria's non-compliance under the Chemical Weapons Convention and provided a deadline for Syria to comply with its obligations. We are concerned to hear that there has been no reply yet from the Syrian Arab Republic regarding the fulfilment of the obligations set by the Executive Council decision. We call on Syria to comply with the decision on time. In addition to Syria's blatant disregard for its international obligations, we now face another challenge to the chemical weapons non-proliferation regime and the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). I am referring to the systematic and targeted disinformation campaign to discredit and undermine the OPCW Technical Secretariat and its investigative mechanisms. It is regrettable that, instead of focusing on discussing in the Council on how to move forward with accountability measures and put an end to impunity for the commission of these horrific crimes, the Russian Federation is making every effort to steer that focus and responsibility elsewhere. This happened again today and was on full display during last week's Arria Formula meeting, where the organizers and their chosen briefers provided us with distorted facts and narratives on Syria's chemical weapons programmes and on specific incidents. At the same time, our Russian and Chinese colleagues decided not to attend the Security Council meeting in May. The participation of OPCW Director General Arias and IIT Coordinator Ambassador Ofate provided an opportunity to learn more about the first UT report. The question has already echoed in past Security Council meetings, but I will ask it again - whom does this disinformation campaign serve? Whom does it serve to purposefully undermine the organization most competent to deal with chemical weapons? The answer is quite clear. It serves those who want to cover up their crimes or those of their allies; those who use or plan to use chemical weapons and want to get away with it with impunity. It is for their benefit to sow distrust and confusion so that condemnation, accountability and a robust international response become more difficult. Finally, Estonia has full trust in the professional, impartial and independent work of the OPCW Technical Secretariat and its investigative mechanisms. We call on the Syrian regime to cooperate with them actively and fully. We also call on the Russian Federation to disclose, urgently, fully and in a transparent manner the circumstances of the poisoning of Mr. Navalny with a chemical nerve agent of the Novichok group and to inform the Security Council in this regard.
