Mr. Baja (Philippines): Mr. President, we thank
you for having convened this afternoon's meeting on
Kosovo and the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive and informative briefing. We are
honoured also by the presence in our midst of the
Foreign Ministers of Germany and of Serbia and
Montenegro.

Yesterday Kosovo once again became a war zone
when the longstanding ethnic animus between the
Serbs and the Albanians erupted in an orgy of death
and destruction - the worst since the international
community stepped in five years ago to put an end to a
bloody conflict which neither side seems willing to
forgive and forget.

We condemn the violence, which has resulted, as
reported this morning, in 31 people dead and more than
200 wounded, including 11 peacekeepers and 61 police
officers. These are only initial figures. The number of
dead and wounded is expected to rise. The extent of the
property damage has still not been fully assessed,
although we know that a number of houses and public
buildings have been torched by rampaging mobs across
the country. We have been informed by our embassy in
Budapest that even the Philippine police contingent's
quarters in Kosovo have been burned and looted.
My delegation joins the rest of the Security
Council in expressing our indignation at these
reprehensible acts of violence, which have dealt a
severe blow to the international community's efforts to
bring about a tolerant, multi-ethnic and democratic
Kosovo. Such outbreaks of ethnically related violence
have no room in Kosovo's future. This violence has to
stop, and it must stop now.

What happened in Kosovo yesterday is indeed
unfortunate. Only a few weeks ago, we heard the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Harri Holkeri, speak of how Kosovo was slowly but
surely moving in the direction that the international
community wants it to take. It is also regrettable this
violence should happen only a few days after Mr.
Holkeri announced the holding of elections in Kosovo
in October and following the visit there, a few days
ago, of the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno.

Yesterday's violence may seem to be a
spontaneous release of collective anger and frustration,
but we should note that it took some time to build up
and did not take place without warning. Before
yesterday's violence, there had been indications that
Kosovo remains the ethnic tinderbox that it has always
been.

This outbreak of violence has dealt a severe blow
to efforts to bring peace and stability to Kosovo. What
happened yesterday should prompt us to take a second
look at the situation there and make adjustments if
necessary. We should ask ourselves whether the
violence could have been prevented. We should ask this
not to put blame on anyone, but to allow us to come up
with an appropriate response and to prevent such
incidents from happening again. Right now, the most
important thing is to restore order there. The
international community must take the necessary steps
to make sure that the rule of law prevails in Kosovo
and that elements from both within and without are
given no opportunity to sow further discord in the
province in order to advance their agenda. Ethnic Serbs
and Albanians must be prevailed upon to exercise
restraint and avoid taking any action that would lead to
further chaos. Appropriate measures should also be
taken to ensure that those responsible for the latest
wave of violence are brought to justice.

We join the call for Kosovars and their leaders to
employ their best efforts to implement the "Standards
for Kosovo," while keeping in mind that peace efforts
cannot be implemented as a political project, even by
the most well-meaning - or the best-armed - unless
the soil is fully cultivated.

