Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I associate myself with the words of gratitude
addressed to Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi
for his briefing.

The Security Council's interest in the situation in
East Timor is shown by the fact that 14 Council
members have spoken at today's interim discussion,
including the Russian delegation. A number of them
have gone into detail about their approaches to and
evaluations of a broad spectrum of the questions
related to that territory. However, it is perfectly natural
that the main topic of Virtually all statements was the
decision taken by the National Council regarding the
date of the Constituent Assembly elections. We hope
that the basis of this crucial step was not merely the
symbolic force of the date, since 30 August will live
for ever in the history of the East Timorese people as a
landmark date, but also a realistic assessment of the
situation in the territory.

As members know, after the referendum that took
place in August 1999, life in East Timor had to begin
from scratch. Since then an enormous amount of work
has been done, and the Council has repeatedly noted
that the territory is successfully moving towards
independence. On the other hand, it is clear that the
degree of preparation for holding the elections should
be assessed in mid-summer, in order to avoid any
unpleasant surprises. We hope that the East Timorese,
in cooperation with the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), will
successfully carry out the tasks before them. That is my
first point.

Secondly, we believe that, as part of the
preparatory work for the elections, the successful
conduct of national and civil registration will be very
important for the ultimate success of the elections.

Thirdly, we think it is necessary - and other
members of the Council have made this point - to pay
attention to the recent incidents involving the use of
force, including against international personnel. Mr.
Annabi has gone into some detail about the reasons for
these incidents and the measures that UNTAET intends
to take to avoid their recurrence in the future. We think
this is particularly important during this critical time
we are going through.

Fourthly, we also note that recently there have
been more returns of East Timorese refugees from the
West Timor camps. However, we agree with previous
speakers that the problem regarding the fate of 100,000
refugees in West Timor still requires close scrutiny. Of
course, this problem must be resolved by UNTAET and
the Government of Indonesia, working in close
cooperation.

In conclusion, we are pleased with the successful
process of this so-called Timorization, not only in the
context of the training of nationals, but most
importantly because East Timorese are being
mainstreamed more and more into the territory's
administration. We are convinced that this movement
will be the most important contribution to preparing for
the upcoming elections.

