Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to express appreciation for the briefing
by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, on the tragic
events that occurred in Mambasa and for the briefing
by Mr. Ramcharan, Deputy High Commissioner for
Human Rights, on the events that occurred in the area
of Drodro.

In a way, we have grown accustomed to
information concerning grave violence and human
rights violations in the north-eastern region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. But the report,
beginning with the capture of Mambasa by troops of
the Mouvement de liberation du Congo/Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie-nationale (MLC/RCD-N),
describes a new level of violence, a new level of
cruelty. And that is why we wish to express our
particular condemnation and concern with regard to the
cruelty committed against the civilian population,
especially women and children.

Moreover, the report's most serious aspect is that
those human rights abuses were planned and
coordinated by the military hierarchy of those rebel
movements and have been a tool of war to spread fear
and to displace populations. The report says that
clearly. We read it carefully: several commanders and
colonels promised days of looting that depended on
military actions. There was planning and premeditation
here, which I think it is important to emphasize.
Therefore, the events that occurred at Mambasa and
Drodro confirm the complex and grave situation of
insecurity and violence that affects the region. And the
fact that all of the rebel groups are recruiting minors to
participate in military operations deserves our special
attention.

With the goal of establishing justice and
supporting the civilian population, the special team of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) is
proposing a series of recommendations that my
delegation fully supports. The recommendation to
provide psychological support to rape victims and to
those who witnessed executions and other horrifying
acts - children, especially, require urgent and special
help - deserves our particular attention.

Therefore, my country values this opportunity to
reiterate its most vigorous condemnation of these grave
human rights violations perpetrated by various warring
factions. We regret that we are witnessing these levels
of violence at the beginning of the twenty-first century.
We reaffirm the need to put an end to the cycle of
impunity that persists in the region. Here, the challenge
is to the international community, but also in a
fundamental way to the Congolese themselves,
particularly the transitional Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

For our part, we believe it essential to strengthen
MONUC's presence with a mandate that enables its
troops to provide the necessary protection to the
civilian population. We also consider it important that
the Secretary-General establish a standing team within
MONUC to investigate human rights violations.

In conclusion, we wish to ask Mr. Guehenno and
Mr. Ramcharan - along the lines of what several
previous speakers, perhaps the representative of France
in particular, have asked - their opinion about the real
possibilities for the perpetrators and masterminds of
the crimes described in the special report being brought
to justice, and about the relevant mechanisms. One
possibility could be a truth and reconciliation
commission, but without prejudice with regard to the
recommendations themselves, which mention
cooperation with the International Criminal Court. I
believe that issue is fundamental to preventing
impunity and to ensuring that such acts never occur
again in the future.

