Ms. Alzhanova (Kazakhstan): Let me start by
expressing our gratitude to you, Sir, for convening this

important debate on the problem of small arms. I
would also like to commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-
moon for his report in document A/2008/258, which
contains, in particular, recommendations for this
Council that in our view can play a significant role in
tackling the destabilizing accumulation and illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons.

My delegation fully shares the concern that, as
stated in the report under consideration, illicit small
arms have a negative impact on security, human rights
and social and economic development, in particular in
areas of crisis and in post-conflict situations. The
accumulation, illicit manufacture, trade and circulation
of small arms nurture inter-State conflicts as well as
civil wars, terrorism, organized crime and gang
warfare, thereby undermining the sustainability of
international peace and security.

Kazakhstan recognizes the need to develop
legally binding international documents regulating the
production, stockpiling, marking and tracing of small
arms and light weapons and related illicit brokering, as
well as achieving effective monitoring and compliance
with United Nations arms embargoes.

In that context, we advocate strengthening and
further developing such international mechanisms on
small arms and light weapons as the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects; the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons; the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms; and the United Nations System for
the Standardized Reporting of Military Expenditures.
As duly pointed out by the Secretary-General in his
report, the revitalization of the Coordinating Action on
Small Arms can improve coordination on that issue
within the United Nations system.

The delegation of Kazakhstan supports the United
Kingdom's initiative on universal standards in the
sphere of transfers of conventional weapons and is of
the view that additional mechanisms of multilateral
consultations would help to fill in the gaps in order to
reach consensus among Member States.
We express our hope that this open debate will
significantly contribute to the productive work of the
upcoming Third Biennial Meeting of States to consider
the implementation of the Programme of Action to

Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons. The timely submission
of national reports on the implementation of the
Programme of Action would facilitate effective
preparations for and the process of the third Biennial
Meeting.

