Five years after the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) by the Security Council, the Secretary-General's first report on youth, peace and security, dated 2 March (S/2020/167), marks an important step in the recognition of the crucial role of youth in conflict prevention and resolution and in peacekeeping. The report and the initial results of the large-scale global dialogue launched within the framework of the UN75 campaign underline the fact that young people around the world, confronted with many challenges - demographic changes, inequality, new technologies, forced displacement, a shrinking civic space, a changing labour market and climate change - strive for peace, justice, inclusion, gender equality and human rights. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has plunged the entire planet into an economic crisis of unprecedented violence, which the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank estimate will have a cost two to three times higher than that of 2008. The crisis will have a significant impact on young people, who are known to be particularly vulnerable to recessions, which could exacerbate their difficulties. Indeed, three out of four young people work in the informal economy, and a large proportion of them are engaged in precarious temporary and part-time work, often in sectors that are particularly vulnerable to the COVID-19 pandemic. As States begin to adopt support and recovery measures, it is essential that specific measures to help young people be taken in order to avoid ensnaring them permanently in a "poverty trap". Political inclusion is a central demand of youth. The many movements whose voices were heard in 2019 sent a strong signal. Youth will not wait. Young people have also shown a remarkable ability to create alternative spaces for a political engagement that, if not given sufficient attention, will challenge the old formats that we are perpetuating. It would be unwise to take the risk of fuelling and increasing a distrust of institutions. Dialogue, cooperation and the establishment of partnerships are our best weapons against sectarian conflict, violent extremism and terrorism. As the United Nations and its Member States have just embarked on a decade of action, we need a massive and full engagement on the part of youth more than ever. Without it, we cannot hope to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals or lasting peace. Young people need our support, and we need the young to build our future. In the current context, which is particularly anxiety-provoking, sport and the practice of physical activity play an important role in maintaining the physical and mental health of individuals and in sustaining social ties. Monaco advocates, and will continue to advocate, the importance of sport as a tool for building a culture of peace and tolerance, thereby bringing together nations and peoples around common values. Sport and physical activity are widely used by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as an important vehicle for integration and the easing of tensions in situations where war, conflict and persecution have destroyed all semblance of normalcy.
