Mr. Prendergast: Madam President, I understand
that you spent the morning session discussing lessons
learned in Sierra Leone, so I propose to restrict myself
to a brief look at the situation in Liberia and at political
efforts to stabilize the subregion.

I will start with the current situation in Liberia,
which has come full circle for the United Nations -
from civil war to a peace agreement, followed by
democratic elections accompanied by a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, and now, since July last year,
a drift back into civil strife as a result of the armed
confrontation between Government forces and the
Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy
(LURD).

Clearly, the international community and the
Government of Liberia in particular need to learn
lessons from the way in which the transition from
peacekeeping to peace-building was managed in that
country.

As the Council knows, the ongoing fighting has
caused thousands of civilians to flee to camps for
refugees and internally displaced persons. There are
approximately 130,000 internally displaced Liberians
today. Since the beginning of the year, 40,000 Liberian
refugees have crossed the border into Sierra Leone.
During the past few weeks, LURD forces have come
perilously close to Monrovia. Government forces
recently embarked on a new military offensive against
the LURD positions at Tubmanburg in Lower Lofa.
The Government are also trying to recapture other
cities.

As military offensives and counter-offensives are
carried out, both sides have looted and pillaged,
including in residential areas and against civilians. As a
precautionary measure, United Nations international
civilian staff have relocated their residential and most
working premises to safer locations.

I now turn briefly to the question of
reconciliation in Liberia, including the role played by
the Rabat process, the Mano River Union and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). I would like to say that, unless urgently
and decisively addressed, instability in Liberia risks
reversing the significant gains made in the peace
process in Sierra Leone. That instability could have a
further domino effect in the region, negatively
affecting the situations in other neighbouring countries,
in particular Guinea and Cote d'Ivoire.

The view of the United Nations is that the current
containment policy towards Liberia has its limitations.
It needs to be complemented with a coherent and a
constructive political agenda. In our view, the
international community needs to encourage and
support the efforts by ECOWAS and by Liberian
political and civil society organizations to exert
pressure on President Taylor to create a conducive
environment for carrying out security sector reforms
and for promoting good governance, dialogue and
national reconciliation.

We hope that President Kabbah can be
encouraged to persevere in his efforts to facilitate a
peaceful settlement of the Liberian crisis now that
LURD seems to be ready for dialogue. We also hope
that Guinea, as a member of the Security Council and
as a neighbour, will be able to play a role. To that end,
we look to the new Foreign Minister, our friend and
colleague, His Excellency Mr. Francois Fall, to
energize his country in playing that constructive role.
In that connection, I also wish, on behalf of the
Secretary-General, to commend Morocco for the
King's efforts to convene a follow-up Rabat summit
with the leaders of the three Mano River Union
countries. I know that the summit has been repeatedly
postponed - for good reasons I am sure. But we would
nevertheless want to encourage Morocco to persevere.

Given that the situations in Liberia and Sierra
Leone cannot be addressed in isolation, some Member
States have shown interest in establishing a contact
group on the Mano River Union to serve as a forum for
forging a coherent agenda in support of the Rabat
dialogue process and the subregion's peace efforts. We
think that the time may have come for them to
constitute themselves as that group.

Finally, a word on cooperation with subregional
organizations: we believe that such cooperation has
proved to be indispensable in pursuing the peace and
security objectives of the United Nations in the Mano
River region, as elsewhere in Africa and - for that
matter - in the wider world. Indeed, the United
Nations can greatly benefit from the many comparative
advantages ofthose organizations, which include sound
knowledge of, and close involvement in, the
subregional dynamics, the personal stature and
influence of leaders in the region and the existence of
regional mechanisms for conflict prevention, peace-
building and the promotion of regional development.

Indeed, it was precisely in view of the linkages
between the countries in the subregion and the
transborder challenges that they face, as well as the
consequent need to interact with regional and
subregional actors, that the Secretary-General recently
decided to establish a high-level United Nations Office
for West Africa, headed by his Special Representative,
who is going to be, as the Council knows,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah. We regret the delay in
the opening of the Office, but the necessary
administrative and logistical arrangements are now
being finalized, and Mr. Ould-Abdallah will soon be
dispatched to the region. Liberia, Sierra Leone and the
Mano River Union will feature high on his agenda.

