Mr. Zebari (Iraq): I thank you, Sir, for convening
this important and historic meeting. It is a great honour
to be invited here today to brief the Council on the
current situation and ongoing developments in Iraq.
This timely meeting is a demonstration of the
international community's broad support for Iraq. At
the forefront are the efforts of the Security Council,
particularly in the areas of reconstruction and support
for the political and constitutional processes.

In this context, allow me to express my
appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon; his Special Representative, Mr. Ad
Melkert, the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) and the Iraq Office of the Secretariat for
their contributions within the mandate of UNAMI and
pursuant to relevant Security Council resolutions.

Members of the Security Council are aware that a
long period of time elapsed between the parliamentary
elections on 7 March and the meeting of the Council of
Representatives on 11 November. That parliamentary
meeting came after an Iraqi initiative led by the
President of the Kurdistan region, who brought
together all political leaders to meet in Erbil and later
in Baghdad to reach a political settlement in order to
form the new Government of national unity and
partnership. The initiative had immense regional and
international support. It led to the resumption of the
meeting of the Council of Representatives to elect its
President, the Speaker of the Parliament, and to ask
Mr. Nuri al-Maliki to form a new Government within
the constitutional time frame. Political exchanges and
discussions on the new Government will be completed
imminently. The new Government will be a power-
sharing, representative and inclusive Government that
reflects the will of the Iraqi people, as displayed by the
parliamentary elections of 7 March. Having myself
participated in these discussions, I can report to the
Council that the Government will be formed very soon.

In the last few months of the political stalemate,
we witnessed regional activities that impacted the
process of Government formation. While we Iraqis
welcome any positive contribution of assistance, the
Iraqi people totally reject interference in their internal
affairs by others. As a free, democratic and sovereign
nation, we continue to work to strengthen relations
with our regional neighbours and our brotherly Arab
countries. To this end, we in Iraq have embraced the
important challenge of hosting the upcoming Arab
Summit in Baghdad in March 2011, over which Iraq
will preside. Ensuring its success will be a clear signal
of our progress and that Iraq has been embraced by its
fellow Arab countries.

Iraq has also demonstrated through its foreign
policy that it remains committed to the basic principles
of our constitution: non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States, seeking to resolve conflicts
through peaceful means, establishing relations on the
basis of common interests and reciprocity, and
respecting our international obligations.

As regards our relations with the Security
Council, Iraq has taken great strides towards meeting
our international commitments. Our key focus has been
to unburden Iraq from the heavy legacy of
non-compliance with international law, break its
isolation and regain its rightful place among the
community of nations.

Pursuant to our Constitution and proceeding from
our commitment to international resolutions, and also
in the context of the Secretary-General's report
contained in document S/2009/385 on the review of
Security Council resolutions imposed under Chapter
VII, we have accomplished major and significant
progress towards meeting our obligations to the
standards of disarmament and non-proliferation in
record time. In this regard, I refer to my numerous
letters to the President of the Security Council and the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency this year, in particular the most recent letter to
the President of the Security Council dated 7 December
2010.

My Government welcomes and deeply
appreciates the Council's collective decision and
support in recognizing Iraq's progress in supporting the
international non-proliferation regime and complying
with disarmament treaties and other relevant
international instruments. My country is committed to
taking additional steps in this regard. The lifting of the
restrictions imposed by resolutions 687 (1991) and 707
(1991) relating to weapons of mass destruction and
civilian nuclear activities is a sign that the new Iraq is
significantly different from Saddam's Iraq at the time
of the adoption of resolution 661 (1990).

We also worked very hard this year towards
completely closing down the oil-for-food programme.
My Government, with all relevant ministries and
departments, worked with the Security Council and the
financial Controller of the United Nations to conclude
all remaining contracts. Here again, my Government
appreciates the Council's recognition of the success we
have achieved in closing out the remaining contracts
and terminating the residual activities of the oil-for-
food programme. The programme was marred by a web
of mismanagement and misappropriation, and its
termination lifts another burden on Iraq's recovery.

In accordance with resolution 1905 (2009), my
Government has achieved significant progress in 2010
towards developing arrangements to replace the
Development Fund for Iraq and the International
Advisory and Monitoring Board. This progress was
reflected in the three reports presented to the Security
Council in 2010. We have also made concrete progress
in the settlement of sovereign debts and commercial
claims, and concluded bilateral arrangements on other
claims.

My Government therefore appreciates the
adoption by the Security Council of resolution 1956
(2010) extending the Development Fund for Iraq and
the International Advisory and Monitoring Board for
another six months. The request for that measure arose
from the delay in Government formation and political
instability, not as a result of a lack of resolve and
determination.

The adoption of these important resolutions
marks the beginning of the end of the sanctions regime
and restrictions on Iraq's sovereignty, independence
and recovery. Our people will rejoice at having turned
a page on the aggressive, belligerent and defiant
behaviour of the previous regime towards international
law and legitimacy.

Here, I wish to thank Vice President Biden in
person for supporting Iraq's liberation from these
international sanctions and restrictions, the permanent
and non-permanent members of the Security Council,
and the Secretary-General for standing by Iraq to get
this far.

Despite those positive achievements, Iraq still has
some way to go to resolve all outstanding issues with
our brotherly neighbour Kuwait. There has been
positive cooperation and exchange between our
Governments to resolve and settle all pending issues
between our countries stemming from Saddam
Hussein's aggression and invasion of Kuwait in 1990.
The remaining issues will be at the top of the new
Government's agenda, among items demanding serious
political action. My country is committed to fulfilling
its remaining obligations under relevant Chapter VII
resolutions pertaining to the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait.

Iraq still faces tremendous challenges. We
continue to confront terrorism and criminal elements
bent on destabilizing our country. Despite remarkable
progress in the fight for Iraq's peace and security, there
are still attempts to revive sectarian, ethnic and
religious strife, such as the recent atrocities committed
against Iraqi Christians. There is shared empathy and a
consensus between the Government and the Iraqi
people to provide security and a safe environment for
Iraqi Christians, who have played an important role in
the national heritage of Iraq, in the national Iraqi
movement and in the building of our country.
International support is critical to encouraging Iraqi
Christians to remain in their homeland as an integral
part of Iraqi society.

The greatest challenge continues to be to build a
State and State institutions on the basis of participation
and inclusion, consolidating national reconciliation and
deferring to an independent judiciary as the arbiter in
implementing the principles of accountability and
justice. Those principles were agreed upon and
endorsed by all Iraqi political leaders and blocs in the
Erbil meeting that took place on 8 November 2010.
They are the foundation for the formation of the
democratically elected Government and a federal,
democratic and unified Iraq, with constitutional
institutions and subject to the rule of law, where human
rights are protected and all components of Iraqi society
are fully respected.

In the economic sector, the situation has greatly
improved through a series of economic, financial and
investment regulations issued by the Government.
Those regulations have contributed to the increase in
per capita income and improved purchasing power and
the level of social welfare. Through the licensing
rounds this year on oil and gas fields, we have brought
qualified international expertise to that sector, which
will improve Iraq's ability to increase productivity and
export capacity so as to enhance economic
development. In that context, we look forward to the
hydrocarbon law being ratified by the Council of
Representatives as soon as possible.

The Iraqi Government carried out an ambitious
budget for 2010. On 4 April, the Government launched
a five-year national development plan for the period
2010-2014, in order to develop the Iraqi economy,
improve the quality of public services and create job
opportunities. The federal fiscal budget for the 2011
was referred to the Council of Representatives on
1 December. The budget, whose ratification is pending,
is designed to sustain the momentum of economic
improvement in the country.

We are aware that the issue of human rights in
Iraq and the problem of internally displaced Iraqis and
refugees in neighbouring and other countries are issues
of concern to the international community. My
Government continues to take proactive measures to
seriously address those issues. In respect to internally
displaced persons and refugees, the improvement in the
security situation and the work of the Iraqi
Government to provide an appropriate environment for
their safe and dignified return have encouraged a
significant number of displaced Iraqis to return
voluntarily. We firmly believe that this is the solution,
as Iraq needs the capacity of all its sons and daughters
to contribute towards building the future of our
country.
In conclusion, Iraq is a country blessed with rich
natural and human resources. However, we continue to
need international cooperation and support to make
progress towards a stable, peaceful and prosperous
future. A democratic and sovereign Iraq that lives in
peace and security with its people and its neighbours
will be a positive factor in the stability and security of
our region. It would also reflect positively on Iraq's
Arab and international relations as Iraq contributes as a
responsible and rightful member of the international
community.

