Mr. Adada (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to address
the Council at this critical moment in Darfur's history.
In this briefing, I will provide the Council with an
overview of the state of affairs in Darfur. As Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), I will provide an accurate picture
of the progress we are making and of the obstacles we
are encountering.

In terms of the political situation, the conflict in
Darfur today is a conflict of everybody against
everybody: Government forces against the armed
movements, the armed movements among one another,
2

Government forces against the militias and tribal
groups against one another. There is also endemic
banditry due to a breakdown in law and order. The
UNAMID civilian protection strategy seeks to address
every factor that poses a threat to innocent civilians.

Two risk factors stand out. The first is the risk
posed by military operations, in particular those
between the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) and
the Government of the Sudan. It is of vital importance
that the Security Council send a clear signal to all
parties that aggressive military action is unacceptable.
The second risk factor is the worrisome state of
relations between Chad and the Sudan. Indeed, the
danger of a serious deterioration of the situation in
Darfur cannot be ruled out.

Having said all that, the situation has changed
from the intense period in 2003 and 2004, when tens of
thousands of people were killed. Today, in purely
numerical terms, the Darfur conflict can be considered
a low-intensity conflict. During the period from the
first day of UNAMID operations on 1 January 2008
until 31 March 2009, our incident database contains
reports of just under 2,000 fatalities from violence,
with a monthly average of about 130 to 150 deaths.
Approximately one third of the victims were civilians.

Over the same period, 620 civilians lost their
lives, either in deliberate attacks, in crossfire or in
criminal attacks. Of those 620, 68 were internally
displaced persons. According to our reports, 573
combatants died and 669 people died in tribal fighting.
Last but not least, we regret to inform the Council of
the loss of 14 of our own.

There is no military solution to the conflict in
Darfur, which is a political conflict. It is important that
the Council send a strong message to all the parties to
speedily resume inclusive talks. Unfortunately, the
political progress made in February with the first round
of the Doha talks has not yet produced concrete results.

The political process in the Sudan has apparently
frozen, in particular after the decision of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to issue an arrest
warrant for President Omer Al-Bashir. The ICC issue
has dominated and polarized Sudanese political life. It
has weakened the position of those in the Sudan who
have been working for compromise and consensus and
has encouraged militant sentiment on both sides. We
need to find common ground and empower moderate
09-31443
elements, civil society elements in particular, to defuse
the tensions.

Although, unfortunately, the chances for a
comprehensive ceasefire seem slim, a short-term
cessation of hostilities between the parties is possible.
UNAMID has repeatedly expressed its willingness to
use everything at its disposal to monitor such a
cessation of hostilities. We have drawn up action plans
to that end. Comprehensive, fast, rigorous and credible
monitoring of violent incidents, with immediate
reporting to the Council and the African Union, would
be an important step towards reducing tension and
restoring confidence.

Lastly, we must never forget that Darfur is part of
the Sudan and that a solution to the crisis in Darfur is
part and parcel of the wider national Sudanese issue.
Nor must we forget that the people of Darfur are
Sudanese citizens who have the right to participate in
the resolution of key national issues, such as the
establishment of a democratically elected Government.
Darfur should not hold the national democratization
processes hostage, but neither should Darfurians be
denied their democratic right to participate in shaping
the future of the Sudan as a nation.

I would now like to address the humanitarian
situation. At the beginning of this year, the
humanitarian crisis in Darfur was, as a whole,
contained. The supply of food, medical care and other
essential services to the affected population was
adequate. Under very difficult and dangerous
conditions, humanitarian organizations were carrying
out an immense lifesaving operation in Darfur. In
addition, the harvest was better than the year before,
and the destruction of crops by nomadic groups had
been reduced. The health situation was also relatively
good, with the exception of a meningitis outbreak, with
40 cases reported. Our major concern at that time was
displacement of populations due to military activities
in Southern Darfur, with the arrival of thousands of
people in the Zam Zam camp in Northern Darfur.

The 4 March 2009 decision by the Government of
Sudan to expel 13 international non-governmental
organizations and to suspend the work of three local
non-governmental organizations has completely altered
the situation. This act directed against those
indispensable organizations has resulted in an
interruption in the delivery of essential humanitarian
services to the affected population.
Although UNAMID does not have a humanitarian
mandate, we are deeply concerned about the risk of
humanitarian catastrophe, as we are the most visible
representatives of the international community in
Darfur and a humanitarian crisis would only further
complicate our operations. That is why we support all
the efforts of our colleagues in the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), who have been
following and managing this situation along with the
Government of the Sudan.

I turn now to the issue of the deployment of
UNAMID. The efforts made by the Council and its
members have been key factors in overcoming the huge
challenges posed by the deployment of UNAMID. I am
pleased to report to the Council that by the end of 2008
we had deployed two thirds of our troops. We have
identified all the troop-contributing countries and think
that by the end of this year we will be able to deploy
every unit planned and thus have over 90 per cent of
our authorized strength.

Unfortunately, we must still identify countries
that can contribute a few essential units: logistics,
transport and military utility helicopters. As I noted,
we are two-thirds deployed, but due to the lack of those
resources our operational capacity is far from that
level. In this regard, we would like to express our
particular gratitude to the Government of Ethiopia,
which has agreed to provide us with five tactical
helicopters.

Our cooperation with the Government of the
Sudan has been good. The tripartite mechanism
between the United Nations, the African Union and the
Sudanese Government has worked very well and has
greatly facilitated our work. UNAMID was privileged
to host the fifth meeting of that mechanism on
31 March 2009.

I must mention that, after the recent fire that
devastated our facilities, we were grateful again for the
assistance of the Sudanese Government.

Today, UNAMID is deployed in every part of
Darfur.

As I have said, we have two thirds of our military
personnel deployed. In addition, thanks to our civilian
police, civil affairs officers, human rights officers,
political affairs officers and the staff of the Darfur-
Darfur dialogue, we maintain close contacts with all
parties and civil society. We monitor the situation on a
daily basis and are in a position to accurately brief the
Council. UNAMID's voice is heard and listened to, and
we can speak with increasing authority on the situation
on the ground.

In assessing UNAMID's role, unfortunately we
cannot yet claim success. Indeed, the war in Darfur
continues. Civilians continue to face unacceptable
risks. Millions of people are still in displaced person
camps or are refugees. Given the prevailing insecurity,
they cannot return to their homes or resume their
normal lives. No solution has been found to remedy the
great wrongs and injustices that have been committed,
particularly at the height of hostilities in 2003 and
2004.

It cannot be said, however, that we have failed.
Our teams are working around the clock to prevent the
return of violence and killing. This preventive role is
not always visible, but it is important.

In January, the JEM. takeover of the town of
Muhajiriya and the Government counteroffensive
gravely endangered thousands of civilians. We decided
to keep our forces in the town, although we were under
severe pressure to leave. That was the correct decision
by the Secretary-General.

When a disaster does not happen, it is not
reported by the media. Muhajiriya was a disaster that
did not happen. During the attacks and counter-attacks
on Muhajiriya, including by aerial bombardment,
nearly 10,000 civilians looking for protection gathered
in the area next to UNAMID base. With the
Government and JEM, we were able to negotiate the
establishment of a humanitarian perimeter.

The situation in the Kalma displaced persons
camp in August 2008 is well known. It, too, was a
disaster that did not happen because, without
UNAMID's intervention, we would have seen many
more than 38 dead. Today, UNAMID is present
24 hours a day in Kalma, and our intention is to do the
same in all the major displaced person camps in
Darfur.

Another major source of violence is inter-tribal
fighting. UNAMID is often involved in the quest for
peace or the prevention of these conflicts. Just recently
in the town of Khor Abeche, UNAMID stopped an
incident of cattle theft from escalating into a lethal and
uncontrollable intercommunal clash. In addition, the
activities of our civil affairs officers, human rights
officers, political affairs officers, and the Darfur-
Darfur Dialogue and Consultation process are
promoting local reconciliation and peace. In many
cases, these local agreements have helped to stabilize
the situation.

On the ground in Darfur, we face day-to-day
challenges. At present, our most pressing concerns
include, first, the need to stabilize the humanitarian
situation, which is under way. Secondly, we must
respond to a diverse set of threats to security as we
continue to deploy the Mission in order to reach full
capability.

The mandate of UNAMID derives from the
responsibility to protect, and we will be able to
consider our mission accomplished only when the
people of Darfur live in lasting peace and security.
That will require a political settlement for the whole of
the Sudan.

Before concluding, I would like to commend the
extraordinary work of the military and civilian
personnel of UNAMID. I would like in particular to
honour the memory of our 14 colleagues who have lost
their lives in the service of the people of Darfur. I
sincerely believe that the role of UNAMID is
increasingly recognized by the people of Darfur. In a
mission such as ours, publicity is given to failures and
setbacks, and successes attract little attention. But I can
say without fanfare that we are making progress.

Our success is ultimately in the hands of the
political leaders of the Sudan. It is their decision that
will determine whether the people of Darfur can live in
peace or must face the hardships of war. We need a
collective international commitment, represented at the
highest level by the Council, to make them understand
that.

