The Secretary-General: Before I proceed, I
would also like to recognize among us the presence of
President Rau of Germany and his wife in the
Chamber. I think it is important that they join us for
this discussion.

I believe that this open meeting of the Security
Council could not be more timely - and not just
because of the dramatic events on the ground of the last
twenty-four hours. Afghanistan presents the United
Nations with one of its greatest challenges. That
challenge is now perhaps at its most urgent stage. The
international community must be ready to respond.

In particular, the sustained engagement of the
Security Council will be needed if we are to help set
Afghanistan on the path to a stable and lasting peace
and address the dire humanitarian needs of the Afghan
people.

The United Nations has a long history of
involvement in addressing the plight of the Afghan
people. The terrorist attacks on the United States of 11
September and the consequent military action in
Afghanistan have created a new environment that
presents daunting challenges to the international
community, but also new opportunities.

First and foremost, we must do all we can to help
meet the humanitarian needs of the Afghan people,
who have suffered from decades of man-made, as well
as natural, disasters in the shape of conflict, repression,
drought and famine. Winter is closing in, and we must
feed and shelter as many of the vulnerable and
suffering as possible. Next, the rapid march of events
on the ground requires that we focus on the challenge
we will face in a post-Taliban period. This means
taking urgent action so as to avoid a political and
security vacuum.

It means giving priority to the actions the
international community needs to take to help ensure a
climate of stability that can create the conditions for a
lasting peace.

As the Council knows, Lakhdar Brahimi has just
returned from Pakistan, Iran and also Saudi Arabia. I
am confident that with your active support,
Mr. Brahimi will be able to make progress in the
intensive efforts in which he is engaged to facilitate
transitional arrangements that will lay the foundations
for a peaceful and stable Afghan future.
If all the Afghan parties - as well as the
neighbours and the wider international community -
give their full support, there is now a real opportunity
to create the sort of broad-based, fully representative
Government which the United Nations has long been
trying to help the Afghan people achieve. A stable
Afghanistan, living in peace, carrying out its
international obligations and posing no threat to any of
its neighbours, must be our common objective. To
achieve it, any arrangement arrived at must reflect the
will, the needs and the interests of the Afghan people
and enjoy their full support.

This requires the end of interference in
Afghanistan's affairs by neighbouring countries. Unless
this happens - on the level of reality rather than just
rhetoric - there can be little hope of lasting stability in
Afghanistan.

Before closing, I wish to draw the Council's
attention to the immediate needs of the more than six
million people inside Afghanistan affected by the
conflict and natural disaster.

Over the past two weeks, United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations have geared up
cross-border delivery and distribution of food and non-
food assistance. For the first time since ll September,
we have been able to reach or even exceed our weekly
targets of food supplies. I commend the extraordinary
efforts of our colleagues on the ground, in particular
the hundreds of Afghans who are working inside
Afghanistan with great dedication under the most
difficult circumstances.

But many areas still remain inaccessible, making
distribution difficult, in particular in the North. These
areas are also among the most vulnerable. If we want to
avert a humanitarian catastrophe in the coming months,
we must make every effort to overcome the logistical
challenges in, for example, reaching areas cut off by
snow.

Let us not forget that our assistance efforts must
be based on one principle only: to help those most in
need. No less daunting are the constraints imposed by
insecurity.

Irrespective of military or political developments,
we will have to gain the consent and cooperation of all
parties on the ground to reach people in need. We shall
have to devise innovative approaches for interim
security measures until a sustained political process is
in place.

The Afghan population look to the international
community and the Security Council to create the
conditions in which they can finally enjoy a
Government which is fully representative, protects
their human rights and ensures friendly relations with
their neighbours. We owe it to them, and let us not let
them down.

