Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting to
examine the tragic situation prevailing in Kosovo. My
delegation expresses its full appreciation to the
Secretary-General, whose presence among us at this
critical moment for the future of Kosovo demonstrates
his personal commitment to the international
community's rapid and concerted action in the face of
the latest developments of which we have just been
informed.

I also welcome the presence at this meeting of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.

The tragic events, which we condemn,
demonstrate that the process of reconciliation among
the ethnic communities living in Kosovo still has far to
go. At the very least, we can say that mutual trust
between the two communities has not been fully
established and that, rather, mistrust runs so deep that
the slightest incident is liable to trigger an outburst of
violence, with incalculable consequences for the
process of building the rule of law in Kosovo. Benin
vigorously condemns the acts of violence, the instances
of ethnic cleansing and the attacks on the integrity of
the international missions in Kosovo. As well, we
extend our condolences to the families of victims.

The damages suffered by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR are completely unacceptable, as are the loss
of human lives in the two communities and the
destruction of property and cultural artefacts, which
constitutes a grave attack on the shared patrimony of
humankind. The perpetrators of those acts are
personally responsible for their actions. The
international community must ensure that no crime or
violation of human rights in Kosovo goes unpunished.

We believe that in the current situation the
Security Council must urgently send a strong message
to the Serbian and Albanian communities of Kosovo,
calling on them to show greater restraint. The multi-
ethnic character of the province, tolerance and the
equal rights of all communities must be respected. The
acts of intimidation and inter-community violence
hinder the establishment of a democratic Kosovo that
respects the rule of law. We should therefore do
everything to prevent another humanitarian
catastrophe.

In that regard, we support the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
should make use of all his authority in Kosovo to
prevent an escalation of violence and a humanitarian
disaster in the province. We also support the
reinforcement measures to restore order and calm.

That said, in Kosovo, we should put more
emphasis on measures to strengthen trust between the
two communities, to promote the reconciliation of
ethnic groups and to strengthen the authority of the
established democratic institutions, rigorously applying
the norms established by the international community
before the decision on the final status of the province.

