Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico wishes to express it most vigorous rejection of
and deep concern at the acts of violence and aggression
ofthe last few days and hours, which have even further
worsened the situation in the Middle East.

Security Council resolution 1397 (2002), adopted
in this Chamber less than a month ago, is
unambiguous. It demands of both parties the immediate
cessation of all acts of violence, including any acts of
terrorism, provocation, incitement and destruction. The
Security Council's demand, along with many other
appeals from the international community, have gone
unheeded by the parties. This disregard is intolerable.
Extremism has gained control of the situation. The
suicidal acts of Palestinian militants in Netanya and
Jerusalem, which have taken the lives of innocent
Israeli civilians during Christian Easter and Jewish
Passover, are, in the exact words of the Secretary-
General, repugnant acts. Nothing canjustify them.

Mexico believes in the cause of the Palestinian
people and today reiterates that conviction. We are
certain that history will accord a place to a Palestinian
State, and we firmly believe, as resolution 1397 (2002)
states, that such a Palestinian State and the State of
Israel must and will be able to live side by side within
secure and recognized borders. However, this vision
cannot become reality by means of terrorism and
aggression against innocent civilians, those same
civilians with whom the Palestinians will have to live
in peace.

Mexico also supports the right and demand of
Israel to live within secure borders. We believe that
secure borders are not fortified borders. They are not
borders of hate, but of peace and understanding.
Security must be understood and built in the Middle
East by going well beyond military conceptions and
measures. Nothing justifies Israel's disproportionate
and sterile use of force and its siege of the civilian
population and of the headquarters of the Palestinian
National Authority. Israel is wrong, and there is
irrefutable proof if it believes that peace can be
achieved through flre - fire, as the Secretary-General
has repeatedly said, for which the Israeli authorities
and the Palestinian Authority bear equal responsibility.

The Palestinian Authority needs respect today
more than ever, because it is with that entity that Israel
will have to sign a peace agreement. The Palestinian
Authority must in turn efficiently and consistently
prevent any further suicidal acts by Palestinian
extremists and it must renounce violence. Israeli troops
must not go any further. The reasonable course of
action is for Israeli troops to withdraw from Palestinian
cities, including Ramallah.

This has been reiterated again and again by the
international community, but no one has yet responded
to its civilizing appeal or paid heed to this or any
resolution of the Security Council. Israelis and
Palestinians alike are in contempt of and failing their
peoples and the international community. Mexico
therefore yet again joins the Secretary-General in his
calls on both sides to take measures of effective
leadership to end the violence.

In this respect, Mexico firmly believes in the
Tenet plan and considers that the recommendations in
the Mitchell report provide a course of action that the
parties can no longer delay in taking. In recent days,
world public opinion has placed great hopes in the
efforts of the United States Special Envoy to achieve a
ceasefire and to relaunch the dialogue. Those efforts
must not falter and cannot fail.

The summit meeting ofthe League of Arab States
in Beirut, and in particular its endorsement ofthe Saudi
initiative offering Israel a peaceful arrangement with
its neighbours, have also revived hopes that the
building of bridges of understanding between Arabs
and Israelis has begun. We regret that these efforts
have not been echoed by those most directly
responsible for exercising leadership and acting wisely.

Only yesterday, President Yasser Arafat of the
Palestinian Authority expressed his acceptance of a
ceasefire, but his words are not enough. Israel has in
turn expressed its intention to seek peace, but its
actions contradict its words. Both are locked into the
logic of extreme violence, reprisals and intimidation.
This is the logic of hatred, death and destruction. There
is no exit to this logic; it is endless.

Both parties must make an effort to break this
vicious cycle. One gesture of generosity, good sense or
self-restraint could unleash a similar and concomitant
gesture from the other. An olive branch from one side
might flower into understanding. Someone has to take
the first step; someone has to plant that seed.

The Security Council must take action. If
resolution 1397 (2002) is to be effective, the Security
Council must act with clarity and break through the
deafness. The Council's hands must not be tied by a
sterile debate of mutual recrimination or by a
competition to identify the guiltiest party at any
particular moment. The Security Council must proceed
jointly and as one. Its actions must be directed towards
exploring mechanisms that will make its resolutions
effective and provide genuine and energetic support for
those in the Middle East who seek peace.

