At the outset, I would like to thank High Representative Mr. Valentin Inzko for his comprehensive briefing on the implementation of the General Framework Agreement for Peace, and welcome the participation of the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia, and the delegation of the European Union. My delegation welcomes the political agreement, signed in June, which will allow for local elections to be held in Mostar next December for the first time since 2008. We commend the international community's efforts to facilitate this landmark development. Nevertheless, we regret that the political campaign is already characterized by divisive, negative rhetoric that deepens existing divisions and makes reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina increasingly difficult. With the twenty-fifth anniversary of the signing of the General Framework Agreement for Peace approaching, we sincerely hope that the political parties campaigning for the 2020 local elections will use the opportunity to reflect not on the past wartime, but on the ensuing 25 years of peace, and offer forward-looking perspectives to all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that all parties should focus on what binds them together, rather than on misgivings and suspicions that separate them and raise tensions. We remain particularly concerned by the rhetoric of hatred, glorification of war crimes and denial of genocide. We call on all parties to show the will necessary to do away with divisive appeals that exacerbate ethnonationalism, put the whole process of consolidating peace and stability under serious threat and undermine the very improvements and progress that citizens wish to see. We would like to express our support to the efforts of the Office of the High Representative in line with the Dayton Peace Agreement and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and we call on all parties to make concerted efforts to implement the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. With regard to the 5+2 agenda, we encourage all parties to fulfil their commitments with a view to ensuring Bosnia and Herzegovina's full autonomy. A quarter century after the signing of the General Framework Agreement for Peace, many issues are not yet resolved. In this regard, we call on all political leaders to prioritize the national interest of all the citizens in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and pave the way for the younger generation to build a better future based on political and cultural unity. In conclusion, we would like to reiterate Tunisia's full support to all efforts aiming at stabilizing Bosnia and Herzegovina, achieving reconciliation among its various ethnic groups, and fostering lasting peace and security so that it can concentrate on reforms, including the reinforcement of justice, the rule of law, human rights and democracy, which are necessary to build a prosperous nation and better life for its citizens, who deserve to see their country moving ahead in the direction of real peace and not just lagging behind in a state of non-war.
