Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): First of all,
I would like to praise the Bolivian presidency of the
Security Council and thank it for organizing today's
open debate.

I would also like to align myself with the statement
made by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. I would like to
make some additional remarks in my national capacity.

Iran is indeed one of the most serious victims of the
use of chemical weapons in recent decades. Our people
will never forget that they were exposed to hundreds of
chemical attacks by the Saddam Hussein regime, while
the Security Council remained silent. We strongly
condemn the use of weapons of mass destruction by
anyone anywhere.

Let me also react to the statement made this
morning by the representative of the Israeli regime (see S/PV.7985). That statement contained unsubstantiated
allegations against my country, fabricated to advance
an Iranophobic agenda and, through that, to cover
for and justify its aggressive and unlawful policies
and practices committed against the whole region. I
categorically reject all those allegations and wish to
bring the following to the Council's attention.

It is very interesting to see the Israeli regime, an
icon of total disregard for dozens of Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016), and the principles of international law, a
regime famous for its atrocities and apartheid policies
with a well-known record of developing, producing
and stockpiling different kinds of inhumane weapons,
including weapons of mass destruction, gesticulating
to complain about Iran's legitimate and conventional
defence capabilities. The Israeli regime blatantly and
flagrantly continues to flout all international regimes
governing weapons of mass destruction by refusing to
adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological Weapons Convention. It is therefore
is the only obstacle to the establishment of a zone free
from weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.

Nuclear weapons in the hands of the regime pose
the most serious of threats to the security of all States
in the Middle East and to the NPT regime. The Security
Council has the responsibility to effectively address
this threat. Moreover, it is now an established fact that
Israeli agents are providing care to Da'esh operatives
active in Syrian territory, proof of which is abundant.

As a country living in an unstable and volatile region,
Iran is fully entitled to build a credible conventional
capability to defend against any aggression. Iran's
missile systems are part of its legitimate defence
capabilities against the threats and intimidations that
we are facing on an almost daily basis, especially by the
Israeli regime. In that regard, I refer you, Mr. President,
to our letter dated 19 May 2015 (S/2015/353). These
systems are an exercise of our right to self-defence in
the event of any armed attack against us. Iran will not
start any war. We do not intend to attack any country,
but if we come under attack, it is our legitimate right,
under the Charter of the United Nations, to be able to
use our national conventional defence capabilities to
counter any aggression against our national sovereignty
and territorial integrity.

Iran will not tolerate actions that endanger its
national security. We have always warned against
terrorism and its expansion in the region. Our policies
are based on cooperation with regional countries and
the international community with a view to uprooting
terrorism and extremism in the region and world.

