Mr. anald (Norway): Norway has persistently
supported President Mahmoud Abbas in his efforts to
foster democracy, stability and peace in the Palestinian
territory. Norway supported his decision to form a
national unity government, which was meant to break a
dangerous impasse and prepare the ground for renewed
negotiations with Israel.

We also supported his decision under extremely
difficult conditions to declare a state of emergency and
appoint a new Government led by Prime Minister
Salaam Fayyad. The new Government is committed to
the political platform of President Abbas, which
reflects the Quartet principles. The platform supports
peaceful negotiations as the only viable means to
achieving a Palestinian State, living side by side in
peace and security with Israel. The new Government
has enabled the resumption of political dialogue with
Israel and normal relations with the international donor
community.

Norway welcomes the willingness of Prime
Minister Olmert and President Abbas to broach
difficult and substantial issues. We urge both leaders to
demonstrate leadership and courage in order to bring
lasting peace to both their peoples. We - the
international community - must support their efforts.
At the same time, we should also support Prime
Minister Fayyad's efforts to normalize the situation on
the ground and to improve living conditions for
ordinary Palestinians. This must go hand in hand with
the political dialogue with Israel.

Norway believes that, in the long term,
comprehensive and lasting peace cannot be achieved
through isolating a major popular movement.
Palestinian national reconciliation is essential to
achieving political stability and to healing divisions.
2

Regardless of how such reconciliation efforts develop,
all legitimate structures under President Abbas should
be re-established and strengthened. All parallel and
illegitimate structures should be dissolved.

The Government of Prime Minister Fayyad faces
serious challenges, particularly in the security sector.
We condemn rocket attacks on Israel. We reiterate our
demand that such attacks must be halted. The
Palestinian economy has been crippled by years of
conflict and by the Israeli regime of checkpoints and
closures. The humanitarian situation remains very
difficult, especially for Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.
Isolated and closed off from the outside world, the
Gaza Strip could eventually become entirely dependent
on foreign aid. Such isolation and destitution will only
provide fertile breeding- ground for more extremists.

We welcome the decision of the Government of
Israel to transfer withheld Palestinian taxes and
revenues, and we urge the Government to continue
such transfers on a regular basis. It is also essential that
Israel ease restrictions on the movement of persons and
on the transfer of goods, and that Israel implements the
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access. Israel
should also take effective measures to halt settlement
expansion. Such steps are necessary to build
confidence, which, in turn, will facilitate the peace
process.

Norway has long called for a regional approach to
the peace process. We need broad engagement of
countries in the region to follow multiple tracks and to
address all issues. We therefore support the
determination of the Arab League to revitalize its peace
initiative. The Arab-Israeli peace process needs support
and engagement on the part of its Arab neighbours. We
welcome the announcement by the President of the
United States to hold, in November of this year, an
international meeting in support of the two-State
solution. A strong commitment by the United States is
crucial for further progress.

The international community should foster
positive developments on the ground in order to
support the political dialogue. Norway, in its capacity
as Chair of the donor forum - the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee (AHLC) for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestine- has therefore
invited AHLC members to meet at the ministerial level
here, at the United Nations in New York on
24 September. The September meeting should send a
07-49288
strong signal to President Abbas and Prime Minister
Fayyad that the international community is committed
to cooperating with and assisting the Palestinian
Authority. The main purpose of the AHLC meeting is
to prepare and set the stage for a broad-based
international pledging conference in December. The
meeting will also provide an opportunity for close
cooperation and coordination between the Quartet and
the AHLC.

Three major international meetings are planned
this autumn to discuss the Arab-Israeli conflict. There
is a chance for progress and results. Spoilers should not
get the upper hand again, and diminish the chance of
stability and peace in the Middle East.

