Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Amina Mohammed,
Deputy Secretary-General, and Mr. Mohammed Bila,
representative of the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
as well as Ms. Chitra Nagarajan, for their significant
briefings on the most recent developments in the Lake
Chad basin region. I would also like to commend the
Kingdom of Netherlands for the choice of today's
topic, which draws our attention to the various
challenges faced by the Lake Chad basin and their
direct and indirect consequences for the countries
of the region. In my statement, I will focus on three
challenges, namely, security and humanitarian and
environmental challenges.

First, with regard to terrorism and security
challenges, the countries of the Lake Chad basin - in
particularCameroon,Chad,theNigerandNigeria-have
been targeted by terrorist attacks, including those of
Boko Haram and what is known as Da'esh. Such attacks
have led to the deaths of unarmed civilians and other
innocent people, which is a great source of concern.
We need to step up regional and international efforts to
combat that dangerous phenomenon, and to cut off the
sources of financing to those terrorist groups.
We welcome the efforts of the Multinational
Joint Task Force to combat the extremist terrorist
groups and to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. In that regard, it is important to mention
the two presidential statements adopted by the Security
Council in January 2017 (S/PRST/2017/2) and July 2017
(S/PRST/2017/10), which emphasize the importance of
fighting transnational threats that undermine peace
and security. The presidential statements also recall
the importance of implementing the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and of strengthening
good governance and the rule of law.

Secondly, the humanitarian situation in certain
countries of the region is considered the second
worst humanitarian crisis that has been recorded,
with approximately 10.8 million people who require
immediate humanitarian aid. Approximately 2.4 million
people, including women and children, have been
internally displaced. It is therefore essential to deal with
the causes of the suffering and to pool international
efforts and the work of regional organizations to
strengthen the stability of the region and its people,
along with those responsible for terrorist acts to be held
accountable in accordance with resolution 2349 (2017),
on the situation in the Lake Chad basin, adopted on
31 March 2017.

During their visit to the Lake Chad basin, the
members of the Security Council had an opportunity
to see the scope of the humanitarian disaster in some
countries of the region. The Council should benefit
from the visit and periodically review the very serious
humanitarian situation facing those countries before it
deteriorates even further. It would then be even more
difficult to contain it at the international level, let alone
at the regional level.

Thirdly, with regard to environmental challenges
facing the region, resolution 2349 (2017) also emphasizes
the need to address the root causes of climate challenge
in the region and to increase international participation
in order to reduce the negative effects of climate and
environmental changes, including the scarcity of water,
drought, desertification, land degradation and food
insecurity. In that regard, we note the need to reassess
risks and define new and serious strategies in order to
assist the Governments of the region. The Governments
concerned and the United Nations must extensively
assess climate risks, contain their impact and minimize
adverse effects of climate and environmental changes,
so as to ensure stability in the region and to ease the
humanitarian suffering of its people.

In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm the
need for the Security Council to continue to examine
humanitarian suffering in some countries of Lake Chad
basin, with a view to improving the living conditions of
the peoples facing humanitarian, security and climate
challenges and minimize their risks. In that regard,
we commend the efforts of the Republic of Nigeria to
address those challenges.

