Mr. Scherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation is pleased to
welcome to this Chamber the Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Adnan
Terzic, and to thank him for enunciating the position of
the Bosnian Government.

We thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Schwarz-Schilling, for his
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina at the current stage of the
implementation of the peace agreement. The Russian
delegation commends the efforts of the High
Representative to promote the peace process in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to pursue reforms to enhance the
effectiveness of the country's central institutions. We
continue to believe that the further specification and
promotion of those very sensitive reforms should take
fully into account the interests of all Bosnian parties.

In the time to come, the key problems for the
country's future will have to be resolved, including the
fate of the Constitution, an important element of the
Dayton accords. We agree with the point made by the
High Representative regarding the link between
progress on constitutional reform and the outcome of
the forthcoming general parliamentary elections.

With regard to the foundations of the peace
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we believe that the
very philosophy of the Dayton accords present very
significant challenges, in particular with respect to
strengthening the climate of trust and the constructive
cooperation of the international community with the
country, and the importance of achieving consensus
among all Bosnian parties on building a stable State
there. We believe that the international community still
needs to focus its attention on such issues as the
guarantee of genuine equality among people
throughout the entire country, the problem of local
institutions, and refugees and displaced persons.

We are pleased to note that progress has been
made towards strengthening the Bosnian institutions.
We support the speedy transfer to the Bosnian parties
of responsibility for the fate of the country and further
progress in political and economic reform. On that
issue, we believe it crucial that the High
Representative continue to work in a spirit of
partnership with the Bosnian parties on the basis of the
adoption of independent consensus decisions and the
resumption of constructive dialogue. We feel that the
use of diplomatic mechanisms should be maximized in
our work with the Bosnian parties, inter alia, in the
field of cooperation with the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.

Like the High Representative, we are concerned
by attempts to call into question the results of the
certification of the police carried out by the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that
context, we are prepared to engage in a constructive
review of the proposals on possible options for
resolving the so-called problem of non-certified police
officers, which, of course, must be based on the
appropriate decisions of the Security Council and
remain squarely within the framework of international
law and, primarily, of the United Nations Charter. In
that regard, we believe that the Security Council should
send a clear signal regarding the inadmissibility of any
attempt to deny the results registered by the
international presences in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
commend the intention of the High Representative
closely to cooperate with the United Nations in the
interests of a speedy solution to the problem.

In conclusion, we would stress that Russia
intends to continue to play an active and constructive
role in international assistance towards the Bosnian
settlement within the context of the mechanisms
created to that end, in particular the Peace
Implementation Council for Bosnia and Herzegovina
and its Steering Committee, the Contact Group, and in
close coordination with the High Representative.

