Mr. Pal (India): Mr. President, we thank you for
calling this meeting. Let me also put on record our
appreciation for your contribution to the Council's
work and for the cooperation you and your
indefatigable team have extended to all delegations.

India has always opposed sanctions that have a
humanitarian impact, and, as External Affairs Minister
Jaswant Singh has said in Parliament,

"the sanctions imposed on Iraq are unjust, unwise
and detrimental to large numbers of innocent
Iraqi men, women and children".

We have repeatedly called for these sanctions to
be lifted in tandem with Iraq's compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We believe that
the no-fly zones are not sanctioned by any aspect of the
Council's resolutions. We have always disapproved of
unilateral armed action against Iraq, and we believe
attempts to undermine Iraq's territorial integrity -
attempts which we reject - could have unforeseen and
destructive geopolitical implications for the region.

The sanctions on Iraq have also caused acute
economic and financial hardship to other countries,
India among them. Unfortunately, our request for relief
under Article 50 is still pending with the sanctions
Committee. To ease the serious strain imposed on our
economy by these sanctions, we have also informed the
Council about a counter-trade arrangement with Iraq
which will let it import food from India against the
export of crude oil and oil products.
India has a vital interest in the peace and
prosperity of the Gulf, which is part of our
neighbourhood. We have therefore supported every
initiative to defuse the crisis over Iraq and believe it
would help promote the security and stability of the
region if Iraq were brought back into the mainstream of
regional and international affairs. We hope diplomatic
efforts will be resumed under the auspices of the
United Nations. We see the need to develop fresh ideas
and new mechanisms to serve the purpose of the
United Nations. We hope the Council will act urgently
to end the long nightmare of the people of Iraq.

