Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
We are pleased to welcome Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
to the Security Council. We would like to thank her for
today's briefing on, as she noted, the eighteenth report
by an ICC Prosecutor on the situation in Darfur since
resolution 1593 (2005) was adopted.

The United States reiterates its appreciation to
her and her Office for their work to advance the cause
of justice for the people of Darfur. Her perseverance
with the long-standing cases in the Court is highly
commendable, particularly given the obstacles the
ICC faces as a result of the Government of the Sudan's
continued non-cooperation.

Justice will be the cornerstone of a stable and
sustainable peace agreement in Darfur. The United
States remains deeply concerned that the lack of
progress on accountability for atrocities committed in
Darfur continues to contribute to instability throughout
the Sudan. Lasting impunity goes hand in hand with
continued violence and insecurity.

The report of the Prosecutor is replete with stark
reminders of the challenges her Office faces in seeking
to address the atrocities suffered by the victims in
Darfur. It once again details the blatant disregard of the
Government of the Sudan for its obligation to cooperate
with the ICC pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). The
most alarming element of the Prosecutor's briefing is
that individuals subject to the ICC's arrest warrants in
Darfur continue to remain at large. The Government
of the Sudan has the responsibility to implement the
warrants, yet it has consistently failed to do so, while
also offering no meaningful measure of justice at the
national level. The Government of the Sudan must
fully cooperate with the ICC and its Prosecutor, and we
continue to call on it to do so.

In a direct affront to the charges levelled against
them, the individuals subject to outstanding arrest
warrants also continue to cross international borders.
The international community should remain united
against those acts of defiance against justice by
preventing such travel. States and regional bodies
should ensure that the individuals in question are not
invited to their countries and should not facilitate or
support travel by those subject to the arrest warrants.
We welcome the Prosecutor's continue pursuit of

justice through her continued work on the case against
Abdallah Banda. We look forward to the start of that
trial and the defendant's continued cooperation.

Yet there are other very troubling elements of the
report of the Prosecutor. Of particular concern are
allegations of sexual and gender-based violence in
Darfur. Such crimes shock the conscience, and the lack
of accountability fuels the cycle of violence through
resentment, reprisal attacks and further conflict.

We also continue to be deeply concerned by
attacks on United Nations peacekeepers. While the
Government of the Sudan claims to be investigating
those deplorable incidents, there have been no results
and no evidence that those killings are being seriously
addressed. Local accountability initiatives, particularly
the Special Criminal Court on the Events in Darfur, also
remain wanting. We urge observers from the African
Union and the United Nations to monitor the Court's
proceedings, or lack thereof, and report publicly their
observations.

In conclusion, accountability for genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur is both
a moral imperative and an issue of peace and security.
The United States places a high priority on promoting
justice and lasting peace for all of the people of the
Sudan. We once again commend Prosecutor Bensouda
for her work to investigate and prosecute those most
responsible for atrocities committed in Darfur.

