Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): First of all,
Mr. President, allow me to thank you for organizing
this open meeting, and to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2007/643). The report reflects the same
commitment to the issue which the Secretary-General
has already shown through his visits to regions where
some of the worst examples of brutality against
civilians have been witnessed. The report is also to be
commended because it does not avoid a direct
description of the sort of brutality inflicted on
civilians, or of the countries and regions where that is
happening. I would also like to thank Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his briefing.

One of the positive developments in the discourse
concerning security in recent years has been the
refocusing on issues relating to the security of the
individual. The development of the concept of human
security since the early 1990s and the ground-breaking
recognition of the responsibility to protect have given
us conceptual approaches in tune with what the
Secretary-General refers to as the shared fundamental
values that make it imperative to recognize the inherent
dignity and worth of every human being.

That places a heavy burden on the Security
Council in particular in its work to maintain peace and
security. Its work must include not only the prevention
of conflict where at all possible and the resolution of
conflicts that arise. The Council also has a role in
addressing the very serious issues related to the
millions of civilians caught up in conflicts in which
they are not combatants and over which they have no
control.

The massive displacement of civilians by conflict
not only imposes suffering on millions, it also makes
much more difficult the re-establishment of peace
following the conclusion of a conflict. Of particular
concern at present is the growing number of displaced
persons and refugees from the conflict in Iraq. Iceland
will continue to make its contribution through the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
assist Iraqi refugees in neighbouring countries.

Iceland would like to welcome the Secretary-
General's unambiguous comments earlier this year on
the "atrocious inhumane impact of cluster munitions".
Iceland will continue its support for the ongoing Oslo
process towards a legally binding instrument of
international law that prohibits the use, development,
stockpiling and transfer of cluster munitions that cause
unacceptable harm to civilians. That process clearly
has added value to the certain conventional weapons
track.

One of the most disturbing chapters in the
Secretary-General's report concerns sexual violence.
Although not exclusively inflicted on women and girls,
they constitute by far the most vulnerable and
numerous group of victims. As the report states, such
violence, particularly where it is a systematic tool of
war, is a grave war crime. The effect of such violence
is not only that it inflicts tremendous suffering on
individual women and their families but that it also
destroys the fabric of societies and communities,
making recovery and peacebuilding far more difficult
if peace is regained. In that context, we welcome the
adoption by the Third Committee of the draft
resolution on eliminating rape and other forms of
sexual violence in all their manifestations, including in
conflict and related situations.

Rape is not an inevitable consequence of war; it
can be prevented. Effective measures to reduce
impunity are essential to signal to all those envisaging
the use of such methods that the international
community will not tolerate such crimes. The
International Criminal Court and other tribunals
provide the tools for decreasing impunity. As has been
observed by many experts, sexual violence is not only
the product of conflict. Indeed, sexual violence is
incipient in all societies. It is therefore the duty of all
States to look to their own legislation as well.

Providing assistance to victims in the form of
medical help, counselling and protection against
further aggression must also be provided. Iceland has
concentrated its efforts in recent years on resettling
women from Colombia at risk of sexual violence.

Iceland is a strong supporter of the United
Nations Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate
Violence against Women and has contributed to it for
years. In 2008 Iceland will double its contribution to
the Fund, thereby confirming our commitment to fight
against violence against women.

