Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for having organized today's important briefing on the
protection of critical infrastructure against terrorist
attacks. We also appreciate the excellent presentation
by His Excellency Mr. Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.

We commend Ukraine's leadership last year
on this issue in the Security Council. Let me also
stress the importance in this area of the efforts and
engagement of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate. This briefing concerning the
implementation of resolution 2341 (2017), on critical
infrastructure, gives Council members another
opportunity this month to send a strong message about
the crucial nature of international cooperation in the
fight against terrorism.

I believe that we need to focus on three things that
we believe are of significance and that together can
serve as safeguards against potential threats.

The first aspect is preparation. It is essential that
plans for the protection of our critical infrastructure be
comprehensively elaborated, targeted, maintained and
tested. We took due note of the call made on States in
resolution 2341 (2017) to develop their own strategies
to prepare and respond to any attack.

Poland's approach to reducing the risk to our
infrastructure assumes all types of risks. That requires
the development of plans that can be used to respond to
many types of disruption and threats to people's lives.
That approach has helped not only to reduce risk but
also to improve responsiveness.

Secondly, and equally important, is the issue
of protection. The threat to some elements of our
national infrastructure may be theoretical; however,
there are some areas, in different countries, where the
probability of a threat is always high. One of these
areas is transport networks. Both surface and air
transportation are under serious and enduring threat
from international terrorism. That is why strengthening
critical infrastructure protection must be done in
cooperation among States.

Finally, I would like to focus on partnership. The
critical infrastructure that we need to protect is not solely
owned by the private sector and therefore forms part
of complex supply chains and international networks.
While Governments have an obligation to ensure
that industry is managing this risk comprehensively,
private companies are responsible for ensuring that the
infrastructure is protected and that essential services
are provided.

As resolution 2341 (2017) stresses, stronger
international partnerships are needed most when the
functioning of infrastructure relies on cross-border
networks and supply chains. It is the operators of
critical infrastructure who bear the responsibility for
its protection. The Government supports their efforts
through detaining and counteracting, reacting and
prosecuting acts of a terrorist nature. Everyone has a
role to play in this respect.

To conclude, let me highlight that there must be
accountability for all acts ofterrorism. The perpetrators,
organizers and sponsors of terrorist attacks must
be held responsible. As reflected in resolution 2341
(2017), measures to counter terrorism must be taken
in accordance with international law, including human
rights law.

