Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's important meeting. I would also like to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under- Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings on the current alarming situation in Idlib. Syria has been the subject of discussion in the Council for almost a decade now. The Council has discussed the use of chemical weapons and the crimes committed by a tyrannical regime against its own people. It has been discussed as a civil war and a humanitarian crisis caused by the terrorist regime of a failed State. It has been discussed as a serious threat to international peace and security. But nothing has changed. To the contrary, the danger of further escalation is growing. On 3 February, the regime, run by a clique in Damascus controlling some parts of Syrian territory, deliberately targeted Turkish forces, resulting in the deaths of seven Turkish soldiers and one civilian personnel. Acting in self-defence, the Turkish armed forces immediately retaliated. Those Turkish servicemen are in Idlib as part of the memorandum signed by Turkey and Russia in September 2018 to stabilize the situation in Idlib and preserve the status of Idlib as a de-escalation area. All deployments of the Turkish armed forces, including the most recent, have been coordinated with Russian authorities. But despite our notifications, the regime opened fire on Turkish positions on 3 February. As a result, we were forced to deploy additional troops to protect our military observation posts and to prevent the escalation of hostilities in Idlib, in line with the responsibilities bestowed on Turkey as a guarantor. As of today, some of our observation posts remain encircled by the fighters of the regime. Even today, there have been bombardments by the regime's air force. Since 2011, hundreds of thousands of Syrians have been killed by the regime. Countless more have been injured, tortured, detained or disappeared. Millions have been besieged and denied humanitarian and medical aid. My country hosts nearly 4 million Syrians. That is almost one-fifth of the entire population of Syria before the start of the conflict. All of this is because the tyrant in Damascus has refused to meet the legitimate demands of Syrian people. Terrorist groups established their own. states in Syrian territory because the tyrant in Damascus would not allow the Syrian people to enjoy their basic rights. And now, he wants to pull my country into his dirty war by deliberately targeting Turkish forces. I cannot overemphasize the point that Turkey believes in a political solution in Syria and is working with the United Nations for a settlement in line with resolution 2254 (2015). However, Turkey will never tolerate belligerent acts. Any military aggression targeting Turkey's security interests and Turkish soldiers will be severely punished. We will never hesitate to use our right to self- defence. I am not drawing a red line here. This is a warning. As announced by President Erdogan, the regime should withdraw from its current positions until the end of the month. We expect the regime and its supporters to take the necessary steps in that direction, and we expect all our friends and all responsible members of the international community to respect our legitimate security concerns. With the Sochi memorandum, we agreed with Russia to stabilize the situation in Idlib and preserve the status of Idlib as a de-escalation area. We also agreed that Turkish observation posts would be fortified and continue to function. As the guarantor of the regime, Russia committed to taking all necessary measures to ensure that military operations and attacks on Idlib will be avoided and that the existing status quo will be maintained. However, since May 2019, as a result of at least 2,000 ceasefire violations by regime forces, more than 1,500 civilians have been killed and approximately 800,000 displaced. A new ceasefire was introduced very recently, on 12 January, following President Putin's visit to Turkey. Since that date, the regime has violated the ceasefire more than 6,500 times, in total disregard of all agreements on Idlib. As I have informed the Council on previous occasions, Turkey has taken a large number of measures to ensure the full implementation of the Sochi memorandum, in line with the responsibilities outlined therein. In the meantime the regime and its supporters continue to use the pretext of combatting terrorism to attack Idlib. We all know that thedeliberate targeting of civilians only fuels further radicalization. With over 3 million civilians squeezed into close quarters, the fight against terrorism cannot be carried out as it is in clear violation of international humanitarian law. Implying that millions of civilians in Idlib are Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists is a joke. We all know that the Syrian regime's real intention is not to end terrorism. It is to punish its own people and silence the Syrian opposition, not only in Idlib but also in other parts that are controlled by the regime. Some 1,600 people have been killed since April 2019. Our contacts with the Russian authorities continue at every level, including at the military level, with our de-conflicting contacts. Our expectation of that communication is the renewal of our commitment to the Sochi understanding on Idlib and a return to the status quo in Idlib. Let me underline that Turkey will not withdraw its forces and will not abandon any observation post. I recently met with a Syrian doctor. His depiction of the situation still resonates with me. He said, "T have seen the world's worst humanitarian crises, but the suffering I have seen in Syria is unprecedented. Idlib has been transformed into a huge concentration camp." What the regime has been pursuing in Idlib over recent months is the last phase of its campaign to exterminate its own people. Hospitals and schools have been indiscriminately bombed and civilians, including babies, have been killed. Freezing temperatures and fuel shortages exacerbate the needs of vulnerable children and families. The capacity of the health system has been severely damaged at a time when health- care needs are increasing owing to displacement and bombardment. Donors, however, have responded in an inadequate manner. We need an urgent response. If this does not qualify as an emergency situation worthy of additional funding, then what does? Even before the recent escalation, the residents of Idlib were the most vulnerable people in Syria. They had already been displaced countless times, seeking refuge from the regime's barrel bombs, airstrikes and heavy shelling for many years now. In the past two months, the regime's brutal violence has resulted in the displacement of almost 600,000 people, 85 per cent of whom are women and children. As bombs fall, civilians continue to move towards our border. The escalation has triggered a mass influx, leading to a chain reaction that affects not only Turkey but also beyond. Is the world ready to face a repetition of the 2015 refugee crisis, when over a million people from Syria arrived in Europe? The children of Idlib continue to bear the brunt of this massacre. More children were killed in July 2019 alone than in all of 2018. A dead Syrian child is referred to in the news only as a casualty, but back in Idlib, she or he has a name, and the body is buried with the dreams of a peaceful Syria. It is even more tragic when the body of a child cannot even be found under the debris of a bombed school. It is time for the international community, and particularly the members of the Security Council, to heed the voices of those Syrian children. Raising concerns and convening meetings is not enough. Unfortunately, this humanitarian disaster is not given due attention by Governments and media around the world. The United Nations and the international community need to pay attention to the desperate calls of the Syrian people and humanitarian organizations. We need immediate, concrete action. We cannot leave the fate of Syrians to the mercy of a regime that has been systematically killing, torturing and starving its own people. There is a clear path forward - a genuine political solution that will ensure the implementation of all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015). Let me recall the formula in the resolution: a negotiated political settlement, elections under United Nations supervision, with the participation of all Syrians inside and outside the country, and a new Constitution. For that to happen, the first step is immediate de-escalation in Idlib. Any step in the opposite direction will inevitably derail the political process. Let us all work altogether to end this tragedy once and for all. Let me also reply to previous speakers. I will not honour the representative of the Syrian regime with a response as I do not consider him to be a legitimate representative of Syria. A regime that has massacred and tortured the Syrian people for over eight years lost its legitimacy long ago and its representative should not have the right to sit behind the nameplate of the Syrian Arab Republic in this Chamber. His mere presence is an assault on the millions of Syrians who have suffered countless crimes at the hands of that tyrannical regime,
