I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritania for their interventions. I would like to extend our sincere condolences to the countries of the Sahel as well as to the victims' families following the recent violence, especially in Burkina Faso. I want to share two messages today. First, France is convinced that the international community can succeed in stabilizing the Sahel if it acts in a united and determined manner. The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), under the resolute command of General Namata Gazama, and the national armies of these countries have recently increased their military operations. Despite heavy losses, they achieved concrete results: the neutralization of many terrorists, seizure of weapons and equipment, and release of hostages. These armed forces gain more and more autonomy and coordination. In addition, the countries of the region, including the Niger, a member of the Security Council, despite limited resources, show resilience and maintain a dynamic democratic life. We must salute their commitment. Then, and this is my second point, the international community has recently increased its support, which is a key milestone for the success of our collective efforts. At the request of the G-5 Sahel countries, France, together with the European Union, supported the launch of the Coalition for the Sahel this year. It rests on four pillars the fight against terrorism, capacity-building, return of the State, and economic development because all of these issues must work together. That mobilization will continue in June with the first meeting of ministers for foreign affairs of the Coalition on 12 June, preceded by a meeting of defence ministers. On the ground, the launch of the Coalition resulted in the establishment of a joint command mechanism between the French Operation Barkhane and the armies of the G-5 Sahel; increased commitment on the part of partners, notably the European Union, but also the African Union, as well as the Economic Community of West African States and the West African Economic and Monetary Union, which are funding a $2.3 billion counter-terrorism plan; and, finally, the launch of Task Force Takuba, which brings together European special forces to support the Malian armed forces. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali plays an essential role in this game, thanks to the support it provides to the operations of G-5 Sahel forces. We must consolidate this United Nations support for the countries of the Sahel to help them ensure the security of their territories and their populations.
