Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela appreciates the initiative of the
Security Council to consider the situation in Haiti for
the second time this year. This is a very important issue
for our country, given the historic and geographic ties
that have bound us to the Haitian people since our
establishment as a sovereign republic. We have shared
in fraternal solidarity the experience of emancipation.
The rise to independence and sovereignty is a process
both relevant and key to understanding current
developments on our continent today, which reaffirm
the emancipation of our peoples and our political,
economic and cultural liberation against a backdrop of
social equality and justice.

Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's report
(S/2009/439) sets out the need to fully overcome
Haiti's problems. By and large, Haiti's circumstances
are a reflection of poverty, social inequality and the
interference of foreign Powers that destabilizes
countries.
The Secretary-General has proclaimed the need to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and has asserted that
the country's institutions remain fragile. Venezuela
believes that cooperative efforts and multilateral
actions should contribute to strengthening democracy
and political, economic and social progress in Haiti. It
is crucial to take account of the opinions of the people
and Government of Haiti, who should exercise their
sovereignty in establishing the nature of cooperation
with their country.

We welcome General Assembly resolution 63/294
of 30 June 2009, which emphasizes the need to hire
Haitian staff wherever possible, with a view to
replacing foreign officials and staff.

At this meeting, we have heard a statement from
former United States President William Jefferson
Clinton, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Haiti. In his briefing, he set out the initiatives and
programmes he intends to carry out. We acknowledge
his concern about the difficult conditions in that
brotherly Caribbean country. We appreciate former
President Clinton's acknowledgement of the
contribution to Haiti's development being made by
Venezuela and the sisterly Republic of Cuba.

Indeed, the Bolivarian Government has, in a spirit
of solidarity, undertaken assistance efforts on behalf of
the Government and people of Haiti. Haiti's
participation in our PetroCaribe energy cooperation
initiative has contributed to reducing that country's
economic difficulties. In addition, our country has set
up electrical power stations that provide service to up
to 30 per cent of Haiti's population. That cooperation
contributes to the provision of such public services as
schools and hospitals. Together with the sisterly
Republic of Cuba, we are also carrying out Operation
Miracle. That cooperation programme provides patients
from various countries with free care for eye
conditions. As of February 2009, surgical procedures
had been performed on more than 40,000 Haitian
patients. Venezuela has also generously welcomed the
Haitian diaspora. Our university classrooms host
hundreds of young Haitians who will lend their
knowledge to the comprehensive development of their
country.

Haitian President Rene' Preval has emphasized the
need for MINUSTAH to reinvent itself. That is truly a
challenge. Cooperation should seek to address the
urgent problems of that sisterly country without
undermining its sovereignty or imposing conditions
that could perpetuate the political and social
catastrophes of its past. The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reiterates its commitment to the Haitian
people and its support for the Government led by Rene
Preval.

I should like to conclude my statement by quoting
the very beautiful words spoken today by Prime
Minister Michele Duvivier Pierre-Louis, which we
fully support:

"Haiti can once again, as it has already done in
the past, reach a moment of epiphany that will set
it firmly on the course of progress and
modernity".

