Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and the
countries aligning themselves with this statement.

Just one month after the last public meeting on
Timor-Leste, we are meeting again today following the
serious incidents that have occurred in recent weeks.
We listened carefully to the remarks made by
Ambassador Jose Luis Guterres and Mr. Ian Martin, the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy, and we would like
to thank them for their frank assessments of the
situation.

The European Union is very concerned about the
security situation in Timor-Leste. There can be no
doubt that the escalation of events in the past two
months has created a highly volatile security situation
that endangers the achievements that Timor-Leste has
registered in the years since gaining independence. The
European Union calls on all parties involved to refrain
from further violence and to contribute to re-

S/l'V.5457

 

establishing public order. The European Union also
calls on relevant actors from all sides to engage in
dialogue to find a solution to the current crisis and its
underlying problems.

We applaud the leadership of Timor-Leste for its
decision to ask for help in trying to contain the
situation. The European Union commends the countries
that were asked for help - Portugal, Australia,
Malaysia and New Zealand - for their quick reaction
to that appeal and for their commitment to helping to
restore law and order and to supporting Timor-Leste in
this difficult phase.

Events in the last two months have, unfortunately,
revealed a serious political crisis and shortcomings in
the approach to security-sector reform in Timor-Leste,
leading to the recent riots. Now, following the
confrontation between different parts of the security
sector and the looting of equipment, including
weapons, a lot more work will need to be done. Most
importantly, of course, the issues and grievances that
led to the current situation will have to be addressed in
a comprehensive manner so that political reconciliation
can take place, as a necessary precondition for
continuing the process of nation-building and for the
holding of the 2007 elections. At the same time, we
should not forget that there are sectors of the
administration in Timor-Leste that had successfully
taken up the provision of State services prior to the
recent riots and whose functioning has been
interrupted. Those parts of the administration must be
enabled to take up their vital functions once again.

At a time when the mandate of the current United
Nations operation - the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) - is under scrutiny and up for
renewal, it is necessary to examine the future role of
the United Nations in Timor-Leste. It is clear to the
European Union that an international security presence
will have to remain in the country for some time to
provide security and stability. The role of the United
Nations will have to be strong in order to promote and
facilitate the process of political reconciliation so as to
heal the divisions that have become apparent, to uphold
law and order, and to redouble international efforts in
capacity-building for the administration in Timor-
Leste.

In the light of recent events, the holding of the
2007 presidential and parliamentary elections is a
formidable challenge. International support for the
election process will be crucial for its success and,
indeed, for the consolidation of democracy in the
country. The wishes of the Government of Timor-Leste
and the assessment of the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy should be among the guiding principles in
considering the form that the future United Nations
mission might take and will have to be closely taken
into account. In that regard, it is important that the
United Nations and the international community at
large be enabled to finish the work undertaken.

Since 1999, the European Union and its member
States have been reliable development partners for
Timor-Leste. Under the current circumstances, the
continued support of the international community is -
more than ever before - essential for the long-term
economic development of the country. In that regard,
last Friday an agreement was signed between the
European Commission and the Government allotting
€18 million to economic and democratic development
projects in the near future. A further €63 million in
financial aid has been earmarked for the period 2008 to
2013. We are thus continuing to honour our
commitment to help Timor-Leste in this field. The
European Union is also engaged in the field of
humanitarian assistance, with the European
Commission redirecting ongoing humanitarian
programmes and preparing a funding decision to
swiftly address the emergency needs of the more than
100,000 internally displaced persons in and around
Dili. Furthermore, the Commission is ready to consider
stabilization measures under its Rapid Reaction
Mechanism.

Timor-Leste is going through a difficult period.
The United Nations was instrumental in helping the
people of Timor-Leste gain their independence and
start building their nation. We must do everything in
our power to secure that investment and to strengthen
the fragile democracy in Timor-Leste. The United
Nations must heed its call for help and assistance in
times of crisis.

