The Deputy Secretary-General: The Israeli-
Palestinian conflict has once again entered a dangerous
phase. The eruption of Violence gripping the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as well as Israel
and Gaza, shows no signs of abating. Between 1 and
21 October, 47 Palestinians and 7 Israelis have been
killed, and more than 5,000 Palestinians and about
70 Israelis have been injured. We condemn all attacks
against Israelis and Palestinians alike in the strongest
terms. The recent wave of knife attacks and shootings
is particularly appalling. There can be no justification
for such despicable acts.

As he reported to the Council yesterday, the
Secretary-General travelled to Israel, Palestine and
Jordan, where he met with senior Israeli and Palestinian
officials and King Abdullah II. In all his exchanges,
he condemned and conveyed alarm about the upsurge
in attacks and Violence over the past two weeks and
offered his deep condolences to the people of Israel
and Palestine. He also had moving meetings with
victims and their families on both sides. The Secretary-
General's Visit had a clear goal - to support collective
efforts to stop the violence, reduce the tensions and
incitement and begin to outline a political horizon that
can lead to lasting peace and security. President Abbas
and Prime Minister Netanyahu assured the Secretary-
General that they are working to curb the Violence,
particularly through continued security coordination.
Yet while they are important, security measures alone
will not suffice.

Let us be clear. There is never any justification
whatsoever for murder. That should not stop us from
asking why the situation has deteriorated. I suggest
that this crisis would not have erupted ifthe Palestinian
people had any perception ofhope ofa viable Palestinian
State, if they had an economy that provided jobs and
opportunities, or if they had more control over their
security and the legal and administrative processes that
define their daily existence - in short, if they did not
still live under a stifling and humiliating occupation
that has lasted almost half a century. Instead, they
see the growth of illegal settlements in the occupied
West Bank, which undermine the very possibility of
a two-State solution and pose growing security risks
to all. They see the emergence of a parallel de facto
settler community, with better infrastructure, services
and security than in Palestinian-populated areas. With
every passing day, their dream of real statehood is
becoming more elusive. Nowhere is the frustration and
anger at the current situation more evident than among
young people.

The current situation also understandably sharpens
a sense of fear among the Israeli population. Israeli
civilians see the recurrence of Violence as a serious
threat to their personal security and that of their country.
They are also alarmed about signs that anti-Semitism
is on the rise globally. We must understand these
Israeli concerns. Israelis see growing attempts in the
international community at what they believe is aimed
at delegitimizing the State of Israel. When confronted
with a climate of terror, Israelis rightly expect their
authorities to enforce security.

Taken together, the failed peace initiatives and
the reluctance of leaders on both sides to take the bold
steps necessary to make progress will create a highly
combustible reality in which Israel's security concerns
remain unmet and the Palestinian national struggle
risks taking on an ever-more violent dimension - and
this, in a region already plagued by violent religious
extremism.

The Secretary-General condemned the setting
ablaze of Joseph's Tomb last week in the West Bank by
hundreds of Palestinians. This was a shocking act of
violence with the potential to lead to reprisals affecting
other holy sites. The sanctity of all holy sites must be
respected, especially so as to deny extremist elements
any opportunity to transform the current situation into
a religious conflict.

Tensions at the holy sites in the Old City of
Jerusalem continue to be a dangerous driver of the
current wave of violence. This year, during the holy
month of Ramadan - the most quiet in 10 years, by
the way - Jerusalem welcomed some 3 million Visits
by Muslim worshippers from the West Bank, Gaza
and Jerusalem. However, extremists on all sides have
sought to disturb the historic status quo. Concerns
among Muslims that this is under threat have been
exacerbated by irresponsible incendiary statements.
These have come from a number of sources and
directions, reaching the point that many have become
convinced that the Israeli Government plans to Violate
the historic status quo.

The Secretary-General welcomes Prime Minister
Netanyahu's repeated assurances that Israel has no
intention of changing the historic status quo at the
Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount. But that message will
resonate only if swift action is taken on the ground that
demonstrates this public commitment. In this regard, we
welcome the Prime Minister's decision to ban ministers
and Knesset members from visiting the Holy Sites. The
Secretary-General encourages Israel and Jordan, in
View of its special role as Custodian of the holy sites,
to act jointly and coordinate the necessary steps. This
would be in line with their previous understandings to
ensure that the historic status quo is preserved.

The shocking murders of the Dawabsha family in
July and the lack of progress in arresting the perpetrators
were another critical trigger of the current escalation.
This incident reflects an increasing sense of critical
exposure among Palestinians in the face of settler
Violence and reinforces their feeling of injustice. It is
imperative that Israel take action to empower Palestinian
institutions to protect vulnerable communities. It must
vigorously address the perceived impunity for settler
Violence by expediting investigations and prosecutions
of the Dawabsha family's killers.

The third factor perpetuating the fragile situation
is the level of force used by Israeli security forces in
countering some of the Violence. A number of incidents,
many caught on Video and widely disseminated, call into
question the degree of response, including the apparent
disproportionate use of lethal force as a first resort. The
Secretary-General has reminded Israeli authorities that
live fire should be used only as a last resort in situations
of imminent threat of death or serious injury. It is their
duty to ensure a prompt and independent investigation
into incidents where use of force has resulted in death
or injury, and to ensure accountability where there is
evidence of wrongdoing. The Secretary-General is also
concerned that Israeli authorities have resumed punitive
demolitions, targeting the homes of perpetrators or
alleged perpetrators of attacks against Israeli civilians
and security forces.

Incitement is another factor significantly fueling
the situation. While leaders on both sides have tempered
their rhetoric of late, misleading and inflammatory
public statements continue to surface from all sides.
The vitriolic nature of the public discourse is alarming.
Every incident that takes place evokes impassioned
narratives and counter-narratives that feed a Vicious
cycle of hatred and division.
Contrary to the shameful boasts by militant
Palestinian groups, including members of Hamas, there
is nothing "heroic" about the killing of an innocent man
and the serious injury of his wife and 2-year-old child
as they walked through Jerusalem's Old City; or the
stabbing of a 65-year-old woman near a bus station in
Tel Aviv; or the killing of an Israeli couple while driving
with their four children. This is murder, full stop. Crimes
like these risk perpetuating the current climate of fear
and mistrust. We call on all stakeholders, including
the Palestinian leadership, to unequivocally condemn
the violence and stand up publicly to extremism and
incitement. Failure to do so on the part of both sides
leaves the door open for extremists to aggressively
promote their destructive agendas.

The first priority for all of us must be the
de-escalation of violence. Let me emphasize again, as
the Secretary-General did yesterday, that the violence
is rooted mainly in the absence of a genuine political
narrative and horizon. Each month we have conveyed to
the Council the reality on the ground that is the setting
of this latest outbreak. Efforts from all quarters must be
intensified to restore Palestinian and Israeli hope that
peace is still possible. We must urgently achieve real
progress towards a negotiated two-State solution.

To do so, we must see significant change ofpolicies,
consistent with prior agreements, that will strengthen
the Palestinian institutions, economy and security. That
would help create the conditions for the parties to return
to meaningful negotiations. We need to hear Palestinian
leaders address sincerely Israelis' legitimate security
concerns and see them take steps to end incitement. To
this end, the Middle East Quartet envoys must continue
their outreach to regional and international partners to
examine how they may contribute to a comprehensive
resolution of the conflict. The envoys are planning
visits to Israel and Palestine in the coming period.

In conclusion, Palestinians and Israelis deserve
a future free from the fear of repeated new rounds of
violence. Establishing the beginning of trust between
the parties is key to overcoming the painful legacy of
this conflict. The United Nations will continue to work
at the side of Israelis, Palestinians and international
partners to advance this crucial goal towards peace and
reconciliation.

