Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (Spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Jan Kubis for his briefing and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin, for his
statement.

This year represents a crucial year of transition
for Afghanistan, during which it will undergo a
three-pronged transition - on political, security
and economic fronts - to comprehensively build on
Afghanistan's stability, prosperity and harmonious
coexistence among various communities. Those
transitions will require unremitting efforts on the part
of the Afghan Government and its people, which would
not be possible without the persistent support and
assistance from the international community.

The presidential and provincial council elections
slated for 5 April represent an important milestone in
Afghanistan's political transition. China welcomes the
smooth progress in the preparations for the upcoming
major elections and wishes for their success in leading
to smooth transitions that are in keeping with the
common interest of Afghanistan and the international
community.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains
fragile, as represented by the major increases in various
types of security incidents since last year. We express
our concerns over rising civilian casualties, and we
support capacity-building for Afghanistan's national
security and police forces to enable them to effectively
fulfil safety and security responsibilities. The parties
concerned should fully take into account the need to
protect the security and stability of Afghanistan and
steadily and responsibly reduce their armed forces
in order to ensure smooth progress in Afghanistan's
security transition.

China supports the efforts of the Afghan Government
and of the High Peace Council to promote an Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned reconciliation process. We hope
that the international community will help Afghanistan
to advance the reconciliation process on its own terms,
and we welcome the neighbours of that country playing
an active role.

China highly appreciates the efforts of the Afghan
Government to develop its economy and to promote
employment. We expect the international community
to effectively fulfil its assistance commitments
by giving top priority to helping Afghanistan to
implement its national development strategy, thereby
enabling Afghanistan to achieve economic and social
development and to gradually eliminate conditions that
favour terrorism, drug production, drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime.

Afghanistan's peace, reconstruction and long-
term security are closely linked to regional peace
and stability. China supports Afghanistan's efforts to
participate more actively in regional cooperation and
to enhance mutual trust and good-neighbourly relations
with countries in the region on the basis of mutual
respect, equality and mutual benefits. We encourage
Afghanistan to make better use of the various regional
mechanisms, such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, in a common effort to address the many
regional security threats and challenges.

We support the United Nations in continuing to
play an important role in coordinating international
assistance to build peace in Afghanistan. We welcome
resolution 2145 (2014), adopted earlier this morning,
which renews UNAMA's mandate. China supports
providing adequate funding for the Mission to implement
its mandate. We hope that UNAMA will strengthen its
cooperation with the Afghan Government, fulfil its
responsibilities under the Council's mandate, effectively
coordinate international assistance and strengthen the
international community's confidence in Afghanistan's
smooth transition and transformation. China supports
the efforts of the international community and of the
Afghan Government to explore ways to make better use
of UNAMA's post-2014 role, in line with the evolving
situation in Afghanistan.

Afghanistan is an important neighbour of China.
We look forward to a friendly, unified, stable and
developed Afghanistan. We always respect that
country's sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and the path of development chosen by its
people, in line with its circumstances. China has
long participated actively in rebuilding peace in
Afghanistan by providing assistance to the best of its
ability. In August, for the first time China will host the
Foreign Ministers Conference on the Istanbul Process
on Afghanistan. Through that meeting, China hopes
to garner consensus in our common effort to support
the long-term transition of Afghanistan and to promote
regional peace and stability.

China stands ready to work with the international
community in playing a constructive role in helping
Afghanistan to achieve early political reconciliation
and economic revitalization and to embark upon a path
towards lasting peace and sustainable development.

