Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation has studied with the greatest interest
your proposal, Sir, contained in document S/2001/82,
that the Security Council address at an open meeting
the item entitled "Peace-building: towards a
comprehensive approach". We congratulate you for the
initiative of convening this meeting, which we feel is
very relevant to the work ofthe Council.

As the representative of Ireland reminded us this
morning, Guatemala is one of the countries in which
the United Nations has been involved in a lengthy
negotiation process to resolve a domestic armed
conflict, which subsequently gave rise to a peace-
building and peace-consolidation effort. I would like to
take this opportunity to share some of the lessons we
have learned from this exercise. We do so in the full
understanding that every process has distinct features
that are not easily transferable to other situations. At
the same time, however, each process has sufficient
shared characteristics to contribute to the accumulated
experience and knowledge of the United Nations in
carrying out its various peace operations.

As members of this Council know, in December
1996, with the invaluable assistance of the United
Nations, we brought to an end a domestic armed
conflict that had raged in Guatemala for some 36 years.
This confrontation took tens of thousands of human
lives, gave rise to grave human rights violations and
not only inflicted physical injury and other suffering on
many of its victims, a large number of whom became
refugees, but inevitably did serious damage to the
country's economy.

The roots of the conflict are complex. They
include age-old social demands on the part of some
sectors of the nation that the many manifestations of
social injustice be redressed. These include poverty,
unequal distribution of income and property, the
resultant inequality in access to services, the violation
of human rights, exclusion and marginalization, and
racial and gender discrimination. The conflict and the
polarization that ensued over the way in which those
demands were to be met were substantially intensified
by the fact that the conflict in Guatemala was subjected
to the tensions peculiar to the so-called cold war.
Indeed, the fall of the Berlin Wall and its consequences
restored a more manageable scope to the domestic
conflict, which enabled the Guatemalans themselves to
take the lead in the search for a way out.

Therein lies the first lesson of the Guatemalan
peace process. It was not imposed from outside, but
rather reflected the genuine will of the parties to the
conflict and of the Guatemalan population in general to
put an end to war. To use a colloquial term, it was the
Guatemalans who were in the driver's seat and it was
the Guatemalans who showed, and continue to show, a
commitment to peace. This is undoubtedly a
prerequisite to the success of any peace-building effort.

The second lesson that can be drawn from the
Guatemalan peace process is in line with the
comprehensive approach that your letter advocates, Mr.
President. The series of agreements that were
negotiated over six years address the principal sources
of the dissatisfaction of many Guatemalans. The titles
of some of those agreements suffice to outline the
causes of this discontent. Those titles include the
following: Comprehensive Agreement on Human
Rights; Agreement on Resettlement of the Population
Groups Uprooted by the Armed Conflict; Agreement
on the Establishment of the Commission to Clarify Past
Human Rights Violations and Acts of Violence;
Agreement on the Identity and Rights of Indigenous
Peoples; Agreement on Social and Economic Aspects
and the Agrarian Situation; Agreement on the
Strengthening of Civilian Power and on the Role of the
Armed Forces in a Democratic Society; Agreement on
Constitutional Reforms and the Electoral Regime.
Likewise, matters relating to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) are reflected
in the Agreement on the Implementation, Compliance
and Verification Timetable for the Peace Agreements.
Members of the Council will readily note the
close correlation that exists between these peace
agreements and the enumeration of various aspects of
peace-building listed in part III of document
S/2001/82. Taken as a whole, the commitments laid
down in the Guatemalan Peace Agreements constitute a
road-map showing the direction of a global effort
aimed at building and consolidating peace and that sets
out the various economic, social, political and cultural
aspects of this process. Moreover, those commitments
have already successfully undergone an important trial
by fire in that they have been accepted by all the
parties as a solemn undertaking of the State. It is
significant that the Government elected in December
1999, made up of the party that opposed the previous
Government, made public its commitment to the
Agreements.

A third lesson to be drawn from the Guatemalan
experience underscores the usefulness of international
support, particularly that of the United Nations. Even
though the Organization was backed by a group of
countries that acted as friends, it was the United
Nations, in the last analysis, that projected the image of
credibility, neutrality and objectivity that enabled it to
play such an important role in backing the effort made
by the Guatemalan people themselves to, first, achieve
peace and, secondly, to build peace.

This role, had it been entrusted to any other
external body, would surely have been viewed as an
intrusion; yet, when fulfilled by the United Nations, it
constituted the performance of a function expressly
assigned to it by the parties to the conflict. And it is a
function that was, and continues to be, carried out in an
exemplary manner. In the first place, since 1994, the
United Nations was active as a body facilitating the
negotiation and conclusion ofthe Peace Agreements, as
well as one that verified compliance with the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights.
Thereafter, as from the entry into force of the Peace
Agreements, its role encompassed the fulfilment of the
totality of the undertakings laid down in those
Agreements. On 19 December last, the General
Assembly approved the extension ofthe mandate ofthe
Verification Mission for the first year of a new phase
covering the period 2001-2003.

As the fourth lesson to be drawn, it should be
noted that regional bodies - another topic referred to
in the Council's note - also played an important role
in the process, this being true not only of the regional
body par excellence, namely the Organization of
American States (OAS). It should be recalled that a
group of Latin American countries - which made up
the so-called Contadora Group, and subsequently the
Rio Group - sought to further the peace process
throughout Central America, including, of course, the
one unfolding in my country. It should also be recalled
that it was the Central American Presidents, acting in
unison, who adopted in Esquipulas the Framework
Agreement within which the peace processes in El
Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua were inscribed.

But, contrary to the practice that prior to 1994
had prevailed in the application of Chapter VIII of the
Charter, it was the United Nations that took the lead
among the multilateral bodies in dealing with the
Guatemalan situation. Thus, an important new
precedent was established in relations between the
United Nations and the OAS.

In the fifth and final case, it is usually said that in
the case of Guatemala, the application of the Peace
Agreements is irreversible. But this is not necessarily
so. If the people of Guatemala do not perceive that
their level of material and spiritual well-being has
improved as a result of those Agreements, it is still
conceptually plausible that regression might occur. For
that reason, the Government is bent on promoting the
fulfilment ofthe provisions ofthe Agreement on Social
and Economic Aspects and the Agrarian Situation. In
other words, if we fail to consolidate peace, this will
surely reflect the fact that the old economic and social
inequities incubating throughout my country were not
properly addressed, thus proving once more the
inseparable interrelationship between peace and
development.

These are, in a nutshell, the experiences we can
bring before the Council. In closing, Mr. President, we
wish once more to express our appreciation to you for
having taken the initiative of organizing this meeting.

