The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Sweden, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahovie
(Yugoslavia) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Nesho (Albania) and Mr. Schori (Sweden),
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Security Council mission on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), document S/2001/600. Members of the Council
also have before them the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, document S/2001/565.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following additional documents:
S/2001/538, letter dated 22 May 2001 from Sweden
addressed to the Secretary-General; S/2001/563, letter
dated 5 June 2001 from the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and S/2001/601, letter dated 15 June 2001
from the Russian Federation addressed to the
Secretary-General.

I give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.


