Mr. Jessen-Petersen: First of all, let me thank
the Council for its expression of support for our
Mission and for the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government and the people of Kosovo, and also for the
many helpful observations that Council members have
made today.

On behalf of the Institutions in Kosovo and the
people of Kosovo, I also want to thank Council
members for the many expressions of condolence on
the passing of President Rugova and the many
generous and, may I say, deserved words on his life
and his legacy. And I wish to thank members for the
congratulations extended to the newly elected
President of Kosovo, Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu.

I also listened with interest to the statement by
President Tadic. In the past, President Tadic has
recommended the participation of Kosovo Serbs in the
processes and the Institutions in Kosovo, so that they
can be part of shaping the future of Kosovo - their
own future. I am sure that President Tadic today has
heard the many statements in the Council urging
Belgrade to engage constructively with Kosovo and
also to allow the Kosovo Serbs to engage and be part
of shaping the future. I count on President Tadic to
follow the advice expressed by the Council today. We
need the involvement of Belgrade. We need the direct
engagement of the Kosovo Serbs to see further
progress on all the issues affecting the minorities.
Without them, it will be very difficult to achieve the
necessary progress, in particular in the areas of returns
and freedom of movement.

I am also glad that Prime Minister Bajram
Kosumi has been here today. He has heard the many
calls about the importance that this Council attaches to
further and faster progress and standards, notably on
minority issues, as well as the importance that the
Council attaches to decentralization. I certainly count
on Prime Minister Kosumi to go back, to lead the
Government in working even harder to see further and
more significant progress on standards, and I count on
the delegation of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government to go to Vienna with a constructive and

forthcoming approach to decentralization. I know that
that is exactly what they will do.

We have now entered the critical and most
decisive phase of the mission of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, and I count
on the continued support and the engagement of the
international community in general and the Security

Council in particular, and, once again, I want to thank
the Security Council for its support.

