Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Ijoin
my colleagues in thanking Mr. He'di Annabi, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
briefing on developments and progress in East Timor.

Today's meeting looks to the future of East
Timor. The announcement of the date of East Timor's
first democratic elections - 30 August 2001 - was a
very important step in a process that has been under
way for more than a year. More than ever before, that
process needs full support from the leadership of all
parties. On 13 March the East Timor National Council
agreed to elections to the constituent assembly that will
be responsible for formulating and adopting the
national constitution. The National Council should take
into consideration the aspirations of all segments of the
East Timor population in order to reflect the political
will of all citizens.

The Violence that occurred in two districts at the
beginning of this month shows that the security
situation remains fragile. We believe that violence must
stop so that East Timor can prepare calmly for a new
and important phase in its history, while the stability of
the entire region is maintained.

I have a question for Mr. Annabi about the
situation in East Timor. What steps has the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) taken during this sensitive stage in the
domestic situation, when political parties and
movements are becoming increasingly active? The
incidents of violence that Mr. Annabi mentioned are
cause for concern. Could the resignation of Xanana
Gusmao complicate the domestic political situation?
What steps have been taken in that regard?

Particular attention should be focused on ethnic
and religious tension, which could fuel the
destabilization not only of East Timor but also of areas
outside the country. We consider that everything must
be done to keep the question of East Timor in its proper
context and to manage the situation in line with the
plan established by UNTAET pursuant to its Security
Council mandate.

The Indonesian authorities have repeatedly
demonstrated their willingness to cooperate with
UNTAET, and they have set up mechanisms for
dialogue and for working together to resolve
outstanding issues and to move towards the
establishment of confidence-building measures.

We believe that the Security Council must take
account of the Indonesian Government's appeal to send
a team to evaluate the security situation in East Timor,
with a View to changing the region's security status.
Action along those lines could restore and consolidate
trust between the two neighbours and could promote
resumed reconciliation among East Timorese,
something that is of crucial importance for the future of
East Timor and of the region as a whole. The return of
humanitarian agencies to West Timor will certainly
help calm the refugee population, and will encourage
their return to East Timor.

I wish finally to say that we encourage
UNTAET's efforts and those of troop-contributing
countries and of donors, who are playing an important
role in helping to stabilize the country as it embarks on
a new stage in its history. It is important to continue to
provide the necessary support to East Timor to ensure
that this endeavour meets with success.

