Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/l35) and Special Representative Eide for his
briefing today, which painted a picture which we
recognize: a difficult security and humanitarian
situation, but with some encouraging signs of progress
being made in areas such as the administration of the
elections, the performance of the key ministries,
counter-narcotics and civilian-military cooperation.
It is often said that every year is a crucial year for
Afghanistan, and that is probably even more true this
year than it usually is, because not only do we have the
presidential elections in August, but we have various
other issues which are on the cusp. This year will
determine whether we are going to move forward to
achieve the goals of the international community or
whether we are going to continue with the present
insufficient degree of collective progress.

Successful and credible elections will be vital to
Afghanistan's future. We welcome the agreement
reached on the August date and we urge Afghanistan's
political leaders to reach consensus on the way to
preserve stability and security in the run-up to the
elections, which means stable government during that
period.

We must avoid a situation of continued
uncertainty and disagreement in Kabul during what
may well prove to be another difficult summer with the
insurgency in the south and the east of the country.
Elections have to be prepared properly in order to
ensure their credibility. The Special Representative has
set out the bodies and mechanisms that are being
established to support the electoral process. We are
encouraged that the Independent Electoral Commission
in Afghanistan was able to conduct the voter
registration process successfully and relatively
smoothly.

There is a crucial role being played by the United
Nations Development Programme in providing
technical support to enable the Afghans to run those
elections, and the United Kingdom has provided more
than £16 million in funding for that. We look to others
to help address the current $100 million shortfall in the
elections budget.

Aid coordination and effectiveness constitute
another challenge facing Afghanistan this year and are
at the heart of UNAMA's mandate. This was addressed
in the Special Representative's briefing. It is vital that
in 2009, international assistance to Afghanistan
becomes greater than the sum of its parts. I took
careful note of Mr. Eide's jibes against the
international community for some of our failings on
this, but we welcome the decision of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board to focus on five
sectors, and UNAMA's efforts to identify priority
projects and rally the donor community behind them.
Equally important is UNAMA's work to develop a
single Government database to track international
contributions. There has been a major improvement in
the mechanisms for aid effectiveness over the last year
or so, and we paid tribute to the work that Mr. Eide and
his team have done on that front.

Our ability to continue to deliver a
comprehensive strategy depends in large part on
civilian-military cooperation and coordination.
UNAMA provides a link between the international
civilian effort, the international military effort and the
Afghan Government. This is not always an easy role to
play, and we are well aware of the tensions that
sometimes exist, but I commend UNAMA's work in
this area, together with that of the International
Security Assistance Force and the Afghan authorities,
to deliver an integrated approach.

On civilian casualties, we all deeply regret them
whenever they take place, and it is important that we
continue to discuss the issue frankly and transparently.
There is no doubt as to the damage that reports of
civilian casualties do to perceptions of the international
effort in Afghanistan, but no one should be in any
doubt that those engaged in the international military
effort make strenuous efforts to ensure that they do not
occur, and we have tightened our rules of engagement
to this end. Where they do occur, we have improved
our investigation and reporting mechanisms.

In contrast, and as the Special Representative
pointed out, the Afghan people and the international
community in Afghanistan face an insurgency that does
not care about civilian casualties. Civilians are used as
shields and are now increasingly the target of
deliberate attacks by the insurgents.

Despite all these challenges, we share the view of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
that there are grounds for optimism. One of those, as
Mr. Eide set out, is the prognosis for poppy production
in 2009, which is encouraging. If, as he cautiously
predicted, we see a sharp decrease in overall
production and a further increase in the number of
poppy-free provinces, that would be a significant
achievement.

Another reason for optimism is the increase in the
resources available to UNAMA. For some time, there
was a gap between the scope of UNAMA's mandate
and the resources available to implement it. UNAMA's
new budget, agreed last year, means that gap has now
been closed, and we welcome the new posts that have
been filled and the additional offices that are being
opened.

However, this also means that expectations for
UNAMA are even higher and that it will be expected to
deliver even more. An important area of that delivery
has already begun, as I have set out. The reality of
Afghanistan in 2009 is that all of those involved in the
international effort, including the United Nations, are
going to have to up their game. We are confident that,
in Kai Eide, UNAMA has the leadership in place to
rise to that challenge.

Let me conclude by expressing the United
Kingdom's appreciation for UNAMA's work over the
past year. UNAMA's staff do vital work in difficult
circumstances, and they and the Afghan people can
count on the continued support of the United Kingdom.

