Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank
Ambassador Mayoral, Loj and Burian for their
briefings on the work of the 1267 Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the 1540
Committee, respectively. China would like to make the
following comments, and express its hopes, with
regard to those Committees.

The visit by the Chairperson of the 1267
Committee has enhanced understanding and
cooperation between Member States and the
Committee. In conjunction with the consideration of
the fourth report of the Monitoring Team and through
letters by its Chairman, the Committee has enhanced
understanding and attention on the part of Member
States as concerns the implementation of sanctions. It
is our hope that, in the next phase of its work, the
Committee will focus its priorities on an extensive, in-
depth and practical exploration of the quality of the
sanctions and its listing and delisting procedures, so as
to reach a common understanding on ways to refine the
list at an early date.

Along with improving the quality of the list,
efforts should be made to ensure that the procedure is
fair and transparent and to avoid double standards.
Only in that way will we ensure that the Committee's
work is respected and supported by the vast majority of
Member States. And only in that way will it be
generally conducive to the promotion of international
cooperation against terrorism.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee has increased
its technical assistance and coordination, strengthened
its dialogue with Member States and begun to discus
ways and means of deepening its relationships with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
In the future, the CTC should accelerate its

S/l'V.5446

 

implementation of resolution 1624 (2005), for there is
not much time left before it must submit its report.

The relevant recommendations of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) have an important role to
play in counter-terrorism financing. China supports the
appropriate dissemination of those recommendations
by CTC. At the same time, the representation of
developing countries on the FATF should be increased.
Only thus can it play a greater role in counter-
terrorism.

China welcomes the seamless extension by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) of its mandate. We hope that the Committee
will establish a comprehensive and balanced
programme of work as soon as possible, in accordance
with resolution 1673 (2006) and the recommendations
contained in the Committee's report. In July 2006, with
the joint support of the United Nations, the United
Kingdom, Denmark, Norway and Australia, China will
host a seminar in Beijing on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in the Asia-Pacific region. We
believe that the meeting will achieve results.

We also hope that the three committees will
continue to strengthen coordination and cooperation on
the current basis. As to the consolidation of country
reports, China believes that the three committees have
different responsibilities and focus on different areas of
work, although those do overlap to a certain extent. At
the same time, the Committees all place heavy
reporting requirements on Member States, bringing
considerable pressure to bear. China encourages the
three committees and their respective experts to
continue to coordinate among themselves and to adopt
appropriate measures to streamline their work, reduce
the reporting burden on Member States, and assist
them in finding solutions to their difficulties and
thereby more efficiently and effectively to implement
the relevant resolutions.

Looking back over the past three months, we can
see that terrorist activities have remained rampant and
that the fight against terrorism remains a long and
arduous task. As the common enemy of the
international community of humankind, all terrorist
activities constitute a serious threat to international
peace and security, regardless of their motivation,
timing and location and the identity of the perpetrators.

In the fight against terrorism, we should not
exclusively focus on and combat those terrorist

organizations and individuals that threaten ourselves,
while being permissive and ambivalent towards those
that do not pose a direct threat to us and our allies;
much less should we fail to respond to the legitimate
requirements of other countries or even raise obstacles
on the basis of other motivations. If that should occur,
it would be difficult to expect proactive coordination
and cooperation on the part of other Member States.

The international community should unite in its
efforts and demonstrate a tireless opposition to
terrorism. It should regard the terrorist forces that
threaten any country as an enemy of all and combat
them with resolve, leaving terrorists with no place to
hide. Only thus will the international fight against
terrorism be complete and effective. China made that
point during the General Assembly's discussion on
formulating a global counter-terrorism strategy.

China has always supported and actively
participated in the international counter-terrorism
struggle. In April 2006, China deposited with
Secretary-General Annan its instrument of ratification
of the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism, demonstrating yet again
our support for international cooperation in counter-
terrorism. In the future, China will continue
constructively to participate in counter-terrorism
cooperation and, as always, to support and actively
take part in the work of the three committees to
promote the implementation of the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council.

