Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express to you, Mr. President, how
delighted I am to see a dear brother, a representative of
a brotherly State, presiding over the deliberations of
the Security Council for this month. Allow me to thank
you personally, Sir, all the members of the Lebanese
delegation and the brotherly country of Lebanon for all
they have given to the Libyan revolution and for
having stood shoulder to shoulder with my people in
their plight.

Today is undoubtedly a decisive, historic day in
the life of the Libyan people. It marks the fall of a
dictatorship. An era of terror, denial of freedom and
violations of human rights has now come to an end for
the Libyan people. The fact that the National
Transitional Council has today assumed Libya's seat in
the United Nations indicates that a new page has been
turned in the history of the Libyan people - a page
marked by the blood of Libya's sons.

The Libyan people have paid a high price. Many
of our sons have died. However, the sacrifice was fully
justified by the objective. Although we express our
sadness at having lost more than 30,000 martyrs. while
tens of thousands have been injured and hundreds
maimed, we can now truly say that their blood did not
flow in vain. The Libyan people today have the right to
celebrate their victory against the tyrant Al-Qadhafi
and his supporters on Libya's sacred land. They can
celebrate the fact that we now occupy Libya's seat in
the United Nations. We can celebrate that Libya's
original name, which was distorted by Al-Qadhafi for
over four decades, has been restored. He distorted it as
a name and he distorted it in fact. We look forward to
ensuring the necessary arrangements with the
concerned departments at the United Nations to raise
the flag of independence - the flag of the Libyan
people's revolution - at the Headquarters of this
Organization.

On this occasion, let me pay tribute to all
those- be they States, organizations or media
outlets- that stood shoulder to shoulder with the
Libyan people militarily, politically or morally. Above
all, I wish to stress the important role played by the
United Nations, as represented by the Security Council
and the Secretary-General. For the very first time, we
witnessed in Libya the operationalization of the
responsibility to protect, which was carried out in a
reasonable manner, saving the lives of thousands of
Libyans and maintaining the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Libya. This would never have taken place
had not all members of the Security Council fully
understood the situation and agreed to adopt
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011).

Resolution 2009 (2011), which the Council has
just adopted, is still further proof of the ability of the
members of the Council to work in unity to maintain
peace and defend human rights despite disagreements.
It also illustrates the ongoing support of the United
Nations for the Libyan people in their current plight.
The resolution is undoubtedly an important step
towards stability, the normalization of the situation in
Libya and the launching of reconstruction and
development efforts.
On behalf of the National Transitional Council,
allow me to express our gratitude to every member of
the Security Council for taking this important step. We
look forward to the United Nations Mission in Libya
beginning its work soon under Mr. Martin's leadership,

so as to provide support and assistance to the
transitional Government on the basis of the principle of
national ownership of the process of stabilization,
reconstruction and economic recovery.

The challenges facing the transitional
Government are indeed great and multifaceted. We
seek to build a new State. We look forward to building
democratic institutions that respect human rights and
fundamental freedoms and provide an opportunity for
every Libyan to contribute in the service of their
country to the limit of their abilities, without
marginalization, exclusion or discrimination vis-a-vis
any group for any reason whatever. We continue to
require everyone's assistance in reaching those goals.
We hope that everyone will respect the choices made
by the Libyan people and not interfere in their affairs
during this delicate period. I am confident that
everyone will do so.

Let me emphasize that as the new authority in
Libya we will abide by Libya's previous commitments.
We will promote current partnerships based on mutual
respect and common interests. We will not forget our
8

African brothers, who need us as much as we need
them. We will look to the future. We will not allow any
event to take us backwards. We will cooperate with all
for international peace and security. We hope that all
States will assist us in ensuring justice and prosecuting
those responsible for crimes perpetrated under the
Al-Qadhafi regime.

The Libyan people are a peace-loving people. We
are a tolerant people who merely want to exploit their
wealth for progress and well-being. Libya will be a
country of laws. The new authorities will allow no one
to take the law into their own hands or to seek revenge.
I have no doubt that the Libyan people are fully
capable of achieving their aspirations, with the support
of the international community. The Libyan delegation
looks forward to cooperating with all delegations of the
Organization, in the interests of us all.

