Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I warmly welcome your
presence, Sir, in the Council today to preside over this
debate and thank both the Secretary-General and the
High Representative for their informative statements.

A reading of the history of the negotiations leading
to the Charter of the United Nations reveals that the
framing of Chapter VIII, on regional arrangements,
involved a particularly contentious debate. While the
Charter clearly needed to confer primacy with regard
to the maintenance of international peace and security
on the universal institution that it was creating, a clear
recognition of the important contribution that regional
organizations could make to collective security was
required, and the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations needed to be
defined. Discussions on those issues at Dumbarton
Oaks and San Francisco were particularly intense, and
Chapter VIII was the result. Drafted decades before
the emergence of transformative regional organizations
such as the European Union (EU) and the African
Union (AU), Chapter VIII has proven to be prescient
and utilitarian. As the Council recognized in its
presidential statement last August (S/PRST/2013/12),
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations is now an integral part
of the collective security provided for in the Charter.

The European Union is self-evidently a natural and
crucial partner for the United Nations. It is actively
engaged within its region and beyond in conflict
prevention, peacemaking and peacekeeping, as well as
in combating proliferation and terrorism, all of which
are key objectives of our collective endeavours, which
are also significantly underwritten by the backing that
the EU and its 28 States members together provide as
the single largest financial contributors to the United
Nations system. Such EU engagement contributes
directly and fundamentally to our collective efforts on
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and conflict prevention.

Since the Council was last briefed by High
Representative Ashton in February last year (see S/PV.6919), significant security challenges have
emerged or persist in a number of countries in Africa.
The EU has significantly assisted both United Nations
and AU efforts to address those challenges. The EU
provision of capacity-building in Mali and Somalia and
its direct support for the AU peacekeeping Mission in
Somalia are playing an instrumental role in building
stability and sustainable peace in those countries.

As the Secretary-General said this morning, the
situation in the Central African Republic is of grave
concern. Strong support for the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic
(MISCA) is essential. Australia therefore welcomes the
EU's support to MISCA and the establishment by the EU
of its military mission to the Central African Republic.
We welcome the strong commitment articulated this
morning to continuing that support.

Australia commends High Representative Ashton
for brokering the historic agreement in April 2013
between Serbia and Kosovo and for her continued
intense support for the high-level dialogue between the
parties to achieve full normalization of relations.

On Iran, the EU's efforts have been pivotal in
facilitating the interim agreement with the 5-1-1 group.
The agreement provides a path towards a long-term
comprehensive solution. In the meantime, as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), Australia is working to ensure the effectiveness
of existing Security Council sanctions measures.

On Syria, Australia and the EU share the view that
the international community must support the efforts
led by Joint Special Representative Brahimi to build
a credible political framework to end the conflict. We
welcome the support of EU member States to the rapid
establishment of the joint United Nations/Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons mission in
Syria and their efforts to promote unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance to the affected people in Syria
and neighbouring countries, as well as their significant
contributions to the United Nations humanitarian and
refugee appeals for Syria. We look forward to their
support for the urgent adoption of a resolution on the
humanitarian crisis in Syria.

On the Middle East peace process, we commend
High Representative Ashton for her contribution
as a principal member of the Middle East Quartet.
We welcome the EU's December announcement of
an unprecedented package of security, political and
economic support to Israel and the Palestinians in the
context of a final status agreement.

On Ukraine, we welcome the EU's constructive
response to the ongoing protests and its calls for
dialogue between the parties. We acknowledge the
important role that High Representative Ashton herself
has played, including through her many recent visits to
Ukraine. We encourage the EU to continue to promote
a peaceful and democratic resolution to that crisis.

In conclusion, given the number and complexity of
conflicts around the world, continued close cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
obviously remains crucial. The EU-United Nations
relationship shows the continued relevance and utility,
and importantly, adaptability of Chapter VIII of the
Charter.

Finally, I would like to thank the High
Representative for her own personal dedication during
her time in office towards efforts to enhance peace and
security.

