Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Since
this is the last open meeting under your presidency,
Mr. President, we would like to take this opportunity
to express our gratitude and congratulations on the
outstanding manner in which you presided over our
work during the month of April. We are also grateful
for the convening of this meeting and we convey our
thanks to Mr. Pedersen for his important briefing. We
wish him the best in finding a political solution in Syria.

We would like to begin by welcoming the
developments described by the Special Envoy on the
possible upcoming establishment of a constitutional
committee that the Syrian people and the international
community could recognize as legitimate, balanced and
consistent with the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). We
note the sense of urgency in making tangible progress
on that issue, because further delays would have a very
negative impact on the process in terms ofits credibility
and legitimacy, especially because today marks 15
months since the Sochi meeting.

We stress the importance of ensuring that the
committee be representative and include all sectors
of Syrian society, in particular Syrian women, and
that it be provided with transparent and democratic
mechanisms for its functioning and decision-making.
We wish to express our full support for the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General in his efforts to move
in that direction. To that end, we believe it is essential
that the parties continue to work on measures that
foster greater understanding, such as on the release of
detainees, the identification of missing persons and the
return of remains, as Mr. Pedersen noted.

The serious situation faced by the millions of
refugees and internally displaced persons poses another
serious challenge, in response to which not only are
financial resources required but, more important, the
political will to assure them a safe and dignified return
under internationally accepted parameters.

I conclude by stressing the importance for the
Council to remain attentive to developments on the
ground in order to ensure the maintenance of the Idlib
ceasefire, which was brokered in September 2018 and
recently reaffirmed by the Russian Federation and
Turkey. The prospects for the success of any effort
to achieve sustainable peace in Syria, such as the
constitutional committee, to a large extent depend upon
preventing Idlib from becoming the scene of further
violence and another humanitarian tragedy.

