I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and civil society representative Susannah Sirkin for their briefings. I would also like to extend a warm welcome to our colleagues, the Permanent Representatives of Syria and Turkey. The Syrians have been suffering long years of conflict and economic hardship. The threat of the sweeping coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic risks aggravating their plight even further. At the same time, Syria has reached a tipping point of territorial and economic disintegration, as trends suggest, with potentially far-reaching consequences for the stability of the region. Syria's sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity are crucial, and the Security Council has a major responsibility to preserve them. We believe that there is no viable alternative to the search for a settlement in line with resolution 2254 (2015), in order to put an end to the human suffering and recover Syria's full sovereignty over its entire territory. Until a political solution is reached, principled humanitarian delivery of aid must continue to be scaled up throughout Syria to meet growing needs and cope with multiplied risks and vulnerabilities as a result of COVID-19. As the Council prepares to renew the cross-border mechanism, it is important that humanitarian considerations prevail and that we speak to consensus and compromise. Tunisia will be joining consensus on any proposal aimed at ensuring sufficient delivery of impartial and depoliticized humanitarian aid to those in need and enabling the renewal of the cross-border mandate. There should be no selective approach to humanitarian access in Syria. Rather, a combination of cross-border and cross-line modalities remains pertinent, with neither modality being exclusive or sufficient alone. We stress the importance of this dual approach being incremental and adequately calibrated in a way that respects and ultimately safeguards Syria's sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity and responds to the needs of the Syrian people. In north-western Syria, we welcome the announcement by Under-Secretary- General Lowcock earlier today on the progress made in the operational planning of the cross-line mission in Idlib, in line with the Secretary-General's recommendation on using combined access modalities for the delivery of humanitarian relief. We also express our support for the renewal of the mandate of the two cross-border operations in the north-west for 12 months. In the north-east, Tunisia believes that there is a need for hybrid, creative and consensual solutions that enable full, sustained and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid, including of medical aid. Viable and unhindered access is also needed for the United Nations in south- eastern Syria to prevent further deterioration of the humanitarian conditions of the remaining population in Rukban. All parties should work together to that end. The war has left millions of Syrians displaced and in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. It has also devastated medical infrastructure and the Syrian economy. As we commend the leading role of the United Nations in coordinating humanitarian relief to help alleviate the appalling humanitarian situation in Syria, we reiterate the necessity for the political track to be accelerated to achieve a solution that brings a peaceful end to the crisis in Syria. In the meantime, we believe it is essential that reconstruction of destroyed or damaged hospitals, which are at the core of the humanitarian response, including the COVID-19 response, as well as of schools, be made possible on purely humanitarian grounds. Only consensus will save lives.
