Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): I thank the
presidency of Poland for organizing this important
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Our appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, and the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Yves
Daccord, for sharing their perspectives on this very
important subject.

Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

It is indeed a matter of grave concern that conflict
situations expose civilians to killing, kidnapping,
torture, sexual exploitation, trafficking and other
dangers. That is particularly so when non-State armed
groups are involved. Their complete disregard for
international law and international humanitarian law
serves to underscore the challenge that they pose to the

protection of civilians in conflict situations.

It is also an unfortunate reality that women and
girls are the most affected in conflict situations. They
face sexual violence, sexual enslavement, trafficking
and other forms of exploitation and degradation. In
that regard, we acknowedge the Security Council's
commitment to the protection of women and girls in both
conflict and post-conflict situations, as exemplified
by the adoption of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1960
(2010) and 2122 (2013), among others. We believe that
those resolutions provide suitable frameworks for the
Security Council to enhance the protection of women
and girls in both conflict and post-conflict situations.

We strongly support community engagement in
promoting the protection of civilians. Community-alert
networks and community liaison assistants are vital
to understanding threat perceptions at the community
level, including how communities seek to reduce risks
and how peace operations can address them. We would
like to see the international community recognize
those imperatives.

As Member States are aware, the Boko Haram
insurgency in Nigeria has led to a humanitarian crisis
in north-eastern Nigeria. It is to be noted that, of the
estimated 14.8 million people affected by the insurgency,
of which 1.7 million people are internally displaced,
the most adversely affected are women and children. In
response to that situation, the Government of Nigeria
has taken decisive steps to ameliorate the plight of
civilians, particularly women and girls, living in rural
areas. A robust social protection initiative and a second
national action plan to fully implement the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000) have been instituted by the
Government to protect civilians, particularly women
and children, from the ravages of conflict.

Nigeria was also among the first group of States
to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration in Oslo,
thereby making a pledge to protect schools during
armed conflicts by, inter alia, using and promoting the
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from
Military Use during Armed Conflict. The Declaration
complements and strengthens Nigeria's national Safe
Schools initiative, established in 2014 as part of the
response by the Federal Government to promote safe
zones for learning.

Such initiatives reflect the Government's commitment
to ensuring the security of women and children during
armed conflicts and to enhancing their active and direct
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
To that end, the initiatives also complement the
implementation of the Buhari Plan, which provides a
blueprint for comprehensive humanitarian relief and
socioeconomic stabilization of the north-eastern part
of country, as well as for the return and resettlement of
displaced persons.

We are collaborating with our neighbours - Chad,
Cameroon, the Niger and Benin - within the framework
of the Multinational Joint Task Force in order to defeat
the Boko Haram insurgency, which targets civilians,
particularly women and children. It is heartening
to note that more than 1,000 kidnapped women and
children have been rescued and that all the territories
once controlled by the group have been recovered.
Indeed, our experience in the Lake Chad region
today is evidence that, with determined international
collaboration, terrorism can be defeated.

In addition, the Government of Nigeria adopted
a multinational and multi-agency approach, named
Operation Safe Corridor, in order to effectively handle
the deradicalization, rehabilitation and reintegration
back into society of Boko Haram members who have
voluntarily surrendered. So far, many insurgents
have willingly surrendered to the military, while
approximately 700 others have indicated an interest in
doing so. We have also taken steps to cater to victims of
Boko Haram terrorism - whether they are victims in
terms of rape, sexual violence or other violations - by
providing humanitarian relief and financial, economic,
educational and psychosocial support.
Despite the tremendous efforts being made at
the national level, we acknowledge that protecting
civilians in conflict situations remains a critical
challenge not only for the United Nations but also for
the entire international community. We therefore call
for continued collaboration and assistance among the
international community to address the issue. On that
note, we pay tribute to our security forces, peacekeepers,
humanitarian workers, non-governmental organizations
and other stakeholders for their hard work, often in
difficult circumstances, to ensure the safety and the
security of civilians.

