We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing on the current situation in the region. We welcome the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Secretary- General of the League of Arab States, as well the Ministers that are honouring us with their presence. Allow me to take a brief moment to express our heartfelt condolences to the family of Sergeant Major Rama Wahyudi, the Indonesian official whose life was lost in the line of duty during the recent attack on the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We condemn that attack in the strongest terms. We also wish a speedy recovery to the officer who was injured. We were deeply concerned to hear the latest details about the marked deterioration of the Israeli-Palestinian situation. The dangerous path that the conflict is taking is eroding the prospect of the achievement of any sustainable peace. As we were given plenty of warning about, the unilateral actions in violation of international law systematically carried out by one of the parties are undermining the foundations for achieving such peace and prolonging the conflict and will cause further deterioration in the humanitarian situation of many Palestinians. The continual violence, incitement and provocations, coupled with financial pressures and the lack of internal reconciliation as well as a deep humanitarian crisis, are elements that close the door to any prospect for renewed negotiations and will likely trigger more instability and suffering. No amount of humanitarian or economic support on its own will address the challenges that the Palestinians are experiencing. These will ultimately require real political solutions in order to tackle them. The Dominican Republic's fundamental principles include respect for human rights and international law; it is committed to peaceful coexistence and solidarity among nations. We therefore reaffirm our full support for a two-State solution, as set out in various United Nations resolutions, and remain committed to the framework based on previous bilateral agreements between Israelis and Palestinians. We encourage the parties to foster real dialogue and relaunch negotiations towards a peace plan based on internationally reached agreements. We commend the continued delivery of humanitarian and development assistance to the Palestinians by the United Nations and other organizations, and we encourage others to urgently support those efforts. Unfortunately, the actions that have been taken to address the coronavirus disease pandemic have created a negative shock for both the Israeli and Palestinian economies and have the potential to have profound repercussions on public welfare, employment, social cohesion and financial and fiscal stability. In that regard, we call for the immediate release of Palestinian children from Israeli detention facilities and for them to be allowed to return safely to their families and communities, and urge that new admissions to such facilities be halted. We also urge the Israeli authorities to ensure that children in their jurisdiction enjoy the highest attainable health standards and that they are protected from violence, abuse and exploitation. Damaged infrastructure, reduced services, food insecurity, discrimination and displacement caused by the conflict have affected women in particular, notably those in the marginalized Palestinian territories. As the international community, we must understand that our collective action must be aimed at contributing, in an impartial and effective way, to the search for real solutions. We must collectively reaffirm the need to increase efforts and continue working until we achieve constructive dialogue that paves the way to a new stage in building true peace between Israel and Palestine. In conclusion, we urge against any unilateral action that undermines the mutual respect, solidarity and justice needed in the common search for peace. The current path will only push Palestinians and Israelis further apart, deepen the occupation and jeopardize the future viability of the two-State solution.
