Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Allow me to express our satisfaction,
Madam, at seeing you, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Sweden, presiding over this very important meeting of the
Security Council.

The situation in and around Kosovo, Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, remains extremely difficult. As
a result of the continued armed confrontations, including
some in which heavy weapons are used, there is a steady
flow of refugees and displaced persons, which, under
conditions of the onset of winter, is fraught with grave
humanitarian consequences. In violation of Security
Council resolution 1160 (1998), material and financial
support from abroad continues to be provided to Kosovo
extremists, first and foremost from the territory of
Albania, which is seriously destabilizing the situation and
provoking tensions in Kosovo. Despite the efforts
undertaken, it has to date been impossible to establish a
direct political dialogue between the Serbian authorities,
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the leadership of
the Kosovo Albanians.

Under these circumstances, an urgent need has arisen
to give additional impetus to international efforts to
facilitate a political settlement and the normalization of
the humanitarian situation in the area.

Such an impetus should be given by the draft
resolution that the Security Council will be adopting

 

today. That draft resolution explicitly reaffirms the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, and calls once again upon Belgrade and the
Kosovo Albanians to cease hostilities immediately and
maintain a ceasefire in Kosovo in order to create favourable
conditions for the launching of a political dialogue and to
avert a humanitarian disaster.

The Security Council demands also that the authorities
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo
Albanian leadership take immediate steps to improve the
humanitarian situation. It calls upon them once again to
enter immediately into a meaningful dialogue leading to a
negotiated political settlement to the issue of Kosovo, and
endorses the agreements reached by the Presidents of
Russia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia at their June
meeting in Moscow.

It insists that the Kosovo Albanian leadership condemn
all terrorist action and rely on peaceful means only. The
draft resolution reaffirms the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1160 (1998), inter alia, on assistance to Kosovo
separatists from abroad. It condemns the continuing
promotion from abroad of terrorist activities in Kosovo.
Recalling the obligations of all States to implement fully
the prohibitions imposed by resolution 1160 (1998), the
Security Council expresses concern over reports of their
continuing violation. The draft resolution also contains a
reference to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, as did resolution 1160 (1998).

The Security Council maintains that if the demands set
forth in resolution 1160 (1998) and in the draft resolution
before us today - which apply both to Belgrade and the
Albanians living in Kosovo - are not met, the Council will
consider further actions and necessary additional measures.
No use of force and no sanctions are being imposed by the
Council at the present stage.

The basic provisions of the draft resolution correspond
to the fundamental stance taken by the Russian Federation
which favours settlement of the conflict in Kosovo
exclusively through peaceful and political means on the
basis of granting broad autonomy to Kosovo, with strict
respect for the territorial integrity of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia. We are convinced that there is no reasonable
alternative to such an approach. In particular, the use of
unilateral measures of force in order to settle this conflict
is fraught with the risk of destabilizing the Balkan region
and of all of Europe and would have long-term adverse
consequences for the international system, which relies on
the central role of the United Nations.

The Russian Federation, in voting in favour of
today's draft resolution, will continue to make an active
to contribution to international efforts to foster a peaceful
settlement of the Kosovo conflict.

