Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of Bolivia
is grateful for the briefings by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), Monsignor Marcel Utembi, President
of the Conference episcopale nationale du Congo, and
Ms. Solange Lwashiga Furaha, spokesperson ofthe civil
society organization Rien Sans Les Femmes, whom we
commend for her work and that of her organization
to ensure the participation of Congolese women at
all levels, in particular their work to ensure women's
participation in the upcoming elections.

We highlight the continued progress and
commitment shown by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to meeting the deadlines set by the electoral
calendar, in particular with regard to its inclusive work on
candidate registration by formally inviting all political
parties and, subsequently, by opening offices for the
reception and management of candidatures. In that
regard, we hope that all legally qualified candidates can
participate in the upcoming elections in a transparent,
credible, inclusive and timely environment conducive
to a peaceful transfer of power.

We commend the Government on providing
additional funds to the Commission electorale nationale
independante to enable it to conduct its duties. We also
commend the Commission on coordinating logistical
and operational matters with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and encourage it
to continue such coordination and training on the use of
voting machines, in particular in remote areas.

The international community must continue
working to strengthen the capacities of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to meet
coordination and logistics challenges in the upcoming
elections, while respecting the country's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. We reiterate
that, for elections to bring about a peaceful transfer
of Government and political tensions to be defused,
parties must implement the confidence-building
measures stipulated in the 2016 New Year's Eve political
agreement, whose full and effective implementation
we once again advocate. Both the Government and
the opposition must work together in order to make
progress on such measures.

We call on all parties to work together ahead of the
elections, in which the full participation of women and
young people is essential. We must step up our efforts
to ensure that women have a meaningful place in all
political processes, including in the areas ofprevention,
negotiation, mediation and peacebuilding. Building
societies that promote gender equality makes peace
processes inclusive and leads to sustainable peace. If
women are not the main actors in such processes, we
will not achieve genuine peace.

We welcome the support of regional organizations,
such as the Economic Community of Central African
States, the African Union and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, and of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region in preparing for the elections. We encourage
them to continue working together, in close coordination
with the Government. Similarly, we commend the work
of the Southern African Development Community and
MONUSCO, which provide positive support for the
holding of elections. We encourage them to continue
their cooperation with the Commission e'lectorale
nationale independante.

We are convinced that the Congolese people and
institutions must make the decisions on the future
of their country. We see that as a decisive factor in
promoting peace, stability and development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Similarly, we
believe that, in order to achieve structural change,
leading to stability and the strengthening of the rule of
law in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the root
causes of the conflict must be addressed, one of which
is the country's lack of control over its own natural
resources. The sovereign administration of national
wealth is paramount in order to ensure stability and the
rule of law.

Lastly, we express our solidarity with the victims
of the Ebola outbreak and commend the Congolese
authorities, the international community and the World
Health Organization for their swift response to the
health crisis.
