Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.

I would like to touch on three issues, namely,
the selection of the next Secretary-General, how
the Security Council can become more open and
transparent, and the role of the elected members of the
Security Council.

First, with regard to the process of selecting the
new Secretary-General, we are pleased to see that the
selection process this time is much more open and
inclusive, thereby allowing for better scrutiny of the
suitability of candidates by Member States and the
general public. The cooperation between the General
Assembly and the Council on that issue has been
remarkable. Through the informal dialogues with the
candidates, organized by the President of the General
Assembly, candidates have presented their visions for
scrutiny by Member States. For the first time in history,
an equal number of women and men have declared their
candidacy. We urge the Security Council to maintain
that openness and transparency all way through the
process. There is no turning back to the practices
of the past. At a minimum, we expect the Security
Council to announce the results of the various straw
polls through the President of the General Assembly.
We are convinced that the increased transparency and
openness that have been introduced into the selection
process have already raised and improved the profile of
the United Nations.

Secondly, the work of the Security Council should
become more accessible. We appreciate that the
Council conducts a significant number of its meetings
in public, and we encourage it to put measures in place
to enable the membership to be effectively informed
about the topics discussed under "Any other business"
during the closed consultations. There are also ways to
improve the information flow. When press statements
and presidential statements are adopted, it takes hours,
if not days, before they are available on the Security
Council's website. It is a necessity that the work of
the Council become more accessible for the broader
membership and, indeed, the public.

Thirdly, moving the Security Council elections
to earlier in the year is an important step that enables
incoming members to prepare better for their term as
members. We welcome the note adopted by the Council
on Friday (S/2016/619), which aims to extend the period
during which newly elected members can observe
the work of the Council and to make the process for
appointing the Chairs of subsidiary organs more timely
and transparent. Duly implemented, those amendments
to the current procedures will make the transition
phase smoother and provide for enhanced participation
by the elected members for the overall benefit of
the effectiveness, coherence and accountability of
the Council.

Finally, we encourage newly elected members to
take advantage of the annual workshop organized by
Finland, which aims to prepare incoming members for
their membership of the Council.

