Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): We wish to join other members in thanking Belgium for organizing this briefing. We also recognize and welcome the Foreign Ministers and Deputy Foreign Ministers present, and thank High Commissioner Bachelet, Father De Roux and Executive Director Sooka for their insightful and thoughtful briefings. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes today's discussion on transitional justice - a critical component of building and sustaining peace in many settings. We wish to recall the Security Council's discussion in November, under the United Kingdom's presidency, on the role of reconciliation (see S/PV.8668). Transitional justice facilitates reconciliation by ensuring accountability for perpetrators and offering justice for victims. Without justice, lasting and sustainable peace will remain elusive. Without reconciliation, our Council's work to build a peaceful and prosperous world will remain futile. Transitional justice mechanisms should always form part of a larger political strategy that addresses the structural inequalities in conflict-affected societies, for the benefit of all stakeholders without discrimination. That inclusive approach should consider the different needs and abilities of all participants. Women, young people, ethnic and religious minorities, indigenous populations, persons with disabilities, the elderly, constituents of rural communities and civil society representatives must always be present as crafters, participants and beneficiaries of transitional justice initiatives at all stages of the conflict cycle - before, during and after the conflict. Indeed, building trust and ensuring justice is a never-ending process. Transitional justice mechanisms should also be complemented by sustainable development initiatives that address the root causes of insecurity and empower people to live in dignity. The Security Council should more often seek to engage the Peacebuilding Commission's strategic advisory capacities and, where necessary, make use of the Secretary-General's Peacebuilding Fund to address important governance gaps and to initiate projects and programmes that stimulate socioeconomic and political participation. We emphasize, however, that there is no one-size-fits-all approach, as others have said. Those initiatives must always be designed with respect for local customs and values. To that end, we also welcome the African Union's continental guideline for transitional justice, adopted one year ago, which takes into account the many-sided complexities of mass violence yet privileges local traditions when delivering justice and accountability. That comprehensive road map is a credible source of best practices and lessons learned that all members of the international community may find useful. Transitional justice safeguards institutional integrity and promotes structural improvements across the peace, security and development nexus. Well- designed transnational justice mechanisms help to restore public confidence in State institutions. They also foster normative realignments across societies as new precedents are created to provide accountability, rehabilitation and reparations to survivors of injustices. On the issue of reparations, it must be emphasized that there should be no statutes of limitation that prevent restitution for mass atrocity crimes, especially where those historical injustices have left legacies of underdevelopment, intergenerational traumas and social inequities in their wake. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates that the historical injustices of native genocide and chattel slavery, including the trans-Atlantic slave trade, compel all former colonial Powers to provide reparatory justice.Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is a young nation that reclaimed its independence only 40 years ago. Like many young societies, we understand that only by healing the collective memory enmeshed deep within our social fabric can we truly come to terms with our past indignities and embrace our future possibilities. That is the lens through which we view transitional justice - a medium to bridge a painful past to a peaceful future by listening to those cries that too often go unheard.
