Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to commend Mr.Stephen O'Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for the clarity
of his briefing. I would also like to commend the
high quality of the twenty-ninth report (S/2016/631)
presented to the Council, pursuant to resolution 2168
(2013), 2171 (2014) and 2258 (2258). Today, it is quite
clear that the cessation of hostilities, which is crucial
for humanitarian assistance and a sine qua non for
the peace process, is seriously compromised. That is
demonstrated by clashes between the Syrian army and
opposition armed groups in various areas, including
Damascus, Rif Dimashq and eastern Ghouta, which
have resulted in numerous victims and injured.

Like previous speakers, I would like to convey my
deep concern given the escalation of military actions
taken by the Government forces in Aleppo, which have
resulted in many victims, including many civilians, in
particular children.

Along the same lines, the Senegalese delegation
condemns the attacks by armed groups against the
part of the city that is under the Government's control,
which have led to many civilian casualties. That
is why we recall the obligation that falls on warring
sides under international humanitarian law and human
rights law, as the increasing bombings threaten those
on the ground - between 200,000 and 300,000 people
in Aleppo - as a result of the blocked Castillo road,
the only route to access the eastern part of the city.
We also call on the Syrian authorities, with the help
of the International Syria Support Group (ISSG), in
particular the co-chairs - the Russian Federation and
the United States of America - to work to ensure that
the Syrian populations can be assisted by responding to
the request of humanitarian players to implement the
weekly cease-fire. It is worth noting that in addition
to more than hundreds of dead, many wounded, this
violence has resulted in the displacement of tens of
thousand people, in particular in Idlib, where according
to figures 45,000 fled air strikes.

Children continue to bear the brunt of the war. In
addition to issues of civil status, family displacements
and early marriage, the phenomenon of child soldiers
remains of utmost concern. My delegation would like to
know the fate of 150 children who were kidnapped from
the Thib Antar school to serve as child soldiers, when
they should have been taking exams.

With regard to humanitarian assistance,
my delegation welcomes the ongoing efforts of
stakeholders, in particular those of the United Nations
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, to alleviate the
suffering of the millions of Syrians affected by war.
However, let us not lose sight of the fact that the goal
of providing 1,500,000 people with assistance, which
was established by the United Nations, has not been
achieved owing to violence and administrative delays.
We would therefore call upon the Government to work
to ensure that the goal of 1.2 million people be reached
in July.

There is a particular need for further authorizations
for United Nations staff. While such authorizations
have allowed for progress in the provision of aid to
besieged and hard-to-reach areas, the number of people
living in such areas has increased by approximately
900,000 - from 4.6 million to 5.45 million - mainly
due to the violence.

The ongoing destruction of public infrastructure,
such as markets, schools and hospitals, particularly
in the Aleppo and Idlib governorates, continues to be
of concern for us. In addition, erratic access to basic
social services, such as electricity in cities, is affecting
some 2 million people. In that context, UNICEF's
commendable efforts to provide more than 3 million
litres of water to 2 million people should be welcomed.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East is experiencing
difficulty in deploying at some of the camps in Yalda,
from which the camp at Yarmuk is provisioned for
the purpose of serving Palestinian refugees. That is
due to clashes between the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front, which is a real
source of concern for us. We welcome the efforts of
the World Health Organization and UNICEF thanks to
which 772,000 children have been vaccinated, which
represents 53.6 per cent coverage. We would like to
take this opportunity to ask about those children who
have not been reached due to violence in the localities
of Deir ez-Zor and Raqqa.

The Senegalese delegation welcomes the excellent
cooperation that United Nations bodies continues to
enjoy with the Turkish and Jordanian Governments.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
pay due tribute to the members of the medical and
humanitarian staff, who continue - sometimes at the
risk of their lives - to help the Syrian people in their
quest for peace and dignity.

Finally, my delegation would like to reiterate its
belief, which is shared by everyone here, that only a
political solution, which is being discussed in Geneva
under the auspices of the United Nations, can help end
the Syrian humanitarian catastrophe. We therefore
call upon stakeholders and the countries of the region,
as well as the International Syria Support Group,
particularly its Chairs, to push for peace in the region.

After six public debates on the humanitarian
situation in Syria and one public debate on the political
situation, the Security Council should scale up its
effort to help reach a political solution, pursuant to
the obligation we imposed on ourselves in resolution
2254 (2015) with the 1 August deadline for starting
the transition process. Terrorist organizations are
taking full advantage of the situation in Syria, with the
growing risk of our seeing them take hold of materials
out of which they are going to make weapons of mass
destruction. The terrorist contagion is spreading, which
means that the Security Council has to do everything it
can to stop it.

