Mr. Krapp (Germany): Germany welcomes the
focus ofthis debate on peacebuilding in Africa. We share
our African partners' vision of a peaceful, prosperous
and integrated continent, and we have consistently
supported African and United Nations mechanisms
that work to that end. Germany also believes that
peacebuilding must be seen as an endeavour that
encompasses the whole lifespan of a conflict, from
crisis prevention to post-conflict efforts. We need an
approach that is more innovative than one based simply
on institution-building.

Drawing lessons from past conflicts, Germany has
been one of the main actors in developing and promoting
the concept of stabilizing the lives of civilians. Such
stabilization is targeted at creating a secure environment
and improving the living conditions of people afflicted
by internal or inter-State armed conflict. By doing so,
it serves the overarching purpose of supporting and
sustaining political processes aimed at non-violent

conflict resolution. Through concrete measures on the
ground, such stabilization contributes to containing,
and ultimately ending, violence.

I will give an example. Together with the United
Nations Development Programme, we have developed
the Stabilization Facility for Libya. The Facility
provides for the quick rehabilitation of critical
infrastructure, enhances the capacity of municipalities
and supports local authorities in their efforts to play
a more active role in peacebuilding. It supports the
new Government of National Accord's efforts to build
its legitimacy in the eyes of the population. Germany
provides a major part of the funding for the Facility.
However, we have also seen that stabilization measures
will fail in the absence of a political will for change.
Therefore, measures must be designed in a way as to
enable the first steps towards reconciliation between
parties to the conflict. Stabilization can help lay the
foundations for a social and political consensus and
legitimate political structures.

In Mali, for instance, Germany is assisting the
Government in implementing the peace agreement,
with a particular focus on moving ahead with
decentralization. Only when decentralization becomes
visible on the ground and the affected population feels
real change in their lives can the peace agreement
achieve the necessary momentum.

We strongly advocate for generally implementing
the concept of civilian stabilization within the
framework of United Nations missions. That would
require, first, an integrated approach. All instruments
at our disposal should be utilized as the situation
demands. That would include the tools of diplomacy and
mediation, development policy, financial contributions,
police assistance and, where necessary, military
peace operations.

Secondly, it would require the strengthening of
existing tools. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
is a valuable instrument that can help us to improve
the focus of our efforts. The Commission needs to
assume a more active role in sustaining peace, in close
coordination with the Security Council. In order to
achieve that, the rules of procedure of the PBC should
be reviewed and streamlined.

Thirdly, all of that requires money. The
Peacebuilding Fund is an important catalyst for
implementing stabilization projects. Therefore, in 2016,
Germany has again contributed to the Peacebuilding
Fund. This year, the amount is $11 million.

Germany stands ready to further refine, in
consultation with partners, the concept of civilian
stabilization as a contribution to sustaining peace.

