Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate Sir John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, on
his commendable efforts as the head of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). His
leadership and commitment have been crucial in facing
a period in which, despite scientific, moral and ethical
progress, innocent civilian populations in various parts
of the world continue to suffer from harsh ongoing
attacks, both as collateral damage and as a result of
being the direct targets of aggression.

In addition to being an ethical imperative that is
part of a long process of the development of human
conscience towards civil behaviour that places respect
for human life, integrity and human dignity at the
centre of its concerns, the protection of civilians is also
a legal imperative rooted in universally accepted norms
of international humanitarian law. In that connection,
with respect to civilian protection provided by the
United Nations in the context of peacekeeping
29
operations, we should also bear in mind the consent of
host countries and the existence of a Security Council
resolution mandating that task.

Any humanitarian response must be sustainable
and take the development perspective into account. It is
therefore essential to ensure appropriate national
capacity-building, in particular in those cases in which
constraints arise as a result of the physical
environment. We regret that, in other cases, constraints
arise as the result of Government policies or of
practices on the part of local actors that interfere with
humanitarian operations. The Secretary-General's
reports thus continue to call for the facilitation of
timely and rapid access, given the many obstacles that
still exist, even when obligations exist under
international humanitarian law.

Uruguay would like to reiterate the urgent need
for all stakeholders in all situations to preserve,
strengthen and respect the norms of international
humanitarian law in order to ensure full respect for the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence, and the pressing need to facilitate access
for humanitarian personnel and ensure appropriate
security conditions for the successful completion of
their tasks.

In this respect, it is important to consider the
possibility of opening dialogues with non-State armed
groups. Such dialogue should in no case imply a
legitimization of those groups; rather, it should be
aimed at achieving understanding and respect on their
part for the norms of international humanitarian law.

Among those groups that find themselves in
vulnerable situations, women and children continue to
require special protection. Despite the significant
achievements in this area, much remains to be done to
ensure their proper protection. Recognizing the
victims' suffering and the importance of bearing in
mind the needs of the civilian population affected by
armed conflict should also receive greater attention
from the international agenda.

We reiterate the need to pay greater attention to
the reintegration of victims who have had their rights
seriously violated, in particular in cases of sexual
abuse or exploitation. It is, in our View, essential that
we continue to fight against the impunity of those
responsible for violations that are in clear
contravention of international norms in these areas.
30

We experience the complexity of protecting
civilians through peacekeeping operations on a daily
basis through our military and police personnel
deployed on the ground. In addition to material
shortcomings is the issue of political sensitivities. On
the one hand, we must avoid the premature withdrawal
of missions when true security has not yet been
established; on the other, this must go hand in hand
with the principle of consent by the host country,
which has the primary responsibility of providing this
protection. This is a crucial aspect that underpins the
legitimacy of the peacekeeping system and sets it apart
from other alternatives.

We therefore believe it essential that the various
stakeholders - the host State, the Council, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries - all
work hand in hand in drafting realistic indicators that
are focused on the well-being of the population. Once
these indicators have been agreed upon, they must be
complied with. Should they not be complied with and
should the mission be withdrawn, the credibility of our
Organization will be significantly damaged.

Despite the difficulties I have just listed, we
underscore the tangible progress that has been achieved
at Headquarters and on the ground over the past year in
the protection of civilians in the context of
peacekeeping operations. The necessary rapprochement
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly in the area of peacekeeping in general and
the protection of civilians in particular is under way.
This lends greater legitimacy to such activities and
encourages less resistance to them, and gives rise to a
greater commitment among all stakeholders involved
in their implementation.

The Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations has deepened and broadened its
commitment to civilian protection through a serious
and comprehensive consideration of the matter,
including the issue of training and the essential need
for a true correlation between mandates and resources.
In this respect, it is essential that concrete efforts be
undertaken to close the material capacity gap.

Furthermore, the Secretariat has received from
the Committee a mandate to draft a strategic
framework and from the Council a mandate to draft
guidelines. We note that this is more than a merely
semantic difference. However, it invites us to focus on
those matters on which we can reach common
agreement. In coming months, we will have in our
hands many documents of great importance, which
should be openly discussed. We will be working as
closely as possible so that when we speak of protecting
civilians, all of those involved will be speaking of the
same thing.

