Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir,
on your presidency of the Security Council this month
and I wish you every success. Moreover, I would like
to pay tribute to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia, for his wise stewardship of
the Council's proceedings in the past month. Through
you as President of the Security Council, as well as
through the President of the General Assembly and
the Secretary-General, I would also like to offer to
the Government and the people of Chad our deepest
condolences for the death of the Chadian peacekeepers
in northern Mali.

I also take this opportunity to renew Sudan's
commitment to cooperate with the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in order to
enable it to carry out its mandate set out in resolution
1990 (2011). I express my thanks and appreciation to His
Excellency the Secretary-General and we thank him for
the Report on the situation in Abyei (see S/2017/870)
presented to the Council. I thank Mr. Alexander Zuev,
Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and
Security Institutions in the Department ofPeacekeeping
Operations and the Special Envoy for Sudan and South
Sudan, Mr. Haysom, for their briefings.

I would like to reaffirm the security stability that
Abyei is experiencing and the progress that has been
achieved in enhancing the principles of peaceful
coexistence between the Messiria and the Ngok, which
has been confirmed in the Report presented today
(S/2017/870) as well as in all of the reports presented
to the Council during the past period. This stability is
a direct result of the extensive governmental and social
efforts that have been made in addition to the positive
role that UNISFA plays and has always played since
its creation.

The Government of Sudan confirms its commitment
to all ofthe agreements signed with the Republic ofSouth
Sudan, starting with the Abyei Protocol of 2004, the
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
on temporary arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei Area, which we signed on 20 June
2011 and the Cooperation Agreement between the two
States, signed on 27 September 2012.
Here we call upon our brothers and sisters in the
Government of South Sudan to enhance their serious
engagement with the Government of Sudan and the
African Union in order to speed up the process of
forming the Abyei institutions stipulated by the 20 June
2011 Agreement in order to determine the final status
of Abyei. This is truly and only in the hands of the
Presidents of Sudan and South Sudan, according to the
agreements signed between the two countries.

My delegation reaffirms its position that the path
towards sustainable peace and stability in Abyei and
throughout the border area between Sudan and South
Sudan is based on two main elements, namely the
implementation of both the Agreement of 20 June
2011 and of all points contained in the Cooperation
Agreement signed between Sudan and South Sudan on
27 September 2012.

The Agreement of 20 June 2011 stipulates the
formation of a joint administration for Abyei as well
as a joint legislative council and a joint police force.
These are basic institutions that are indispensable to the
management of the area and in offering the necessary
services to its citizens, as well as enhancing peaceful
coexistence betweent the different social elements.
There is also a need to create the necessary conditions
in order to peacefully establish a final status for Abyei
based on the 2004 Abyei Protocol. This Protocol
stipulates holding a joint referendum in a manner that
meets the aspirations of all stakeholders by finding a
win-win formula that satisfies everyone.

Furthermore, the Cooperation Agreement has
established strong foundations for the normalization of
ties between Sudan and South Sudan and to enhance
the level of cooperation between the two States in
all aspects. It also stipulates the need for sustained
peace between them.

The Agreement covers vital areas that are important
to the present and future relationship between the two
countries, such as oil, trade, debt, borders, security
arrangements, citizen affairs and other important
matters. However, the lack of enthusiasm among our
brothers in South Sudan for implementing all of those
points, with the exception of the oil agreement, has
prevented the achievement of the desired results. My
delegation hopes that the Government of the Republic
of South Sudan will fulfil its pledges to implement
all of these agreements, especially the agreement on
security arrangements and all its facets.

Everyone, especially the members of the Security
Council, knows that meeting security needs in any
situation must come before meeting economic and
other goals, as explicitly stated in resolution 2046
(2012), adopted in May 2012. It will require broadening
the horizons of the relations between the two States
in a manner that would guarantee cooperation, rise
above any disaccord and fulfil the aspirations of the
two sisterly nations to achieving peace, stability and
development, as good neighbours.

My country confirms that the Sudan has never
been the cause of obstacles to the work of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism or to
restrict its movements. My delegation believes that the
Mechanism is important to ensuring lasting peace along
the joint borders of the Sudan and South Sudan, and
must be maintained and activated in order to normalize
ties between the two States. As Council members will
recall, at the most recent meeting of the joint political
and security mechanism between the Sudan and South
Sudan, held on 14 and 15 May in Addis Ababa, stressed
the centrality of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism:

(spoke in English)

"The joint political and security mechanism
stressed the centrality of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism for the
peace and security of the Sudan and South Sudan.
They pointed out that the absence of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism would
be detrimental to and have detrimental effects on
stability along the border and within both countries
as a whole. In that regard, the meeting resolved
that the parties must urgently take practical steps
to activate the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism and facilitate its work."

(spoke in Arabic)

Moreover, the Sudan and South Sudan, as well
as other relevant parties, have worked together since
the Council's meeting in May. The Foreign Ministers
of both countries sent a joint letter to the Council on
23 September in which they reaffirmed both countries'
commitments to the activation of the Joint Border and
Verification Monitoring Mechanism. Furthermore, both
countries dispatched aerial patrols to the Mechanism
and patrols in the four border crossing areas that were
agreed upon for activation. In addition, an invitation
was sent out for the meeting of the joint political and
security mechanism. It was also agreed to conduct the
long-awaited visit by His Excellency President Salva
Kiir Mayardit of South Sudan to Khartoum on Tuesday,
31 October. We hope that the meeting will result in the
necessary progress in regard to the issues that remain
outstanding between the two countries.

While we understand the concerns of those calling
to end UNISFA support for the operational activities
of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, we believe that the Mechanism is
indispensable to maintaining stability in Abyei and
along the border with South Sudan. Ending UNISFA
support for the operational activities of the Mechanism
could lead to developments that would threaten the
gains that have been made through the joint efforts of
all concerned - including the Security Council, which
has endorsed the Mechanism - and reignite tensions.
It would be tantamount to a collective punishment
of those who have met their obligations and of those
who have not, and of civilians in both countries. We
therefore see little justification for ending support for
those activities.

We believe that the way to revitalize and reanimate
those activities is for the Council and the entire
international community to make an extra effort to
enhance dialogue and encourage both countries to
fulfil their obligations in regard to creating a buffer
demilitarized border zone and to removing all obstacles
to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism. I confirm the full commitment and
willingness of the Government of the Sudan to do its
part to activate the Mechanism and implement the
agreement on security arrangements of 27 September
2012 and other agreements signed with the Republic of
South Sudan.

In conclusion, I would like to offer my sincere
thanks and gratitude to all of our partners whose efforts
facilitate UNISFA's work, in particular the Government
of Ethiopia, the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, the African Union Commission and the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel for the
Sudan and South Sudan, as well as the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South
Sudan. We also reiterate the Sudan's commitment to
cooperating with UNISFA in fulfilling all its duties
unhindered, pursuant to resolution 1990 (2011) and
subsequent relevant resolutions.

