Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-
Plasschaert for her briefing. We are pleased that the
Security Council has unanimously adopted resolution
2470 (2019), on the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
which we fully support. Iraq is at a critical juncture.
Much progress has been made, as our British colleague
mentioned, but there are still many challenges, in a
context that remains difficult at the security level, given
the significant threat that Da'esh continues to pose.

At the outset, Belgium supports the speedy
formation a federal Government. We encourage the
various parties to support a common vision for the
country and to find compromise. In that particular
context, the establishment of strong State institutions is
essential to meet the challenges.

We support the Iraqi Government in its
reconstruction, economic development and reform
efforts with a view to fostering the private sector's
participation. We also welcome the Iraqi Government's
strong commitment to the fight against corruption.
However, economic reconstruction alone will not
be enough.

We commend the Government's efforts, together
with the international community, to clear explosive
ordnance in order for the stabilization and reconstruction
operations to continue, as well as to enable families to
return to their communities and resume their lives.
Moreover, at a time when Iraq must look to the future,
reconciliation is of paramount importance. That can be
achieved only by including all sectors of Iraqi society
and the various communities.

We support UNAMI's important mission to promote
justice, the protection of human rights and judicial and
legal reforms and strengthen the protection of children.
We encourage the Government to make greater efforts
to address the issue of the right of every detainee to
a fair trial, particularly children and minors. We also
encourage the Iraqi Government to develop an action
plan on children and armed conflict, with the support
of UNAMI and the United Nations country team, which
is already working towards that goal, together with
the Government.

Lastly, we support Iraq's efforts to open up to
neighbouring countries, with a view to strengthening
bilateral and regional relations based on the fundamental
principles of respect for sovereign equality and
territorial integrity.

