Ms. Gallardo (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me to voice the satisfaction of the
Government of El Salvador at your initiative to
convene an open Security Council debate on the
situation in Haiti. We take this opportunity also to
express our confidence in the diplomatic leadership of
Argentina in guiding the affairs of the Council.

My Government attaches great importance to this
topic, not only because of its implications for regional
peace and security, but also because of the human
tragedy and the pressing needs of Haitian civil society
at present. The social harmony to which it aspires
requires progress towards the creation and subsequent
consolidation of democratic institutions that can
improve living conditions and strengthen the rule of
law.

This debate provides an opportunity to reiterate
El Salvador's political will to continue contributing,
within our limited possibilities, to the stabilization
process that the international community and the
Transitional Government are carrying out in Haiti. This
process is taking place in the context of the
international community's action, in the global,
multilateral context of the United Nations, through the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), as well as in the regional context,
through the Organization of American States (OAS),
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the Rio
Group. It must continue to be consolidated.

We would like to take this opportunity to
commend the Secretary-General on his endeavours and
leadership in this process.

El Salvador shares the concern of the Transitional
Government of Haiti about the deteriorating security
situation, particularly in Port-au-Prince, and the
resulting tense political climate. The existence of
armed groups, and the intention of some of them to
confront the Transitional Government, continues to be
among the main threats to peace and security in Haiti.
My delegation hopes that the Transitional
Government's proposed measures will contribute to
reducing levels of violence and will promote a political
climate conducive to tolerance, dialogue and
negotiation. As the Council is aware, the Government
of El Salvador is convinced that those are the required
tools to seek and consolidate the peace. Our own
history has proven that.

The coordination efforts of MINUSTAH and the
National Police in Port-au-Prince, intended to restore
the population's trust in the capabilities of the Haitian
National Police, have proven to be an effective practice
in making progress. In that context, it is important to
make a greater effort to strengthen the national
commission on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. We must recall that in the process of
peacebuilding in El Salvador, that was an essential step
to which the international community attached a great
deal of importance.

As to the civilian police component of
MINUSTAH, at the request of the United Nations, the
Government of El Salvador is considering the
possibility of making available more police officers,
particularly women, to be included in the overall
international effort, and in conjunction with other
countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.

The Government of El Salvador is convinced that
stabilization and peacebuilding in Haiti must be based
on promoting dialogue and national reconciliation. In
that regard, we are gratified at the positive assessment
provided by Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as a result of
his exploratory meetings with political leaders and
representatives of civil society, who have stated their
readiness for a national dialogue.

The Transitional Government's commitment to
organize free, fair and legitimate elections in 2005 and
to hand over power to a president to be elected on
7February 2006 is another key element that can
contribute effectively to the success of dialogue and
national reconciliation. Here, El Salvador's experience
might be useful to Haiti, and we shall place it at their
disposal under any agreed modalities and format. In
this context, my delegation is gratified at the signing
on 3 November 2004 of the memorandum of
understanding between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States on electoral
assistance for Haiti. It sets out respective
responsibilities and establishes a committee for
electoral cooperation to ensure that the assistance
provided will be effective and consistent.

In addition to the gravity of the political
situation, it is important for us to recognize the
negative impact of natural disasters, in particular the
flooding that occurred in southern Haiti in May 2004,
as well as the torrential rains in the wake of Tropical
Storm Jeanne in September of the same year.
Undeniably, the need to respond immediately to the
disaster was a further challenge for MINUSTAH,
which had to temporarily redeploy its military and
police personnel to Gona'i'ves to support the Argentine
troops in providing security at distribution points and
warehouses, and for humanitarian convoys. In my
delegation's opinion, the international community's
response was excellent and effective. However, Haiti's
manifest vulnerability to natural disasters, along with
other pending development tasks, are a double
challenge for the national authorities and the
international community. We must not forget that
political stabilization must go hand in hand with
strengthening national capacity to confront both
challenges simultaneously.

In this respect, the Government of El Salvador
endorses the commitment of the Rio Group to
coordinate with the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the Inter-American Development Bank
and donor countries to ensure prompt disbursement of
the funds and resources pledged for stabilization in
Haiti. We also are pleased with the decision adopted by
the Economic and Social Council to reactivate its Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation's satisfaction with the actions adopted by
the Security Council with respect to the proposals
made in the report of the Secretary-General contained
in document S/2004/908, and in particular the
extension of MINUSTAH's mandate for an additional
18-month period, until 31 May 2006. El Salvador is
convinced that the engagement of the United Nations at
this stage of the stabilization process in Haiti is
fundamental for successful and lasting national
reconciliation.

