Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank Ambassador Wang Guangya for the able and
efficient way in which he guided our work last month. I
would also like to welcome Ambassador De La
Sabliere to the presidency and to assure him of my
delegation's full cooperation. It is a great pleasure to
see the High Representative, Lord Ashdown, and the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Terzic, at this meeting. I would like
to thank them, as well as Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno, for their informative and comprehensive
briefings.

Germany subscribes to the statement to be made
later by Ireland on behalf of the European Union.

I would like to commend Lord Ashdown for his
work in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We realize it is an
enormous responsibility to be charged with advancing
the difficult, delicate and, at the same time, immensely
important reform process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Almost eight years after the Dayton Agreement, Bosnia
and Herzegovina still needs help and support from the
international community. I can assure the High
Representative that the German commitment continues
to be strong. In the past two weeks alone, both our
Foreign Minister, Mr. Fischer, and the German Minister
of Defence, Mr. Struck, have been to the country to
gather first-hand impressions of developments.

As the High Representative pointed out, marked
improvements have been made in recent years, and in
the reporting period, in key areas such as the security
situation, currency stability, the return of refugees and
the constitutional equality of the three ethnic groups.
However, there continue to be shortcomings in other
areas. State structures still do not always perform as
they are supposed to; there still seems to be a
considerable lack of identification on the part of the
main ethnic groups with the joint State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina; time and again, we see political
thinking- as well as day-to-day decisions - based
primarily on ethnic categories. There is still no self-
sustaining economy.

Let me make three points. First, the peace process
in Bosnia and Herzegovina now seems to be entering a
decisive phase. The Dayton Agreement, of course,
remains the basis for the time being, but the so-called
European perspective is increasingly gaining in
importance. Both the European Union (EU) and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) have made
clear that they are prepared to open the way to a multi-
ethnic, reform-oriented Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
responsibility for progress on that road now lies with
the political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Let me comment briefly on the way forward into
European structures. It is the pace of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's reform policy that will determine the
pace of the country's future integration into Euro-
Atlantic structures. In the case of European integration,
the EU, as the High Representative stated, has
identified 16 priority areas for further reform.
Successful reform in those areas - including fighting
organized crime, promoting the rule of law and public
administration - is a prerequisite for further progress
towards EU integration.

Concerning Bosnia and Herzegovina's interest in
joining NATO's Partnership for Peace, we believe that
Bosnia and Herzegovina must now press ahead with
the agreed defence reform. The Agreement was an
important first step in the direction of Partnership for
Peace membership; full implementation is the next
important step to be taken.

Secondly, let me mention in that context an issue
that is of continued concern to us and to other Council
members and that was stressed by Lord Ashdown in his
briefing: the question of war criminals. We believe that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is now able, with international

assistance, to bring war criminals to justice in national
courts. Bosnia and Herzegovina's acceptance of that
responsibility is an important indicator of its political
will to gain ownership of its domestic affairs. We
consider the establishment of a War Crimes Chamber at
the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina to be urgent
and important. I would like to reiterate the call that the
Council has made to the international community, by
means of resolution 1503 (2003) of August 2003, to
support the establishment of the Special Chamber.
Germany has already pledged support in the form of a
significant financial contribution and the secondment
of an expert. We welcome the information provided by
Lord Ashdown that the Chamber should be established
by the end of this year.

Thirdly, I should like to comment on the issue of
the de-certification of police officers in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which was raised by the High
Representative. We agree with Lord Ashdown that
legal certainty must be established as swiftly as
possible; only then can the process of reforming the
police of Bosnia and Herzegovina be carried forward
without backlash. The overall process of decertification
must not be called into question. We are willing,
together with our partners in the Coordination and
Drafting Group, to look closely into that issue and to
make a proposal to the Council. In that context, we
welcome the engagement of the Secretariat, as
mentioned by Mr. Guehenno.

In conclusion, I would like to express Germany's
full support for the course of reform defined by the
Bosnian Government in close consultation with the
Peace Implementation Council and the High
Representative. The focus is rightly placed on the areas
of the rule of law, the economy and the strengthening
of national structures. Reforms in those fields must be
carried forward. The High Representative has provided
important momentum for such reform. However, the
responsibility for implementation lies with the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe
that the Government can assume even greater
responsibility and that it has still not fully assumed
what we call ownership of the process. If it fails to do
so, there is a real danger that ambitious objectives -
particularly EU membership and membership in
NATO's Partnership for Peace - will remain
unattainable. I would like to make special mention of
the host of reform initiatives over the past year, which
seem very promising but which still await
implementation.

We sincerely hope that we will soon reach a stage
in which the reform process can be carried out in
Bosnia and Herzegovina without the current massive
pressure by the international community. In our view,
what is needed now is the creation of a sustainable,
self-supporting reform process.

