Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I wish, Sir,
to congratulate you and your delegation on your election to
membership of the Security Council, and on the excellent
and wise way in which you are presiding over the work of
the Council this month. Our thanks go to you also for
having organized this meeting.

During its tenure as a member of the Security Council,
Bahrain contributed to the consultations on post-conflict
peace-building; we welcomed the outcome of those
consultations. That is what has prompted us to participate
in today's meeting, in the hope that we would be able to
contribute further to the debate.

Post-conflict disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration operations are of great importance in
stabilizing situations, reducing the probability of new
Violence, and facilitating the transition of societies from
conflict to normal life and development. For that reason, it
is very important that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes be included in any post-conflict
peace agreements. Such agreements must specify the
responsibilities of leading national institutions and other
actors, along with the measures that they need to take
with respect to this issue; they must define both the
strategies and the timetables for these programmes.

We endorse the definitions contained in the report of
the Secretary-General on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, but we stress that if such post-conflict
operations are to succeed, we must focus on the following
nine elements.

First, the parties to the conflict must provide precise
information about the size, staffing, location, nature,
number and location of stockpiles of weapons.

Second, the framework for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration must be defined in the
peace agreement marking the end of a conflict.

Third, the States Members of the United Nations
must provide the political momentum necessary to
encourage negotiators to take the difficult, but necessary,
decisions.

Fourth, ex-combatants must be reassured that their
safety and security will be fully guaranteed prior to and
during the disarmament phase.

Fifth, the expertise and resources necessary for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration must be
provided, with a View to implementing the peace
agreement.

Sixth, illicit arms flows must be halted.

Seventh, all parties must be persuaded of the futility
of a resumption of hostilities.

Eighth, civil society must be prepared to accept the
reintegration of ex-combatants; this includes the need to
find appropriate jobs for them once they have been
rehabilitated.

And ninth, international efforts to promote
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration must be
coordinated and fostered.

Most of the elements of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants, of
course, are quite clear. But certain issues must be given
more careful consideration. These include the deployment

 

of United Nations personnel to neighbouring countries with
a view to forging links with their national counterparts, and
to monitoring arms flows in the region. But this must not
compromise the principles of State sovereignty and of non-
interference in the internal affairs of States.

There is an inextricable link between the maintenance
and the building of peace. Areas in which conflict had
taken place must not experience the resumption of conflict.

There must be cooperation and coordination between
tow organs of the United Nations: the Security Council,
which is responsible for the maintenance of peace and
security, and the Economic and Social Council, which is
responsible for the building and consolidation of peace,
along with the related specialized agencies. In that
connection, we are pleased to see that there have been signs
of such cooperation and coordination between the two
organs, as in Haiti for example. We would like these links
to be strengthened, as they were when the Presidents of the
two Councils met recently. Why, then, should there not be
a joint meeting of members of the Security Council and of
the Economic and Social Council to consider strategies that
would clearly define the activities of each organ with
respect to the maintenance of international peace and
security.

I cannot fail in conclusion to stress that peace is an
integral whole, no component of which must be neglected.
Peace requires cooperation among all members of the
international community, whether it is a matter of the
maintenance of peace or of post-conflict peace-building.

