Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I thank the President for
convening today's meeting. The beauty of speaking
after my German colleague and fellow penholder is
that I do not have to say much. He made many points
with which I agree, except for the one about changing
Permanent Representatives. Like Germany, we have
not yet had a woman Permanent Representative, but we
have had a female Foreign Minister.

First, I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed and Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary DiCarlo for their briefings and their
recent visit to Afghanistan. I agree with Mr. Heusgen
that the visit was certainly a show of force and support
for the process in Afghanistan. I would also like to
thank Ms. Jamila Afghani for her valiant work on
behalf of Afghan women.

It is a critical time for Afghanistan, as efforts for
an intra-Afghan dialogue gather pace and Afghanistan
moves towards the presidential election in September.
We thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
briefing in this regard. We are happy to hear that an
increasing number of people are registering to vote
and that 36 per cent of them are women. That is a sign
of progress.

There have been many calls by Afghan women for
women's rights and roles not to be compromised in the
name of an agreement. I think this is a point on which
we can certainly concur with Ms. Jamila Afghani.
The two-day solidarity mission by all-women top
United Nations officials that focused on women and
peace and security has reinforced the message that the
international community cares about the well-being
of Afghan women. Their meaningful participation
in building an inclusive and democratic Afghanistan
ensures that the rights of all segments of society are
equal and protected.

I would just like to add three points. First, the
need for greater and more meaningful participation of
women in the peace and reconciliation process cannot
be overstated. Indonesia remains a strong believer in
the idea that the meaningful participation of women
in the peace and reconciliation process increases the
chances for peace to be sustained. We are pleased
that, of the 37 members of the reconciliation council
established by President Ghani in November 2018 as
the negotiating team, five are women. We hope that
the number of women and the scope of their roles will
continue to increase.

We were happy to hear from Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed just now that the role
played by women in Afghanistan is improving: in terms
of improving school enrolment, reducing maternal
mortality and participating in political life. However,
I think much remains to be done. Of course, we concur
with Ms. Mohammed's point that, in building a culture
of peace, including women is the only way to make
peace. This is a very important aspect.

Secondly, I would like to underscore the importance
of continuing to mainstream the women and peace and
security agenda in Afghanistan. There have been an
increased number of positive signs of the advancement
of the women and peace and security agenda in recent
years, but this progress needs to happen all over the
country. Indonesia hopes that success in the peace
and reconciliation process will lead to unstoppable
advancement everywhere. In this regard, we support
the Government's efforts to finalize the second phase
of its national action plan on women and peace and
security for the period 2019-2022.

We also applaud the election of two women - to lead
the Independent Election Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission. Moreover, the fact that
36 per cent of the 8.5 million registered voters in the
October 2018 parliamentary elections were women
only underlines their enthusiasm for contributing to the
democratic process. However, we heard Ms. Afghani's
plea and concur that there is a need for greater
involvement of women in Afghan democratic life, and
I think that the Council needs to do more to this end.

Thirdly, the security situation should improve. It
is regrettable that, despite the ongoing peace process,
bombing and attacks are also ongoing, resulting in
many civilian casualties. This cannot continue. We
call for all Afghan political leaders to commit to the
peace process and to the protection civilians. Indonesia
condemns yesterday's attacks in several provinces in
Afghanistan, and we express our deepest sympathy
and condolences to the families of the victims and to
the Government of Afghanistan. Attacks on civilians,
particularly women and children, are a crime.

We once again reiterate that violence and extremism
have no place in religion. Accordingly, Indonesia will
continue to support endeavours to involve members of
ulema in peacemaking so that they convey the message
of peace and harmony and become the voice of reason.
