Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation, too, would like express its vigorous
condemnation of the recent attacks in Istanbul. We
extend our sympathy to the families of the victims and
to the Governments of Turkey and of the United
Kingdom.

We are grateful to the Angolan presidency for
having convened this open meeting on the Great Lakes
region. We would like to express appreciation for the
briefings provided today on this issue by our guests.

As we have said on previous occasions, we fully
endorse the regional approach in addressing issues
pertaining to the Great Lakes region - hence the
importance of appropriate preparation for the
international conference.

Given the complexity of the issues under
discussion, we are of the view that the conference must
be seen as a process, rather than a single event. We
have heard a number of speakers, including Mr.
Ibrahima Fall, express the same view.

The conference will have before it a broad range
of questions relating to peace and security, good-
neighbourliness, stability, democracy, good
governance, economic development and regional
integration, as well as humanitarian and social issues.
It will be important, therefore, to define principles and
goals, as well as concrete programmes and initiatives,
relating to those areas, with a view to developing a
plan of action that can bring about their
implementation in practice.

With regard to good-neighbourly relations in
particular, we welcome the signature, on 25 September,
of the declaration on principles of good-
neighbourliness and cooperation between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Rwanda
and Uganda, and we appeal to the signatories to apply
the principles set out therein. Such initiatives
contribute to the creation of a climate of trust among
the countries of the region, which is clearly conducive
to peace and can reduce the potential for tension.

Among other hopeful developments, we should
also mention the return to Rwanda, on 14 November, of
General Paul Rwarakabije of the Forces democratiques
pour la liberation du Rwanda.

We believe that, in order for the international
conference to be a complete success, it should involve
all the actors affecting the stability of the area.
Furthermore, the follow-up mechanisms for the
conference must be adapted to the complex realities of
the region. To that end, we must have the support and
cooperation of all relevant countries and institutions.

For our part, we will work actively within the
European Union - the Italian presidency of the Union
spoke earlier on behalf of all its members - on all
initiatives in support of the conference. We will
continue to demonstrate our commitment and provide
support for peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region.

