Mr. Annabi: Mr. Guehenno regrets that he cannot
be here this afternoon, as he has just left for the airport.
He will be visiting the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

I think that there were essentially two questions.
The first relates to freedom of movement. As Mr.
Guehenno indicated this morning, restrictions on the
freedom of movement of the personnel of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE)
continue to occur from time to time. Those restrictions
are, of course, taken up on a case-by-case basis with
the military and, if necessary, with the political
authorities on both sides. Some of those restrictions are
due to an incorrect understanding of the orders
received by local commanders on the ground, or
misunderstandings about these instructions. Some of
them are deliberate. There are occasions when one or
the other of the parties may not wish us to see its
positions, but these situations are, as I said, being
addressed on a case-by-case basis.

We remind the parties on every occasion of their
commitment under the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities, concluded on 18 June last, under which
they both agreed to provide unrestricted freedom of
movement to UNMEE, as required for its operations.

There may also be some misunderstanding as to
the exact operational requirements of UNMEE. In our
minds, it is clear that in order to patrol the Temporary
Security Zone and to be able to reassure both sides that
nothing unusual is happening in the area, we need to be
able to see beyond the limits of the Temporary Security
Zone itself. For operational purposes, the Force
Commander has indicated to the parties that we would
need to go some 15 kilometres beyond the limits of the
Zone to establish contacts with the authorities on both
sides and discuss whatever practical problems may
have arisen in the area of operation. This is not always
well understood by the local commanders, and we are
continuing to discuss this with the parties. We hope, as
I said, that they will work with us in accordance with

their own undertakings and the Agreement of 18 June
last.

As regards the second question, related to the cost
estimates for logistical support for the work of the
Boundary Commission, I think that Mr. Guehenno
indicated this morning that a team from the
Cartographic Section, assisted by logistical experts
who are on the ground right now, is looking at the
requirements. That team will return by the end of the
month with, we hope, an evaluation of the logistical
support that will be required. Council members will, of
course, be informed in due course of those estimates.

I think those were the only two questions.

