Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I should like at the outset to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and to commend his
good offices efforts to promote stability and national
reconciliation in Myanmar. We stress our support for
his personal work and that of his Special Adviser,
Mr. Gambari.

We also extend our thanks to the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar for his statement.

We welcome the Secretary-General's visit to
Myanmar and his talks with the Government and other
parties on that occasion. At the same time, we note his
inability to meet with the opposition leader, Ms. Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi. We regret that failure, despite our
understanding of the position of the Myanmar
authorities, as outlined by the Permanent Representative
of that country earlier in this meeting.

We fully understand that the Secretary-General's
personal efforts and good offices, exercised through
Mr. Gambari, have led to real movement and positive
developments. While slow, such developments - first
among which is the commitment of the Myanmar
authorities to pursue their follow-up of the seven-step
road map and, at the appropriate moment, to enact a
law to regulate the 2010 elections - augur well for
real progress. We hope that these efforts will advance
the democratic process and achieve a lasting solution
to all Myanmar's problems.

We believe that dialogue with the Myanmar
authorities must be pursued in order to encourage them
to achieve the aims we all support and aspire to, above
all the release of political prisoners and detainees,
continued dialogue among the various parties, and the
establishment of an atmosphere conducive to the
organization of elections, the promotion of the rule of
law and respect for human rights.

We hope that the Myanmar authorities will
continue to cooperate with the United Nations and the
international community in order to ensure national
reconciliation, lay the foundations for the full
participation of all political actors in the 2010
elections, and establish stability throughout the
country. We believe that coordination between the
United Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) is also critical to achieving tangible
and timely results.

In previous statements to the Council, my country
has stressed that issues relating to the internal affairs of
States must be addressed through consultation and
constructive dialogue between the Government and
political actors involved, with the assistance of the
international community. We reiterate that point of
view and commend the role played by ASEAN, its
support for the good offices of the United Nations and
its assistance to the people of Myanmar in achieving
national reconciliation in their country. We hope that
Myanmar will soon achieve political and economic
stability, development and national reconciliation, and
that its people will live in peace.
We emphasize that the future of Myanmar is
exclusively in the hands of its people, who must work
together to ensure that it will be a prosperous one.

