Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2397 (2017). I would
like to congratulate Ambassador Nikki Haley and the
delegation of the United States on their outstanding
action and determination on this issue. We share with
them, together with the other members of the Security
Council, in particular China and Japan, the sense of
urgency regarding the importance of addressing the
dangerous illegal activities of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, by applying further economic and
diplomatic pressure.

Today's resolution, which is the fourth adopted this
year, introduces further meaningful restrictive measures
with regard to the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, following the country's intercontinental
ballistic missile launch on 28 November. North Korea's
continued defiant and reckless actions constitute the
gravest threat to the international community. We
voted in favour of resolution 2397 (2017) because such
provocative acts deserve a strong and unified response
in defending our collective security and the integrity of
the non-proliferation regime, as well as the authority
of the Council. Once again, we strongly condemn the
illegal activities of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and call on the regime to put an immediate end to
the development of its missile and nuclear programmes
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner,
thereby making credible progress on its obligations
to denuclearize.

The measures adopted today provide a complex
response commensurate with the threat we face. By
applying further restrictions on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea exports and foreign workers, we
limit the ability of the regime to earn foreign currency
and thus financing its illegal weapons and missiles
programmes. Likewise, the timing of restrictions, along
with the announcement of information-sharing among
the States Members of the United Nations, reduces the
scope for illegal attempts by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to circumvent sanctions. We
welcome the fact that the text renews our commitment
to avoiding unintended humanitarian consequences
for the local population. It is of paramount importance
that such effects be avoided. We should never lose
sight of the fact that the citizens of North Korea are
first and foremost the Victims of the regime's self-
isolation policies.

We reaffirm our concerns about the humanitarian
situation in the country and our support for the assistance
provided by United Nations agencies in order to alleviate
the suffering of the North Korean people. Resolution
2397 (2017) expresses our commitment to a peaceful,
diplomatic and political solution, and welcomes efforts
to achieve true dialogue. Italy is committed to that
goal, while recognizing that the way to open a window
of opportunity towards meaningful negotiations is to
apply maximum economic and diplomatic pressure, in
order to bring about veritable change in the regime's
current policy.

Lastly, as the outgoing Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), we again call
upon all States Members of the United Nations
to implement all relevant Democratic People's
Republic of Korea sanctions resolutions in a full and
comprehensive manner.

