I thank Judge Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their briefings. I also present my deep condolences for the two staff members of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals who passed away as a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The date of 16 May will be important in the history of international criminal justice. After nearly 23 years as a fugitive, Felicien Kabuga, indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in 2011 for genocide and crimes against humanity allegedly committed in Rwanda in 1994, was finally arrested by the French authorities, as a result of the revised search strategy the Office of the Prosecutor initiated a few years ago, but also of the assistance and support provided by INTERPOL, EUROPOL and the competent authorities of a dozen countries, including Belgium. We congratulate the Prosecutor and his team, as well as all the States and organizations involved, on what is an essential milestone in the life of the Mechanism. The message to war criminals, wherever they are, could not be clearer. The international community will not tolerate impunity for the most serious crimes of international law. It will continue to do everything in its power to bring justice to the victims, even if more than 20 years have elapsed since the crimes were perpetrated. This success of the Mechanism gives us the opportunity to highlight even more clearly a principle that we believe is essential in the approach the Security Council must continue to adopt in the field of justice. The prosecution of perpetrators of atrocity crimes can only be effective if States cooperate not only among themselves, but also with international courts and tribunals, which is why the Statute of the Mechanism and several Council resolutions established the obligation for all Member States to cooperate fully with the Mechanism as a foundational principle. In this respect, Belgium notes once again with concern that the Office of the Prosecutor has struggled to obtain the necessary cooperation from a number of relevant Member States in connection with the search and arrest of the remaining six fugitives indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. We strongly encourage these States to provide all necessary assistance and thereby participate in collective efforts for justice and accountability. I welcome the commitment just expressed by the representative of South Africa in this regard. In addition, greater cooperation from States is also necessary in relation to the resettlement of the nine acquitted or released persons currently residing in Arusha. This year we commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of several tragic events, including the Srebrenica genocide, which marked the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. In this context, it is particularly regrettable to read once again in the Office of the Prosecutor's report (S/2020/416, annex IT) that the denial of crimes and the glorification of war criminals remain more than ever a reality throughout the region of the former Yugoslavia. The same conclusion applies to regional judicial cooperation, which has been at its lowest level in years. Belgium therefore calls upon the authorities of the relevant States to make it a priority to prosecute war criminals and combat hate speech and any ideology advocating discrimination, in accordance with the values and principles of both the United Nations and the European Union. I would like to conclude by welcoming the Mechanism's efforts aimed at limiting as much as possible the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its activities. Belgium also praises the efforts of the President of the Mechanism on the issue of early release, which have led to the recent changes to the directive applicable in this area. The role of the Mechanism in the process of reconciliation between communities, both in Rwanda and in the countries of the former Yugoslavia, remains more fundamental than ever. Belgium therefore reiterates its full support for the Mechanism and wishes to see its mandate extended beyond 30 June.
