The Group of Friends of the African Women Leaders Network to the United Nations, chaired by the Permanent Mission of Ghana to the United Nations and vice-chaired by the Permanent Mission of Germany to the United Nations, expresses its appreciation to the Russian presidency of the Security Council for convening this open debate as we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. The Group also commends the Secretary-General for his report on the issue (S/2020/946), which captures the progress made on the role of women in securing peace and security, while forthrightly calling on Member States to step up efforts on financing and on the implementation of the agenda. It is now 20 years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. However, women remain largely excluded from local, national, regional and international decision-making processes. Despite our strong and continued engagements to ensure women's meaningful participation, the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has tested Governments and civil society alike. It has added yet another layer of risk and complexity to conflicts. It has also further widened gendered inequalities and threatens to undermine human rights. The COVID-19 pandemic further exacerbates poverty, inequalities and gender-based violence. It has been aptly coined the shadow pandemic by UN-Women, with particular effects on women and girls, threatening all efforts led on the peacebuilding front. Despite the many challenges brought about by the pandemic, women in peace and security in Africa and across the world have shown resilience in their undertakings and determination to ensure that this invisible enemy does not erode the gains made over the past two decades. Since its launch in 2017, the African Women Leaders Network (AWLN) has brought to the fore women's leadership and participation in peace, security and sustainable development. The AWLN platform is jointly supported by the African Union (AU) Commission and the United Nations through UN-Women. More than three years after the establishment of the AWLN, the Group of Friends remains committed to making the message of women's meaningful participation a central part in the efforts regarding the maintenance of international peace, security, conflict prevention and mediation, peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction. The AWLN Group of Friends wishes to focus its statement on four main points. First, the AWLN Group of Friends recognizes the urgent need to continue its march to localize peace and security efforts and to continue to support a bottom-up approach at the local and national levels if we are to ensure long-term gains for peace and stability. Since 2017, 25 national chapters of the AWLN have been launched in Africa in line with the Beijing+25 Conference, serving as rallying platforms to continue our work of building sustainable peace together with the AU and the United Nations. AWLN women leaders are leading national and community efforts to prevent and mitigate conflict and build peace. AWLN women in Mali have been able to bring their expertise and to participate in the recent mediation and ongoing transitional mediation process. AWLN women leaders in Zimbabwe and in the Central African Republic actively participate in peace, security and governance spaces, including as voters, community leaders, candidates, civil society leaders, ministers and parliamentarians. AWLN women leaders have been at the forefront of mobilizing efforts and resources to respond to the COVID-19 crisis and prevent the widespread contamination and misinformation at community levels and across the continent. Secondly, the AWLN Group of Friends identifies intergenerational partnerships, among younger and senior women, as a key instrument to build sustainable peace and security, building on the synergies between the women and peace and security agenda, pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000), and the youth, peace and security agenda, pursuant to resolution 2250 (2015). At the country level, the AWLN convened several intergenerational strategic engagements on peace, security and governance, while hosting its first Intergenerational Retreat on Leadership in Africa last year with young women and senior United Nations and AU officials under the leadership of the President of Kenya, His Excellency Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta, and the AWLN patron, Her Excellency Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf. Thirdly, the Group recognizes that the meaningful participation of women in peace, security and peacebuilding processes requires moving beyond the numbers to ensure that women's rights, needs and experiences are heard and reflected in the peace outcome documents and reconstruction processes. The Group of Friends stands with the 2020 review of the Peacebuilding Commission in ensuring women's meaningful participation to help de-escalate tensions, prevent conflicts and promote lasting and inclusive peace. Lastly, AWLN leaders have operationalized resolution 1325 (2000) on the ground by conducting 10 joint United Nations-AU fact-finding solidarity missions in the course of three years to recentre women's participation and leadership in peace, security and development in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa, as well as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and South Sudan. The Group commends the leadership of AWLN champions United Nations Deputy Secretary- General Ms. Amina Mohammed, UN-Women Executive Director Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka and African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security Ms. Bineta Diop, together with other AU and United Nations officials, for bringing the agenda closer to the women and other people on the ground. The ongoing world pandemic brings us closer to one reality, namely, that we all have a role to play in building and sustaining peace. The Group of Friends of the AWLN to the United Nations calls on the Security Council to continue to provide robust mandates that integrate women and peace and security priorities, while we continue to build the necessary partnerships and mechanisms to deliver on the call for women's meaningful participation.
