The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as a representative of Germany.

First, my delegation would like to thank the guest
speakers for their contribution to this discussion. I will
not repeat what has been said already by previous
speakers; I will merely restrict myself to a short
statement on two aspects that are important to my
delegation. One is the whole complex of
entrepreneurial responsibility, the so-called global
corporate citizenship, and the other is the huge
potential for private sector activity in any development
or reconstruction strategy.

The issue of corporate citizenship in zones of
conflict has generically not been dealt with by the
Security Council. Yet the Council has given attention
to the involvement of the private sector in countries
and regions experiencing violent conflicts through
various resolutions pertaining to individual cases. The
Council has, for example, imposed sanctions in an
attempt to end hostilities by reducing the opportunities
for combatant self-financing through trade in conflict
commodities. Diamonds and timber can be named in
this regard. The Secretary-General has prominently
addressed the issue of corporate citizenship through his
Global Compact initiative, and the Global Compact
policy dialogue has turned out to be very successful,
committing to date over a thousand companies and
organizations to voluntarily engage in socially and
ecologically responsible and sustainable business
practices.

My second point is that private sector activity in
the post-conflict phase of reconstruction is essential to
sustainable resolution of conflicts, as such activity
projects political stability and helps to prevent the
possible resurgence of conflicts in the future.
Multinational corporations, working in partnerships
with Governments, international organizations, non-
governmental organizations and civil society, can use
their business skills and financial leverage to promote
regional stability. In countries in which peace efforts
are foundering, a tangible promise of employment,
trade, direct investment and the promotion of local
enterprise can have a major effect. Ideally, corporate
participation would provide twin benefits: investment
with resulting jobs and business opportunities, and
provision of managerial know-how and expertise.
Other actors in the field - the United Nations, the
international financial institutions, non-governmental
organizations and civil society - would profit in their
own efforts to overcome a conflict situation.

Yet in the end, it is not for Governments or
international organizations to decide what is in the best
interest of the private sector. Companies will make
their own decisions, weighing opportunities against
risks of engagement in zones of conflict. The United
Nations, the international financial institutions and
national Governments, in this regard, are called upon to
create the necessary framework for private sector
engagement. The question of what can be done to
adequately address the risks the private sector runs in
engaging in post-conflict situations is crucial in this
context.

Equally important is a clear perspective for the
creation of a stable legal framework, the rule of law,
adequate administrative structures and the
establishment of a viable private sector. A stabilized
region is a precondition for successful development at
the country level. A lucid example of that is, in spite of
many tasks still ahead, the Stability Pact for South-
Eastern Europe. This Pact incorporated three crucial
elements - first, a coherent political, economic and
security approach; secondly, the close cooperation of
all relevant stakeholders; and, thirdly, the regional
dimension of conflict resolution.

Private sector engagement in all phases of a
conflict can be successful only if it is embedded in a
broader concerted effort accompanied by strong
partnerships among Governments, international
organizations, business and civil society. In conclusion,
I would therefore like to encourage the relevant United
Nations bodies and agencies, including the Bretton
Woods institutions, as well as civil society, to
cooperate closely with the private sector, to support a
climate of peace in conflict-prone regions, to help
mitigate crisis situations and to contribute to
reconciliation processes. I take note of, and warmly
welcome, the Secretary-General's suggestion that the
Security Council should, in the future, focus greater
attention on this issue.
I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Council. I call on Mr. Wolfensohn, President of the
World Bank, to respond to comments and possible
questions raised.

