Mr. Merimee (France) (interpretation from French):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union.
I should like first to thank the Secretary-General for
his excellent report entitled "Supplement to an Agenda for
Peace: position paper of the Secretary-General on the
occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations". This important document provides timely help
for the Council and the General Assembly to ponder in
depth all facets of the objectives and means of
maintaining international peace and security. It rounds out
the important contribution of "An Agenda for Peace",
which remains a useful basis for reflection by Member
States.

The report of the Secretary-General quite rightly
stresses the importance of preventive diplomacy and post-
conflict peace-building. It emphasizes that the concept of
peace-keeping, especially in the form of peace-keeping
operations, is an irreplaceable instrument and that there is
a need to improve the capacity for rapid deployment of
United Nations troops. It takes into consideration various
aspects of the resort to enforcement measures, military
and non-military alike, and calls for caution in this regard.
In all these areas the Secretary-General underlines the
importance of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations.

Recourse to the methods of preventive diplomacy
and peacemaking is the best means of preventing the
outbreak or exacerbation of conflicts and of avoiding
situations in which the Security Council must decide to
launch a peace-keeping operation. Conflict prevention
includes assistance to countries that are making progress
towards democracy and the monitoring of elections. The
establishment of and respect for human rights and the
rights of individuals belonging to minorities, as well as
measures to promote economic and social stability, are
other basic elements of prevention.

We attach particular importance to preventive
diplomacy. We support the intensification and improved
integration of efforts between the United Nations system
and regional organizations in order to better identify
situations that may give rise to conflicts.

We also support the initiatives of a number of
countries, including European countries, that have

 

provided the Secretary-General with a list of personalities,
experts and resources likely to help the Secretariat to carry
out fact-finding, mediation or good-offices missions in parts
of the world where disputes may surface or be exacerbated.
We support the Secretary-General's suggestion that the
personalities so designated should also be available for
long-term missions. We also support the efforts to ensure
regular financing for preventive-diplomacy and
peacemaking missions. By strengthening personnel and
material resources available for United Nations preventive-
diplomacy activities, we would be bolstering the confidence
of the international community in the Organization's
capacity in this field and helping make better use of the
resources available to the United Nations as a whole.

I should like to take this opportunity to recall the
European Union's support for the preventive deployment of
troops, including stationing them on only one side of a
border, in order to help stabilize a tense situation, where the
consent of all the Governments concerned is lacking.
Preventive deployment, such as that carried out in the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, should be used
in other cases as well, whenever it seems useful and
possible to do so.

In cases where a peace-keeping operation has been
necessary, we believe it is legitimate and useful for the
United Nations to maintain a presence on the ground after
the end of the operation in order to ensure that its action is
followed up in such a way as to contribute to a lasting
restoration of peace through measures for coordinated
consolidation in the economic, social, institutional, electoral,
humanitarian and human rights fields. This method has
already been proven on many occasions, particularly in
Namibia and Cambodia. It deserves to be continued, as is
intended in El Salvador and Mozambique. Indeed, it would
be difficult to understand if, after having put so much effort
into an operation that was probably burdensome, complex
and costly, the United Nations were to withdraw without
taking measures designed to secure the results. Peace-
building activities can also be useful, without the
deployment of a peace-keeping operation, to prevent
conflict or remedy its consequences.

These measures could be planned from the outset in
the mandates or the political agreements between the parties
before the launching or in the course of an operation. In
any case, the transfer to the competent bodies of the peace-
building functions assumed within the framework of a
peace-keeping operation should be planned and organized.
We believe it is necessary to have a transitional phase
between an operation under the aegis of the Security
Council and actions that are the responsibility of other
parts of the United Nations system, so as to preserve a
political logic in the implementation of consolidation
measures.

The question of rapid deployment of peace-keeping
operations remains crucial. Speed of deployment depends
largely on the capacity of Member States themselves to
meet manpower and material needs. In this regard, we
favour the idea of studying the stockpiling of reserves of
the United Nations to use material left over from already
completed operations already completed for the start-up
phase of new operations. We also believe it to be
necessary to improve - as has been shown by the time
taken in the case of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Rwanda - arrangements for contacts between
Governments which are contributing troops to the United
Nations and those that are providing equipment. In this
respect, we support the concept proposed by the
Secretariat of calling upon Member States to equip and
train battalions provided by other States in the form of an
overall allocation within a given time-frame.

Arrangements relating to stand-by forces, the
principle of which was endorsed in the Presidential
statement on 27 July 1994, should make it possible to
anticipate the planning phase of operations and to reduce
the time between the adoption of a resolution and the
deployment of a force. In principle, this system does not
guarantee that contingents will be provided for a given
operation, since States which agreed to participate are
under no obligation to respond automatically. However,
we think that if enough States commit themselves to it the
system of stand-by force modules is an appropriate
response to the question of rapid deployment. The
European Union hopes that the Secretariat will continue
to develop this concept and to attract support from other
Member States. The European Union feels that particular
attention should be given to the greatest possible capacity
for interaction between contingents and that the system of
stand-by forces should be supplemented by a similar
exercise with regard to command structures and civilian
components.

Other measures to improve the capacity for rapid
deployment can be considered within a regional
framework.

All the members of the Union are also members of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Furthermore, the member countries of the European
Union are either fully-fledged members or observers in

 

the Western European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization. In these bodies, procedures have been worked
out to support peace-keeping operations and to contribute
to them.

Particular attention should also be given to the
improvement of peace-keeping capacity in Africa. The
African countries, through the Organization of African
Unity in particular, should also improve their internal
cooperation as well as their cooperation with other
organizations or Member States. This cooperation concerns
the training of troops, stockpiling equipment and necessary
logistical planning in order to mobilize urgently personnel
and contingents for preventive diplomacy missions,
humanitarian actions and peace-keeping operations under
the United Nations. Members of the European Union are
now considering arrangements for cooperation with African
States within this context.

Furthermore, the European Union has noted with
interest the Secretary-General's proposal to create a United
Nations rapid reaction capacity. This proposal, however,
should be examined most carefully in the light of its
practical implications and its political and financial
consequences.

It should also be recalled that an essential condition
for the rapid deployment of peace-keeping forces is the
availability of financial resources, particularly for the start-
up phase. That is why the European Union stresses that it
is imperative, for Member States, pursuant to their
obligations under the Charter, to pay their assessments for
the financing of activities they have approved.

Rapid deployment and, more generally, the success of
peace-keeping operations, depend on the political will of
States to shoulder their responsibilities for peace-keeping.
This will should be strengthened by improving
arrangements for consultation and exchange of information
with countries providing contingents, as mentioned in the
Presidential statement of 4 November 1994.

The Secretary-General in his report touches on the
delicate question of enforcement measures, whether it be
the imposition and effects of sanctions and the effects of
them or military measures involving the use of force.

The European Union has supported the sanctions
regimes against certain States or entities. These measures
are indeed the only enforcement instrument, apart from the
use of force. We consider that sanctions against States or
entities which have contravened international law are not
designed to punish their populations, but are an
exceptional but necessary measure, when it comes to
exerting pressure on a Government to bring about a
change of attitude on its part where diplomatic means
alone have proved inadequate to achieve this goal.
Sanctions must have a precise goal. The acts of a State or
entity which will make it possible to ease or lift sanctions
must be defined when they are adopted. Sanctions should
also be regularly examined. As to their effects, we believe
that requests for exemption in connection with
humanitarian activities must be examined rapidly by the
relevant Committees in such a way as to prevent
unnecessary suffering on the part of the civilian
populations. Furthermore, we should continue to study, in
particular having resort to the expertise of the Bretton
Woods institutions, means of helping Member States
which have suffered indirect damage because of the
application of sanctions in the interests of international
peace and security.

With regard to the use of force and military
enforcement measures, a number of comments can be
made. It is true that a peace-keeping operation is more
likely to succeed if it is undertaken with the consent of
the parties and without the use of force. It is always
preferable, as the Secretary-General quite rightly points
out, for the prestige and resources of the United
Nations - and, indeed, those of Member States - not to
be committed in an attempt to prevent a crisis or put an
end to one, except within the framework of a process
which enjoys the consent of the parties.

The fact remains that the use of force entails dangers
for an operation if it does not possess the necessary
military resources to face its consequences and if the
conditions with regard to the definition of the mandate in
the command structure and the conduct of operations have
not been met.

The unfortunately fluctuating nature of crises faced
by the international community should mean that we
never reject the possibility - in the absence of the
consent of the parties, and even against their will in
certain exceptional circumstances, if the situation so
requires - of our Organization's deciding to have
recourse to the enforcement measures provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter. Otherwise, we would
collectively be sending a very negative signal about the
Organization's will to ensure respect for international law.

The European Union wholeheartedly supports the
intention of the Secretary-General to develop coordination

 

and cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations by means of consultation, diplomatic support,
mutual operational support, co-deployment and joint
operations in compliance with a number of principles:
primacy of the United Nations in accordance with the
Charter; clear-cut division of labour; and consistency,
particularly with regard to the norms for peace-keeping.
Furthermore, the European Union considers that the United
Nations can, on a case-by- case basis, benefit from the
delegation by the Security Council of certain operational
tasks to regional organizations and arrangements.

We would hope in this regard that relations between
the United Nations and regional arrangements and organs
which, under Chapter VIII of the Charter, could help the
work of preventive diplomacy and peace-keeping could be
formalized even further in such a way as to be consistent
with the objectives, field of activity and the capacities of
each of these organizations.

The Security Council, to which any Member State
may bring any dispute which poses a threat to international
peace and security, should be kept informed of action taken
or contemplated in this area by regional arrangements and
organs. It should also be recalled that only the Security
Council can mandate enforcement action in the case of a
threat to the peace, breach of the peace or act of
aggression.

I should like to end with two points.

The Secretary-General rightly stresses that civilian
populations are the principal victims of current conflicts. In
this regard, we, like him, are concerned at the proliferation
of small-calibre weapons and anti-personnel mines. It is in
this context that the European Union has proposed that
consideration be given to a code of conduct for the transfer
of conventional weapons. The commitment of the European
Union has contributed a great deal to the progress made,
within the framework of the Convention on the banning or
limitation of the use of certain conventional weapons, to
limit the export of anti-personnel mines. We should also
like to recall the initiative taken by the European Union in
the realm of mine-clearance assistance. We should also
seek means of stemming the flow of small-calibre arms,
which are helping to trigger and fuel conflicts.

Too often the work of the United Nations in the
field of peace-keeping is misunderstood by public
opinion. People seem to think either that this is the very
essence of the Organization's work or that the failure of
certain operations masks the success recorded elsewhere.
We think that the tasks, the difficulties and the
achievements of the United Nations should be part of a
public relations policy that would make possible a proper
appreciation of the efforts of the Organization. The
European Union will support any action to this end.

It is also important for populations within the zones
of United Nations operations to be informed as to the
objectives and progress of the operations. The European
Union will continue to support all efforts to this end.

In conclusion, the European Union, whose members
have made a considerable contribution in support of the
activities of the United Nations in the realm of the
maintenance of international peace and security, considers
that the Organization has a creditable record to date,
despite all the setbacks that have occurred in certain
cases.

