Mr. Koudougou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): At the outset, my delegation wishes to thank
you, Sir, for organizing today's debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
a subject to which we attach great importance.

We also thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
introductory briefing to our discussion, which we hope
will contribute to the search for a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution for the entire Middle East.

The evolution of the situation in the Middle East,
particularly with respect to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, remains of major concern to the international
community, which has undertaken numerous efforts
and initiatives to re-establish lasting peace in a region
beset by several decades of war that have claimed
countless victims. My delegation once again welcomes
the efforts made at various levels by the Quartet and a
number of countries and organizations to help the
parties to relaunch their peace talks, particularly now
that recent developments threaten to compromise the
fragile progress that has been achieved. These
developments include the ongoing Jewish settlement
activity in the West Bank and the appalling
humanitarian situation that continues to prevail in the
Gaza Strip due to the lengthy closure of crossing
points, which has hindered the delivery of essential
goods and particularly the importation of construction
materials into Gaza. All such actions contribute to
hindering the momentum of the dialogue resumed at
the Annapolis Conference.

At this point, we believe it critical for the parties
to commit further, resolutely and unconditionally to
open and direct discussions on all issues. In this regard,
Burkina Faso welcomes the recent commitments made
by the Israeli authorities to launch discussions with a
View to achieving peace with the Palestinians and to
expand this peace to the regional level.

Likewise, we welcome the public statement made
by the Palestinians which states that the Palestinians
are ready to resume discussions immediately.

The urgency of the situation calls for direct talks
to resume without delay and without conditions. These
discussions should respect the spirit and the letter of
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular, the
most recent, 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009), as well as
the Madrid terms of reference and the Arab Peace
Initiative of 2002. These undoubtedly constitute the
most appropriate political and legal frameworks for a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement to the
conflict in the Middle East in general.

My delegation believes in the advent of a stable,
peaceful and prosperous Middle East, with the full
participation of an independent and viable Palestinian
State, with secure and internationally recognized
borders, living side by side in peace with the State of
Israel, which, itself, would live in security with all its
neighbours.

In our view, this is the only solution for putting
an end to this regional conflict. To achieve this, the
first step to take, as we emphasized during the most
recent ministerial debate, held in May under the
Russian presidency, is still the establishment of a
genuine climate of confidence through the adoption of
the following measures: an end to extremist rhetoric
from all sides; an end to Israel's construction of the
separation wall; an end to its policies of colonization
and settlements; the guarantee of humanitarian access
by opening passage points; and an end to the firing of
rockets by Hamas and all its other forms of violence in
Israeli territory.

In parallel, the Palestinians should succeed in
restoring their unity to give themselves a chance to
build a stable and prosperous State. We reiterate our
thanks to Egypt for its commitment and efforts to help
them do so, and we encourage the international
community to continue to provide support to this end.

The donor conference held in Sharm El-Sheikh
on 2 March of this year was an opportunity to make
commitments on essential issues. We hope that these
commitments will be kept.
In my delegation's View, humanitarian aid must
be able, without hindrance, to reach Gaza and all the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, in order to ease the suffering of the
population.

It is evident, then, that the road to peace in the
Middle East is indeed still long, but there are grounds
for hope given such positive signs as the
reestablishment of diplomatic relations between
Lebanon and Syria. This good example indicates that,
with further efforts, we can ultimately succeed in
defining the conditions for peaceful coexistence
between Israel and its Arab neighbours in the light of
the aspirations for peace and security on all sides.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict, on which the
stability of the entire region seems to depend, requires
ongoing attention and unflagging support from the
Security Council so as to ensure compliance with all
related resolutions it has adopted.

In conclusion, we would like once again to
reaffirm that a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East cannot be contemplated without the
commitment and determination of all actors in the
conflict. They should shoulder their responsibilities,
reaffirm their commitment, show their firm
determination and take ownership of the processes
leading to peace.

