Mexico welcomes today's debate, which is particularly timely, as it coincides with discussions surrounding the twin resolutions on the United Nations peacebuilding architecture (General Assembly resolution 70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016)), during which the Security Council and the General Assembly will endorse the five-year review. Given that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is a facilitator in the process, we welcome the fact that today's debate dovetails with the General Assembly process. International security is multidimensional. The threats faced by States are not only military and political; they are also related to economic and social development challenges and other phenomena, such as pandemics and environmental challenges, among others. Therefore, these threats cannot be addressed in isolation and should not necessarily be overcome in that manner. While the Security Council bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, other principal organs of the United Nations, such as the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, as well as the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), also have a key role to play in preventing development challenges from becoming a threat to peace. The pandemic has demonstrated the need to strengthen global governance based on international law, cooperation and solidarity. The Security Council bears special responsibility in the quest for global solutions. If the Security Council is slow to respond or is paralysed and, in addition, takes no action on the ground, the narrative projected affects the entire Organization and multilateralism as a whole. The members of the Security Council, in particular its permanent members, must shoulder their responsibility, with strict adherence to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It is an extremely critical juncture for conflict-affected countries and for building and consolidating peace. Our Organization is currently assessing how the pandemic will exacerbate already dire situations, such as violence, challenges to gender equality, poverty, weak Government institutions and other shortcomings that could constitute the structural causes of conflict or lead to a relapse into conflict. The Security Council must ensure that its solutions for conflict areas, as well as its definitions of preventive peacekeeping or peacebuilding and special political missions, include contributions to, and support for, development and the implementation of a coherent approach to conflict prevention and resolution that follows the common thread of sustaining peace, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016), and advances the implementation of national goals and priorities. The Security Council should continue to build on the advisory role of the PBC and establish clear and effective communication channels among the peacebuilding architecture, in particular the PBC, the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the United Nations development system.
