Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank the Secretary-
General for submitting to us his report on the question
of Ethiopia and Eritrea. We would also like to thank
Mr. Miyet for the briefing he has just given us. We also
wish to thank the President and the Malaysian
delegation for arranging this open meeting.

As other delegations have done before us, we
would very much like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and its former Chairman, the President of
Algeria, for all they efforts they have made to promote
reconciliation between these two countries.

Since 18 June 2000, when Ethiopia and Eritrea
signed the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities
mediated by the OAU, both countries have succeeded
in exercising restraint, and relative peace and
tranquillity have prevailed in the border region. At the
same time, the two countries have begun a new round
of indirect talks under the auspices of the OAU on the
question of delimitation of the border and
compensation. The momentum for political resolution
of the conflict has led to new progress. Under these
circumstances, the active involvement and energetic
support of the international community, and
particularly of the United Nations, are of crucial
importance.

We are happy to note that last month the Security
Council adopted resolution 1312 (2000), on the
establishment of UNMEE. Today we have received a
report from the Secretary-General on increasing the
number of Mission personnel and expanding its
mandate. The Chinese delegation has noted with
appreciation that prior to submitting this report, the
Secretary-General sent a reconnaissance mission to
engage in field survey and research and to hold
consultations and act in coordination with the
Ethiopian and Eritrean Governments and the OAU. We
hope the recommendations contained in the report are
clear and concrete and that they constitute a good
framework.
The effective implementation of these
recommendations will facilitate the course of
reconciliation and an early political settlement of the
dispute between these two countries, as well as peace
and stability throughout the Horn of Africa. The
Chinese delegation takes a positive attitude towards
these goals. We hope the Security Council, on the basis
of consultations held with the Ethiopian and Eritrean
Governments and the OAU, will take early action on
the basis of the Secretary-General's recommendations
and formally decide on the number of Mission
personnel and its mandate. The Chinese delegation will
actively participate in the relevant discussions and
consultations and will submit its views.

At the same time, we hope the Secretariat will
engage in early research on possible sources of troops
and resources, and will launch, as early as possible,
relevant preparatory work.

The Chinese delegation is also deeply concerned
about the humanitarian situation in both Ethiopia and
Eritrea. We appreciate the work done by relevant
United Nations organizations in this regard. We call on
the international community to step up its involvement
on the basis of its current work and to contribute even
more towards alleviating the humanitarian crisis in
these two countries.

