Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): It is always a pleasure for Equatorial
Guinea to listen to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, and above all
a source of great satisfaction to hear of the important
advances being made in the political process in Syria.
We reiterate our thanks for his admirable commitment
and thank Ms. Sabah Al Hallak for her briefing.

Having welcomed the formation of the
Constitutional Committee at our previous briefing
(see S/PV.8645), the Government of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea now welcomes the convening of the
Committee's first meeting in Geneva on 30 October
and the approval of the composition of the drafting
group for the future Syrian constitution. This is a truly
important and hopeful moment as the outcome of the
first agreement between the Syrian parties since the
adoption of resolution 2254 (2015). We believe that it is
now essential for the Committee to participate in serious
and substantial discussions to achieve positive and
tangible results that serve the interests and aspirations
of the entire Syrian people.

We welcome the high level of representation in
the Committee of a broad segment of civil society, of
various ethnic and religious groups and of different
political movements, and we recall that their work
must be undertaken in respect for the Charter of the
United Nations, the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and such indisputable principles as respect for
the unity, independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria.

Furthermore, we share the opinion that the
Constitutional Committee must be governed in its
work by the search for consensus and constructive
interaction, without external interference and without
outside deadlines, in order to reach a general agreement
among its members that would allow for the broadest
possible support among the Syrian people for its
work. However, we must be aware that this is only a
first step towards the political and peaceful settlement
of the crisis, because after this first step we will still
have 1,000 miles to go, since the Committee is not
the crowning goal of all efforts to achieve a durable
conflict resolution.

We also believe that attempts to present the
resolution of the conflict as depending only on the work
of the Constitutional Committee represent the wrong
approach. The war will end when we have put a halt to
hostilities across the country and to terrorism. The fight
against terrorism in Syria is an indispensable condition
for advancing the process of a political solution. Syrians
have the same right as everyone else to live free from
terrorists in their own country. Equatorial Guinea does
not believe that it is possible to make progress in the
political process if the guns continue to roar, hundreds
of innocent lives are annihilated time and again, and
mass population displacements occur.

I reiterate that there is no military solution to the
war or an alternative to a political solution and that the
improvement of relations between the Syrian parties
regarding the release of prisoners and humanitarian aid
is in the interest of the political process. Any process of
any kind in Syria must respect the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of the country and involve the Syrians
themselves as the main actors and protagonists, since it
is the future of their own country that is at stake. There
must be no imposed solutions.

