Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): I very much welcome
this opportunity to participate in the Council's meeting
on Sierra Leone in my capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific meetings
on Sierra Leone. My last statement in that capacity
before the Security Council dates back to 17 October,
when I participated in the Council's debate on the
Peacebuilding Commission (see S/PV.5761). On that
2

occasion, I briefed the Council on my recent visit to
Sierra Leone and the discussions with the newly
elected Government of Sierra Leone on the draft
peacebuilding cooperation framework.

Today I would like to brief the Council on a key
development since then. On 12 December - only two
days ago - at a formal Peacebuilding Commission
meeting attended by Her Excellency Zainab Bangura,
Foreign Minister of Sierra Leone, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Government of Sierra Leone
adopted the Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework.
The Framework will guide the work of the Commission
and the Government of Sierra Leone over the next
three years and will address the challenges and threats
most critical to sustaining and consolidating peace in
Sierra Leone.

The Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework was
developed through an intensive consultative process
over the last several months involving all major
stakeholders both here in New York and in Freetown. It
contains commitments on the part of the Government
of Sierra Leone and the Peacebuilding Commission in
the areas of good governance, security and justice
sector reform, youth employment and empowerment,
energy sector development and capacity-building. In
addition, it addresses subregional dimensions of
peacebuilding and the cross-cutting issue of gender
equality. The Commission will use the Framework to
enhance dialogue and strengthen partnerships between
Sierra Leone and its international partners and to
mobilize additional resources needed for peace
consolidation efforts.

The development of this Cooperation Framework
and its adoption represent another major milestone in
Sierra Leone's journey from conflict to peace, stability
and prosperity. Despite the significant progress in
peace consolidation in Sierra Leone, many of the root
causes of conflict still need to be addressed. Additional
efforts are also needed to reconcile the country, reform
governance institutions and address the dire socio-
economic conditions of the people.

The primary responsibility to address these
challenges rests with the people and the Government of
Sierra Leone. At the same time, it is equally important
to acknowledge that the international community,
including the United Nations, should remain engaged
in the country and continue to support national efforts
for peacebuilding and recovery. The Peacebuilding
07-64475
Commission was created specifically to ensure
sustained engagement and support by the international
community for countries recovering from conflict. The
Framework adopted the day before yesterday will
ensure Sierra Leone's cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission and the commitment of all
stakeholders in the Commission, on the basis of
national ownership, mutual accountability and
sustained engagement.

By encouraging implementation of the
commitments contained in the Framework, the
Peacebuilding Commission can play, and will play, a
critical role in support of the new Government and in
meeting the high expectations of the people of Sierra
Leone.

In this regard, I would welcome continued
support from the Security Council in ensuring
constructive engagement of all stakeholders in the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission. I also use this
opportunity to call on all stakeholders to live up to the
commitments made through the Cooperation
Framework by considering and offering additional and
concrete support to address the identified priorities.
07-64475

With the Framework in hand, we now have the
opportunity to provide focused support to a country
that has emerged from conflict but that is still
struggling to address those factors that could trigger a
relapse into conflict, in spite of the good progress that
has been made in many areas. In other words, we now
have the opportunity to do what the Peacebuilding
Commission was created for.

Finally, I would like to request that, in extending
the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Sierra Leone, the Security Council mandate the Office
to continue to support the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the implementation of the newly
adopted Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework.

