Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Kobler and Mr. Skoog
for their briefings.

We regret to note that, despite the efforts being made
by the international community to resolve the internal
political crisis in Libya, the situation is not improving.
We are concerned that the fragmentation of the country
and its public administration system are hindering the
solution of the numerous problems that the country
faces in the fields of security and socioeconomics.
Libya is still painfully recovering from the impact of
the political intervention of 2011.

The ongoing confrontation between Tripoli and

Tobruk has led to an actual paralysis of the Government's
administrative system. One of the latest alarm signals
of general instability is the fighting in the area of the
so-called oil crescent, as well as in the south of the
country. Against the backdrop of the power vacuum,
we have seen the presence of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and Al-Qaeda, as well as the activities
of local extremist groups. The problem of the spread
of terrorism is especially urgent, given Libya's porous
borders and the absence of centralized law-enforcement
agencies. We are concerned that as a result of counter-
terrorist actions, some militants have subsequently
scattered to various corners of the country, which might
lead to the formation of sleeper cells.
The negative impact of the situation in Libya is
being felt in Europe, which has had to deal with the
influx of illegal migrants trying to cross over to the
European continent from Libyan territory. Similar
problems include the aggravated problems of cross-
border crime, arms smuggling and drug trafficking.

We see a potentially constructive role played by
Libya's neighbours in suppressing such threats. We
note the importance of the implementation of resolution
2259 (2015), which established the Libyan Political
Agreement as the basis for the settlement ofthe conflict.
Unfortunately, there has been almost no progress in
implementing the Skhirat Agreement. The main tasks
of the transition period have not been fulfilled. For
example, the work on the text of the Constitution has not
been completed, general elections have not been held,
and as a result permanent bodies of power still need be
formed. It is good that the Libyan parties have declared
their readiness for dialogue, but additional efforts will
be required in order to reach a clear understanding of
the parameters of national reconciliation, including the
formation of national authorities.

The Presidency Council in Tripoli cannot seriously
expand the base of its support and become an institution
of power trusted by broad sections of the population
throughout the country. The capital is controlled by
numerous armed groups and not all of them are loyal
to the Presidency Council. The prospects for the
establishment of the Presidential Guard are still unclear.
Moreover, it is unclear how its formation connects with
the key task of creating unified power structures. The
membership of the Government of National Accord has
not been endorsed by the House of Representatives, as
required by the Skhirat Agreement.

The myriad interrelated problems dictate the urgent
need for vigorous international support for the political
process in Libya, which could reduce the likelihood of
further negative development of the situation on the
ground. There is no alternative to continuing, under the
auspices of the United Nations, to work painstakingly
with the representatives of all major political forces,
regions and tribal groups. It is necessary to help them
overcome their internal disagreements and find mutually
acceptable solutions to the remaining controversial
issues. That work needs to be intensified and provided
with specific ideas. We cannot leave anyone on the
sidelines, as some Western countries have done with
the introduction of unilateral sanctions. In that case,
the gradual return to the country of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya must be strictly related to the
security situation.

Libya should not allow room for unhealthy
competition, which will only complicate the prospects
for settlement. Therefore, we attach great importance
to the consolidation of international efforts, including
their important elements in forums such as the African
Union, the League of Arab States and neighbouring
countries of Libya. The development of a common
position by regional forces would be very helpful, since
a stable and secure Libya would meet their long-term
interests. We look forward to continuing the work of
the Rome format, with the participation of all interested
parties. It would be wrong to allow its fragmentation
and gradual demise.

One of the key areas that requires our attention is
the promotion of the unification of power structures. At
the same time, it would be a mistake to marginalize the
Libyan National Army, since the Army could form the
basis for future unified armed forces. A united Libyan
National Army under central command could become
a reliable recipient of international military assistance.
Given the current uncertainty, we believe that it would
be premature to start talking about the full or partial
lifting of the arms embargo imposed on Libya by
Security Council decision.

The fate of the country should be decided by the
Libyans themselves. Trying to provide them with
ready-made solutions is counterproductive. That said,
at the heart of the Libyan political process should be
the refusal of all parties involved to resolve the crisis
through force. The only way out of the impasse must
be found through joint efforts at the negotiating table.

We believe that it is a mistake for some capitals to
support Tripoli against Tubruq. We should not pit one
set of Libyans against another. That kind of one-sided
policy has become a reason for the slow-down of the
political process. We would like to hope that the many
foreign military presences in Libya will not contribute
to the further disintegration of the country and its
institutions. The efforts of European countries to fight
the illegal migration passing through Libyan territory
and the measures they have taken to do so should not go
further than their declared purposes.

Russia's position is consistent. Guided by the
priority task of maintaining the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Libya, we have been working
with all the power centres by encouraging them to
overcome their differences. Given Libya's particular
situation, it is the only proper approach.

In general, the international community faces the
difficult task of preventing the country's disintegration
and collapse. It is in our interests to ensure that
Libya emerges from its protracted crisis as quickly as
possible, that it re-emerges as a stable State, sustained
by its strong institutions, a functional army and law-
enforcement structure and that it can regain its status
as an important player in the Middle East. A strong,
lasting settlement would not only respond to the hopes
and interests of the Libyans themselves, it would also
have a salutary effect on the Middle East and North
Africa in general. For that, we need coordinated action
on the part of all interested parties, and we are ready
for such cooperation.

