Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I wish to convey my best wishes to Ambassador
Traore of Guinea as he leaves the Security Council. I
also wish to express my gratitude to Mr. Oshima for the
vital work he has done in the humanitarian field, and in
particular in the area of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

I would like to digress from the excellent notes
that have been prepared by members of my delegation,
to tell Mr. Oshima and the Council that the subject of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict is probably
at the very heart of the credibility of the United
Nations, given that the Organization is expected to
protect people in real-life crises. In that regard, we note
that women, children and older persons are
increasingly the main victims of armed conflict. That
means that the task of protecting civilians is absolutely
essential; otherwise people will have the impression
that the Organization is unable to be effective or
operational in addressing such a basic priority as
protecting innocent human beings in armed conflict.

Therefore, my country, along with a number of
other States Members of the Organization, has for
some time been very interested in taking part in a
human security network aimed at changing the focus of
security, which has traditionally been State-centred.
There is certainly a State dimension to security; but
there is also a human dimension. Ultimately, our
concern is the real impact of conflict on real flesh-and-
blood human beings. In that context, it seems to us that
the concept of human security that has been developed
is directly related to the humanitarian efforts outlined
to us by Mr. Oshima.

In reality, the availability of weapons during and
after an armed conflict means that the main victims are
innocent people, especially children. We have seen that
in Central America, where there have been many
deaths after the end of civil wars due to anti-personnel
mines and the availability of weapons that end up in
the hands of criminal groups. The result is the death of
many thousands of civilians. There is also the issue of
the availability of small arms and light weapons, about
which the Organization has expressed its concern. It
therefore seems to us that this is truly a fundamental
concern.

The danger lies in the fact that the vulnerable are
sometimes not merely victims of armed conflict; as
Mr. Oshima has said, they are often the explicit targets
of armed groups. He mentioned the case of Colombia,
a neighbouring Latin American country where the
killing and kidnapping of civilians clearly indicate that
civilians are no longer chance victims but, rather, the
main targets of terrorist acts.

With regard to how to respond to this, I would
like to commend the work described to us by
Mr. Oshima to raise awareness of this issue - for
example, the holding of regional workshops. We are of
course prepared to participate actively in the regional
workshop in Latin America and the Caribbean.

Apart from the great importance of that work,
however, we believe that, in the end, it is vital that
violations of humanitarian norms result in concrete
punishment in the competent courts. In other words,
humanitarian crimes must not go unpunished. The sole
lesson should be that those who perpetrate these crimes
will be punished and put in jail. Years may sometimes
pass, but sooner or later those who commit these
crimes must be brought before a court. We believe that
is the best lesson that can be taught in order to prevent
violations of humanitarian law in armed conflict and to
avoid having civilians suffer the worst consequences of
these conflicts. Emphasis must therefore be placed on
punishment and on ending impunity. We consider that
to be fundamental, without prejudice to the other
initiatives described to us by Mr. Oshima, which we
support most enthusiastically.

Finally, in addition to expressing our support to
Mr. Oshima, we would also like to state our backing
for the idea put forward by Norway and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to establish a
support group in the area of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We wish Mr. Oshima the best of
luck, and we emphasize that what he has referred to in
his semi-annual report is of the utmost importance to
the Organization and the Council.

