Mr. Crowley (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to express its appreciation you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting on this very important
subject underpinning the collective efforts of the States
Members of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We also wish to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his briefing to the Council earlier
today.

South Africa aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Egypt on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Today's United Nations peacekeepers are mostly
deployed in situations of intra-State conflict, therefore
necessitating both the deployment of formed and
civilian components to deal with the complexity of the
challenges confronting conflict-affected States. The
multidimensional approach to peacekeeping has shown
to be an effective tool to address modern-day conflict
situations. Ten of the current 14 peacekeeping missions
that are configured in that manner bear testimony to
that fact.

The multidimensional peacekeeping approach
has also, over the years, proven to be an international
peacebuilding instrument that has contributed to laying
the foundation for sustainable peace and democratic
governance. United Nations peacekeeping therefore
continues to occupy a central role in the functioning
of the collective security system established by the
Charter of the United Nations.

The deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
forces gives rise to high expectations at the international,
regional and national levels, especially among the
civilian population of the host State who are generally
caught in the cross-fire of conflict and who bear the
brunt of the conflicts. It is therefore an understandable
and credible expectation that political support should
translate into concrete outcomes through, inter
alia, technical and financial support, as well as the
anticipated transfer of expertise and resources during
the lifespan ofa peacekeeping/peacebuilding mission.

Security Council resolutions that mandate such
peacekeeping missions must not only be realistic,
achievable and well-resourced, but they must be able
to meet those expectations. Consistency and coherence
are imperative in that regard, and the Security Council
must be responsive to the calls of the affected parties to
a dispute or conflict. Selectivity in its responsiveness
must be avoided in order for multidimensional
peacekeeping to be truly effective.

Human rights components, by means of an example,
should not be avoided in some multidimensional
peacekeeping missions for the sake of political
expediency. Such an approach has only proven to
prolong some conflicts. The Security Council must
ensure that its decisions are upheld in promoting
international peace and security and to avoid selective
approaches that end up disappointing populations who
yearn for the realization of their legitimate aspirations.

Peacekeeping missions provide a security umbrella
through the presence of uniformed personnel and
contribute to preserving the political space. As the first
United Nations presence in the field, peacekeepers are
correctly considered as the entry point for peacebuilding,
upon which other stakeholders, including the host
Governments, will build in designing a peacebuilding
architecture. National ownership of that architecture,
however, remains paramount.
Multidimensional peacekeeping missions have the
combined presence of political, military, technical and
other specialized expertise and skill sets. Peacebuilding
components are intrinsic in such peacekeeping
missions, which present a comparative advantage at the
onset of a mission's deployment.

Peacekeeping missions are enablers that provide
assistance at critical moments in the aftermath of
conflict and bring expertise in the form of security
sector reform, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, the rule of law, human rights, electoral
assistance and other civilian affairs. Regular and joint
consultations and assessments by the peacekeeping
mission and the host Government during the security
phase are critical in edging towards or determining the
transition to a peacebuilding phase.

The Secretary-General's 2009 report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) is instructive in providing a broad
framework that highlights five recurring priorities for
United Nations engagement in peacebuilding. The first
is the delivery of basic safety and security for citizens;
secondly, inclusive political processes; thirdly, the
provision of basic services; fourthly, the restoration
of core Government functions; and, fifthly, economic
revitalization.

In that regard, we have witnessed the value of strong
national ownership and leadership in the formulation
of peacebuilding priorities in the cases of the Timor-
Leste, Liberia and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan.

For multidimensional peacekeeping missions to be
truly effective, mandate reviews must be informed by
periodic and focused reviews contained in the reports
of the Secretary-General. The views of all the relevant
stakeholders in the field, including those of the host
country, must be included in such reports. The views of
the troop-contributing countries in that regard, together
with those of the Secretariat and the Security Council,
are imperative. In that way, the host country's needs can
influence United Nations supply on the peacebuilding
front and on the reconstruction phase.

Finally, my delegation wishes to acknowledge the
contributions made by the thousands of men and women
deployed by our respective countries to serve under the
United Nations flag in dealing with very dangerous and
complex situations around the world. We wish, in that
regard, to pay special homage to those who have fallen
in the cause of the noble endeavour to make the world a
safe and secure place.
