Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Peru for taking the initiative to convene today's
debate. I also thank the three briefers for their briefings.

Peacekeeping operations are an effective tool for
the United Nations in maintaining international peace
and security. The Security Council, troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and police-contributing countries
(PCCs), and the Secretariat are three important
components involved in peacekeeping operations.
Strengthening triangular cooperation among them is
crucial to enhancing the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations. In 2018, the Secretary-General proposed the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, while 151 Member
States endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, making
commitments to strengthening consultations between
peacekeeping stakeholders on mandates and their
implementation and giving new impetus to advancing
triangular cooperation.

China wishes to make the following comments
on strengthening triangular cooperation in
peacekeeping operations.

First, improving the mandates given by the
Security Council is a precondition. The mandates of
peacekeeping operations should adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the basic principles guiding peacekeeping operations,
while remaining closely aligned with the fundamental
goal of a political solution. The formulation of
mandates must be tailored to conditions on the ground
and correspond to the needs and actual situations of the
countries concerned. The mandates of peacekeeping
operations should be clear and specific to facilitate
political solutions. The priorities and focus of each
phase need to be updated continuously according to the
dynamics and needs.

Secondly, improving the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations is crucial. The Secretariat
should optimize the logistical support mechanism
to ensure more efficient support and adequate
peacekeeping resources. Attention should be paid to
strengthening training in order to effectively help the
TCCs and PCCs improve their ability to implement
their mandates and respond to complex situations. More
attention should be paid to the safety and security of
peacekeepers. The Secretariat and the missions should
adopt integrated measures, develop safety and security
rules, improve early warning and response capabilities,
enhance information collection and sharing, improve
security equipment and protection measures, and
strengthen medical rescue and life-saving capabilities.

Thirdly, building stronger partnerships serves
as a buttress. The Security Council meetings with
TCCs and PCCs should be better utilized to promote
more comprehensive and in-depth discussions. The
role of the Council's Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations should be better leveraged to serve as
a channel of communication among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the TCCs and PCCs so as
to forge synergy and resolve practical problems. The
penholders of the Security Council should strengthen
communication with the TCCs and PCCs in the process
of drafting relevant draft resolutions on peacekeeping
operations, to learn the actual needs and tailor the
mandates authorized by the Council's resolutions, with
greater attention paid to improving actual results.

China is a permanent member of the Security
Council, as well as a major TCC and a major financial
contributor to peacekeeping operations. China is a firm
supporter of and an important participant in the United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Currently, we are
comprehensively implementing the multiple pledges
made by Chinese President Xi Jinping to further
support United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We have already established a peacekeeping standby
force of 8,000 troops and two peacekeeping standby
police units. At present, more than 2,500 Chinese keep
peacekeepers are implementing mandates in eight
mission areas.

China attaches great importance to and is ready
to actively participate in triangular cooperation in
peacekeeping operations. We support the Security
Council in strengthening communication with the TCCs
and PCCs and the Secretariat, and in working together to
improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
China would like to leverage the China-United Nations
Peace and Development Fund and its own advantages
in the area of training and strengthened coordination
with the Secretariat to focus on building the capacity
of developing TCCs. Through concrete actions, China
will continue to make its own contributions to enhance
the capacity ofUnited Nations peacekeeping operations
and honour its commitments towards peace.

