Mr. Kolby (Norway): We are meeting at a time of
great uncertainty. Many people are concerned. At the
same time, the Council has given Iraq one last chance
to comply with the demands of the international
community.

Time has not run out. The use of force is not
unavoidable. We must do everything in our power to
achieve a peaceful solution. But for this to happen, it
requires the immediate, active and unconditional
cooperation of Iraq, as stated in Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002).

It is with the greatest concern that we note that
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, in their reports to the
Security Council on 27 January and again on 14
February, described Iraqi cooperation on process, but
no real breakthrough on substance.

The United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) need
urgent answers to their highly important and legitimate
questions. What has happened to the weapons of mass
destruction that remain unaccounted for?

We should not have to beg for these answers. Iraq
is required to provide them. They should have been
given a long time ago.

Norway agrees that the inspections should
continue. But more inspectors or better equipment
cannot by themselves resolve the outstanding issues.
We want to recognize the valuable efforts that
UNMOVIC and the IAEA are undertaking under
difficult conditions. But, as Mr. Blix stated last Friday,
the period of disarmament through inspections could be
short if Iraq chose to cooperate fully, as required.

It is a challenge to the Council and an affront to
the international community at large that Iraq is
withholding full cooperation.

The authorities in Baghdad cannot fail to
understand that it is in their hands only to demonstrate
how present uncertainties can be eliminated and a
peaceful outcome ensured.
As a former member of the Security Council that
supported the adoption of resolution 1441 (2002),
Norway wishes to make the following points.

First, any further steps with regard to Iraq must
be anchored in the Security Council, as the pre-eminent
body responsible for upholding international peace and
security.

Secondly, we will see progress only if pressure is
upheld. The international community must therefore
remain united in its approach to Iraq. Similarly, it is of
utmost importance that the members of the Security
Council seek a common approach.

Thirdly, and most importantly, Iraq must
recognize the full extent of the serious consequences
stated in resolution 1441 (2002), while terminating 12
years of disregard for the authority of our world
Organization. This would pave the way for the peaceful
outcome that we all seek.

