Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes Mr. Ramos-Horta,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-
Leste, who has made a special trip to attend today's
open meeting. We thank him for his detailed briefing
on the current situation in Timor-Leste.

We should also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Hasegawa for
his briefing on the Secretary-General's report and the
latest developments in Timor-Leste.

In 15 days, Timor-Leste will celebrate the fourth
anniversary of its independence. Over the past four
years, with the strong support of the international
community, the Government and people of Timor-Leste
have registered admirable achievements. Today, the
young Timor-Leste is already firmly on the path of
peaceful nation-building. China takes this opportunity
to congratulate the people and Government of Timor-
Leste.

We cannot forget that - from the United Nations
Mission in East Timor to the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, from the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor to the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) -
the United Nations staff and the people of Timor-Leste
have, with great effort, jointly written a proud success
story and provided valuable experiences for United
Nations peacekeeping operations and post-conflict
reconstruction. As the mandate of UNOTIL draws to an
end, I wish to thank and pay tribute to all its staff,
Mr. Hasegawa and all his predecessors.

While we are pleased at the achievements made
in Timor-Leste thus far, we should also be aware of the
fact that Timor-Leste is one of the youngest and
poorest countries in the world and that the path of
peaceful nation-building remains difficult and
challenging. The presidential and parliamentary
elections scheduled for 2007 not only represent an
arduous undertaking for Timor-Leste but also
constitute a real test of the results of the support
provided that country by the international community
and the United Nations.

As stated in the report of the Secretary-General,
that test must be successful. The recent unfortunate
incidents in Timor-Leste are a warning that the
situation in Timor-Leste remains fragile, and past
experience in peacekeeping operations also tells us that
we must redouble our resolute efforts, especially when
success is in sight.

Against that backdrop, the Chinese delegation
welcomes and supports the request made by the
Government of Timor-Leste for the continued support
of the United Nations. We fully endorse the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that an
integrated United Nations office be established. We
look forward to conducting serious consultations with
other members of the Council and to reaching
agreement as soon as possible.

