Mr. Henze (Germany): I should like to thank the
Secretary-General for his valuable, stimulating and timely
report supplementing "An Agenda for Peace". We believe
it to be particularly important for the United Nations in its
fiftieth year to re-examine its role in the maintenance of
international peace and security in the light of the
developments of the last years. The supplemental report
sums up recent discussions and experiences in a very
relevant way.

We fully share the positions set out in the statement to
be delivered by the French Presidency on behalf of the
European Union. I should like to concentrate my remarks
on issues to which we attach particular importance. These
are preventive diplomacy; post-conflict peace-building;
sanctions; and certain aspects of peace-keeping.

We share the Secretary-General's appreciation of the
paramount importance of preventive diplomacy. We also
understand that practical mechanisms and measures to
implement preventive diplomacy are more difficult to
define. In this context, we support the suggestion of the
Secretary-General, to establish, whenever necessary, small
support missions for special envoys on the ground. The
decisions would be taken by the Secretary-General, based
on all available information and on the understanding that
the Security Council be kept informed.

In all conflict and pre-conflict negotiating processes,
sufficient time and a virtually constant presence on the
ground are important conditions for success. In the past,
formal United Nations missions were set up only when a
conflict had reached a certain level of intensity. But even
in these cases the preliminary dispatch of a limited number
of observers under the authority of the Secretary-General
can be required when negotiations have reached a certain
stage and quick reactions are necessary, as was recently the
case in Tajikistan.

In this context, I should like to mention that Germany
has completed a list of personalities ready to perform tasks
in the area of preventive diplomacy. This list is being
presented to the Secretary-General, during his current visit
to Germany, in response to his concern about a lack of
experienced personnel. I should also like to point out that
we have significantly stepped up our new programme for
democratization aid and electoral assistance. In 1994 we
granted substantial assistance in these fields to 12 countries.
In doing so, we accorded special attention to countries in
which United Nations operations had taken place, such as
Ethiopia, South Africa and Mozambique.
Another important element of preventive diplomacy
is respect for human rights. Experience has taught us that
societies in which human rights are upheld and where
democratic structures exist are less prone to conflict.
Therefore, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights deserves our unequivocal support, and the
Centre for Human Rights should be strengthened. We
welcome the increased attention that the United Nations
is paying to the integration of human rights aspects into
its development programmes. The importance of respect
for human rights in regard to conflict prevention should
also be increasingly considered in the context of
peace-keeping and, even more so in post-conflict
peace-building.

Economic and social development are basic elements
of conflict prevention. We therefore support the
Secretary-General in his efforts to complement an Agenda
for Peace with an Agenda for Development.

In his report the Secretary-General rightly points to
the goal of post-conflict peace-building - the creation of
structures for the institutionalization of peace. In order for
this to be done successfully, the transition from a
peace-keeping operation to the establishment of new
structures that could consolidate the peace has to be well
prepared. We have not yet developed a consolidated
conceptual approach to this end. Until now, either United
Nations peace-keeping operations have ended more or less
abruptly without any significant period of transition, as in
the case most recently of Mozambique, or the United
Nations has pursued peace-building tasks for years
thereafter, as, for example, most successfully in El
Salvador. Naturally, each case is different, but we should
attempt to elaborate ways and means to ensure a certain
degree of follow-up after the formal end of a United
Nations peace-keeping operation.

Especially in cases in which programmes for the
reconstruction of political and administrative structures
are part of a peace-keeping operation, we should avoid
terminating them prematurely, before assistance in the
field through other channels is assured. I refer in
particular to the areas of police and justice. It is essential
to provide a secure environment for the reintegration of
refugees and for economic recovery. Frequently, countries
re-emerging from conflicts have difficulties in recruiting
civil servants, let alone in paying their salaries. Often,

 

democratic elections are not the true end of a conflict, as
we have seen in Cambodia and Angola. It is contradictory,
and not a good investment, to launch a costly
peace-keeping operation and then withdraw without trying
to consolidate the results of that operation.

In addition, we might study possibilities for funnelling
development aid into post-conflict peace-building
projects - in particular, those funds that are generally
available but were blocked when a conflict began. To
ensure smooth transition from a United Nations
peace-keeping operation to an economic cooperation
programme, close coordination between the peace-keeping
operation and the relevant agencies is required. This need
for coordination should be considered in the drafting of the
initial mandate of a peace-keeping operation, as appropriate.

Institutional contacts should be established with
relevant international financial and development
organizations - if possible, at the beginning of a
peace-keeping operation - in order to prepare, at an early
stage, for the transition to post-conflict peace-building.
Contacts should also be established with governmental and
non- governmental organizations. Moreover, we should study
the possibility of instituting, on a regular basis, very small
transitional teams that would continue to be present in the
country of conflict, ready to ensure and monitor the
transition of the mandate, to observe, to counsel, to provide
good offices and to sound the alarm when things go wrong.

Turning to the issue of sanctions, we support more
precision in the definition of their regimes and closer
monitoring of their impact, especially on third countries, as
proposed by the Secretary-General. We remain convinced
that the imposition of sanctions is a necessary instrument of
coercion at the disposal of the Security Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter, especially if the use of military
force is to be avoided. Nonetheless, we feel that the time
has come to consider ways and means to ensure more
precise targeting. This will not only be more effective in
bringing about the desired result, but will also strengthen
the credibility and authority of the Security Council.
Thought should also be given to whether sanctions could be
targeted at those individuals who bear particular
responsibility for the event that gave rise to their
imposition.

In his report, the Secretary-General proposed the
establishment of a mechanism to carry out, inter alia,
impact assessment and monitoring functions. Inasmuch as
we harbour some doubts as to whether, in the light of the
urgency imposed by events giving rise to sanctions, it
would be practical to conduct an in-depth impact
assessment before sanctions are imposed, we agree that a
preliminary assessment should form a part of the basis for
decision-making by the Security Council. An extensive
impact assessment should, however, be conducted
immediately following the adoption of sanctions so that
necessary adjustments might be made in a timely fashion.
To this end, it would indeed be useful to establish within
the Secretariat a capacity to prepare such assessments and
monitor the application of sanctions continuously, in close
coordination with relevant international financial and
development institutions and to report regularly to the
Sanctions Committees.

In addition, we agree with the Secretary-General that
it is necessary for the Security Council, in its resolutions,
to define clearly the objectives of sanctions and the
conditions under which they can be terminated. In our
view, a high degree of clarity and predictability will also
command a high degree of authority and implementation
and, accordingly, of success.

Durable peace and international stability will to a
large degree depend on the implementation of an effective
system of collective security under the roof of the United
Nations. To this end, the United Nations must be in a
position to react with peace-keeping operations in a
credible and efficient way. Germany supports the concept
of stand-by arrangements proposed by the Secretary-
General. German armed forces are at the moment being
fundamentally restructured, a process that will lead, step
by step, to more capabilities in the areas of crisis reaction
and peace-keeping. Therefore, we are not yet in a position
to earmark specific troop contingents, but we shall do so
upon request. As Foreign Minister Kinkel declared in the
General Assembly on 27 September 1994, we are
prepared to contribute.

We also support the Secretary-General's proposal to
create a reserve stock of standard peace-keeping
equipment for those national contingents that are not
adequately equipped. Even before the creation of such a
stock, Germany has in the past, through the United
Nations, equipped such contingents - for example, the
contingents from Pakistan and Bangladesh in the former
Yugoslavia.

We once again thank the Secretary-General for his
stimulating report. We agree with him that there is no
reason for frustration or pessimism. Let us not forget the
success the United Nations has had in, for example,
Namibia, Cambodia, El Salvador and Mozambique. And

 

the Secretary-General's report itself and our discussion
today are ample proof that the United Nations is capable
and ready to respond to current challenges. In this spirit we
look forward to continuing the review of the Secretary-
General's report in the Security Council.

