Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing on the latest
developments in Ukraine and the status of the issues
being dealt with by the good offices of the United
Nations. Argentina continues to follow the situation
in Ukraine very closely and remains concerned by the
developments in the eastern regions of the country.

With regard to the election process of last Sunday,
Argentina, as a matter of principle and of general policy,
does not comment on the results of elections, which are
by their very nature under the exclusive jurisdiction of
each State. We reiterate that due respect must be paid
to Ukraine's conduct of its internal affairs, without
any type of interference or intervention, be it military,
political or economic, in matters that are under its own
jurisdiction. Argentina respects the decision of the
people of Ukraine.

We have repeatedly emphasized the need to
establish conditions conducive to restarting the
urgent dialogue process. We hope that the presidential
elections held on 25 May will contribute to that and
to a decrease in tensions by decreasing the risk of
new violent confrontations and decreasing the spiral
of violence, which if it continues, would have severe
repercussions on the stability not only of Ukraine, but
also the region. The actions of armed groups, unilateral
actions and the human rights violations and abuses will
only deepen the crisis and put the security and living
conditions of the civilian population at risk.

We are concerned about reports of the disappearance
of four members of the international observers team
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, who have not been heard from since Monday.
In that connection, we call on all parties concerned to
take every possible step to ensure that the observers
are immediately released unharmed. In particular,
Member States with influence on the parties should
bring positive pressure to bear to that end.

We are convinced that the only solution to the crisis
in Ukraine is political and diplomatic. Therefore, we
reiterate our call on all parties to exercise maximum
self-restraint and contribute to a constructive dialogue.
In that vein, the effective implementation by all parties
of the measures agreed on in Geneva continues to be
necessary to making progress in a dialogue process,
which will encourage confidence between the various
communities and assure all Ukrainians throughout the
country that their main concerns and rights will be
cared for.

Any violation or abuse of human rights is
unjustifiable. The cases of killings, torture, abduction,
harassment, illegal detention and intimidation must be
investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice.
We therefore call on all the national and regional
authorities of Ukraine to take effective steps not only
to prevent human rights violations and protect human
rights, but also to ensure that all security forces respect
those rights.

Once again, we reaffirm that the international
community should, on the one hand, focus its efforts on
ensuring that the parties enter a constructive dialogue
with full respect for human rights, international
humanitarian law and respect for the rights of all
minorities and, on the other, act strictly within the
framework of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations, with the objective of achieving
domestic peace in the country and creating a climate
conducive to sustainable, inclusive and prosperous
development.

