Ms. Millar (Australia): Australia welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan of
7March and supports the renewal of and proposed
adjustments to the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission to Afghanistan (UNAMA). That
includes the continued political and good offices role
for UNAMA in Afghanistan, such as its efforts to assist
in the implementation of the Afghanistan Compact
agreed at the London Conference on Afghanistan,
which the Australian Foreign Minister, Mr. Alexander
Downer, attended. Australia also supports UNAMA's
continued humanitarian and development coordination
efforts.

The Afghanistan Compact, signed at the London
Conference on Afghanistan held on 31 January and
lFebruary, provides a clear and agreed strategic
framework for the next phase of reconstruction
activities in Afghanistan. Australia applauds the
completion of the process set out in the Bonn
Agreement and welcomes the Compact's focus on
Afghan leadership of the next phase, clear bench-
marking of activities, and the ongoing political and
financial support pledged by the international
community at the Conference. That support includes
Australia's latest commitment of up to $150 million
over the next five years, which follows the $110
million Australia had committed since 2001 and which
is now fully disbursed.

Australia remains concerned about the damage
done in Afghanistan by years of conflict. We share the
concern of the Secretary-General at the many issues
that present challenges to the short- and longer-term
stability and security of Afghanistan that have not yet
been resolved. In his earlier reports to the Council, the
Secretary-General expressed concern at the increasing
trends in violence and challenges to State authority.

But alongside those worrying trends are outcomes
of great promise. Significant among those are the
Afghan National Assembly Lower House elections,
held on 18 September 2005, in which some 6.4 million
Afghans took part; the inauguration of the National
Assembly on 19 December and the associated
commencement of parliamentary debate and business;
the agreement on 26 January between the Afghan
Government and international partners on a national
Disbandment of Illegal Armed Groups strategy; the
ongoing reform and rebuilding of the police and army;
and the Afghan Government's counter-narcotics
programme, the success of which will be crucial to
longer-term stability and good governance.

Australia agrees with the Secretary-General that
the human rights situation remains challenging and
encourages the Afghan Government to continue its
efforts in this area so as to meet domestic and
international commitments fully.

Australia remains fully committed to playing its
part in the efforts of the international community to
support the reconstruction of Afghanistan. Alongside
our further financial commitment of 150 million
Australian dollars, Australia has also recently
announced an additional military deployment of up to
200 personnel as a contribution to a provincial
reconstruction team. This is in addition to our current
Special Forces Task Group and aviation support
element, which includes two CH-47 helicopters. In the
context of today's debate, we are also proud to note
that we provide direct support to UNAMA through the
provision of an Australian Defence Force officer as a
military adviser to UNAMA.

Australia will continue to support Afghanistan's
transition from conflict to peace and democracy. We
congratulate the United Nations on its efforts to date
and agree that the proposed adjustments will allow
UNAMA, in providing support to the Government and
people of Afghanistan, to meet better the challenges
ahead.

