Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Ijoin colleagues around
the table, Sir, in warmly welcoming you to the Security
Council today. On behalf of my delegation, I thank you
for convening and presiding over this meeting. Your
presence here today clearly demonstrates the importance
New Zealand attaches to the subject of today's open
debate. I also thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
for his briefing, which should strengthen our collective
resolve to put an end to the saga of the tragic plight of
the Palestinians.

On Monday, 20 July, Malaysia was honoured to
co-host with Jordan an Arria Formula meeting of the
Council to reflect on the situation in Gaza one year
after the Israeli military offensive. I wish to thank
Ambassador Dina Kawar of Jordan for co-chairing the
meeting, as well as Council members for their active
participation. The last such meeting was held in 1997.
Speakers at the meeting came from the academia and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and did
not represent any political stripe. The thrust of their
presentation was on the dire humanitarian consequence.
The stories of victims whose misfortune it was to live on
the wrong side of the border tugged at the heartstrings
of the presenters and led them to tell stories of anguish
and despair, of continuous misfortune and suffering and
of broken dreams and hopes. I would like to share my
own reflections and impressions on the Arria Formula
meeting and some of the pertinent points raised, which
I hope will help us to provide a sharper focus on the
consequences of the Palestine-Israeli conflict in the
Council.

According to the World Bank, by May 2015
the continuing Israeli blockade had reduced Gaza's
gross domestic product by 50 per cent. Meanwhile.
Meanwhile, the unemployment rate hovers at around
44 per cent, the highest in the world. According to the
NGOs, basic construction materials - such as gravel,
steel bars, cement, wood of certain thickness, along
with a wide range of spare parts, computer equipment
and vehicles - are classified as dual-use items, and
their importation into Gaza is severely restricted
by Israel. As of June 2015, less than 1 per cent of
construction materials required for reconstruction had
so far entered Gaza. Also according to them, since the
offensive not a single destroyed house has been rebuilt.
Awaiting construction are 12,580 housing units, while

17,817 families - roughly 100,000 persons - remain
displaced. At the current pace, it will take 19 years for
Gaza to be rebuilt. And there was recognition across
the board from Council members that the humanitarian
situation in Gaza was increasingly dire. Malaysia
subscribes to the View that the situation of hopelessness
only feeds strongly into the narratives of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant/Daesh in their recruitment
drives and represents a time bomb for the region unless
drastic and immediate action is taken to address it.

The situation in Gaza cannot be looked at in
isolation from the larger issue of the occupation and the
attempts by the occupying Power to cement its control
over the occupied Palestinian territory. The date of
9 July 2015 marked 11 years since the International
Court of Justice rendered its unanimous advisory
opinion on the Legal consequences ofthe construction
of a wall in the occupied Palestinian territory (see A/ES-10/273) 4 on the illegality of the construction
of the Israeli separation, or apartheid, wall. We
remained dismayed and outraged, in equal measure,
that the Court's opinion continues to be flagrantly
disregarded by Israel 4 not to mention the fact that to
date no reparations have been made to those affected
by the continuing construction of the system of walls
and fences. We condemn the Israeli Supreme Court's
approval, earlier this month, of the construction of a
new section of the apartheid wall in southern Jerusalem.

At the same time, expansion of illegal Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory
continues in complete disregard of international law
and the overwhelming disapproval of the international
community. At a time when Muslims are rejoicing after
Ramadhan, Israeli authorities decided to demolish
more homes in a village in the south of Hebron. Israeli
security forces continue to use unnecessary force to
arrest or detain Palestinian children, some as young as
11. According to a recently released report by Human
Rights Watch, Israeli security forces have choked
children, thrown stun grenades at them and beaten them
in custody. Furthermore, detained children are being
tried before military courts - in gross violation of
international law and human rights law. Ninety-five per
cent of children released from Israelijails have suffered
from torture and ill treatment during interrogation and
detention.

It defies logic and common sense to believe
that these are the actions of a sincere partner for
peace. The expansion of settlements, the continuing
blockade against Gaza, the continued construction of
the apartheid wall and the systematic and continuing
denigration and subjugation of an entire people,
backed by overwhelming military superiority, reveal a
concerted attempt by Israel to alter the situation on the
ground 4 leading to a one-State reality.

We call upon the international community and
the Council to find the political will to halt that trend,
which drives Palestinians and Israelis further away
from a two-State solution and ensures that the flames of
enmity between the two sides will never die out. While
we remain committed to existing initiatives aimed at
solving the conflict, we believe that new initiatives such
as the proposed French draft resolution to reinvigorate
the Middle East peace process must be given serious
consideration.

At a time when the Middle East is rocked by raging
conflict from Syria to Yemen, driven to a certain extent
by extremist ideologies and ideologues, it is easy to
forget that, according to the key narratives propagated
by extremists and terrorists, such as Al-Qaida, Daesh
and their ilk, those groups claim that they are also
fighting against injustice and oppression in occupied
Palestine. Ensuring a just, comprehensive and final
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would
contribute tow depriving those groups, their supporters
and affiliates of such a false narrative.

In conclusion, Malaysia remains convinced that the
United Nations must continue to play a central role in
the achievement of a two-State solution for Palestine
and Israel. Malaysia continues to believe that the time
has come for the international community, and for the
Council in particular, to lead the way and end the status
quo in the occupied Palestinian territory. The Council
must find the collective will to shoulder its Charter
responsibilities in resolving this long-standing conflict,
which is as old as the Organization itself.

My delegation associates itself with the statements
to be delivered by the representatives of Iran and
Kuwait on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

