Mr. Serrano: I would like to thank you very
much, Mr. President, for giving me the floor to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU).

The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Iceland, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Serbia and the European Free Trade Association
country Norway, member of the European Economic
Area, as well as the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this declaration.

I would like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura for his
briefing and the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2011/381) on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security. Our thanks also go to Ambassador Tanin
for his presentation.

This month of July marks the start of the
transition to an Afghan security lead. The European
Union welcomes the impending handover of security
responsibility from the International Security
Assistance Force to Afghan forces in seven areas of the
country. In that context, we are encouraged by the
Secretary-General's assessment that the performance of
these forces has improved as a result of focused
training and capacity-building efforts. At the same
time, we can read that insecurity is on the rise, which is
an indication that the insurgency remains resilient,
making transition harder. The statistic of a 51 per cent
increase in security-related incidents over the same
period in 2010 underscores just how much harder. That
is why it is important to recall that the transition
process does not signify withdrawal, but a gradual shift
to a genuine supporting role, and is not calendar-driven
but conditions-based. By carefully managing the
transition, we are slowly but surely fulfilling the wish
of the Afghan people to take responsibility for their
own security.

Creating the conditions for a successful transition
throughout the country requires further progress
towards good governance and development and on the
political track. The stakes for better governance are
high, and measures such as improving transparency of
and oversight over public finances and fighting
corruption therefore deserve high priority.

On the one hand, the European Union welcomes
positive steps, such as the launch of the joint
independent anti-corruption Monitoring and Evaluation
Committee. On the other, we notice that, out of all the
national priority programmes of the Kabul process, the
ones dealing with public administration and
subnational governance were among the least
advanced. This is especially unfortunate, since for
several reasons, these programmes are also among the
most important.

As the Secretary-General remarks, in a post-
transition Afghanistan, with donors working more
through the central Government, less development
funding will flow directly to local authorities. Without
a stronger and more reliable connection to the centre
and without better subnational governance, there is a
risk that these provinces and districts will be starved
for aid.

A more immediate impediment in the area of
governance to the disbursement and distribution of
development funding is the continuing lack of an
agreement with the International Monetary Fund on the
consequences of the Kabul Bank collapse. If
Afghanistan is to take full responsibility for its own
development and if more development funds are to be
channelled through Afghan institutions - which
President Karzai has called an integral part of the
transition - then this bank crisis needs to be resolved.
This is an issue of great concern for the European
Union and its member States, which are jointly
spending more than €1 billion a year in Afghanistan.

Resolving the Kabul Bank crisis and, more
generally, implementing governance and other
commitments of the Kabul process, such as the
modernization of the justice sector and electoral
reform, require resolving the controversy between the
Afghan executive branch and Parliament. The
European Union calls for this to be done in a way that
is both quick and consistent with the separation of
powers.
Further steps towards more effective and
legitimate Government institutions are vital not only to
development cooperation, but also to progress on the
political track. Better governance would help convince
all Afghans that settling differences by force should no
longer be an option in the future and that the political
arena should be the only place to fight.

In this context, the European Union welcomes the
recent decision of the Security Council to split the
Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regimes - a decision

sure to boost reconciliation and reintegration efforts.
On the ground, these Afghan-led efforts benefit from
the support of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which continues to promote
confidence-building measures through advocacy on
access to basic services, detainee release and the
protection of civilians. Civilians, as the report
confirms, still bear the brunt of the conflict, with 80 to
90 per cent of the civilian casualties linked to
anti-Government elements.

Reconciliation should not only be Afghan-led, but
should also never stray from its fundamental
principles: the rejection of Al-Qaida, renunciation of
violence and respect for the Constitution. Securing
peace at the cost of international law and inalienable
human rights, including women's rights and the rights
of religious minorities, would lead to a pyrrhic victory.
This does not amount to some utopian ambition to
make Afghanistan a perfect place; it simply amounts to
upholding the values that this world body and the
European Union were founded on.

At our most recent debate on this item
(S/PV.6497), when its mandate was on the agenda, we
spoke extensively about UNAMA. That is why today I
will limit myself, in conclusion, to once again
expressing the European Union's support for its crucial
role during the transition, including as co-chair of the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board, a body in
need of further strengthening.

We commend Staffan de Mistura and his staff for
their commitment and courage, and condemn in the
strongest terms attacks perpetrated against UNAMA.
The United Nations is doing important work in
Afghanistan for all Afghans, and we strongly support
its continued engagement there in the short and long
terms. We count on UNAMA in the new phase
ahead- a phase of great opportunity and also great
peril. Nevertheless, as they say in Afghanistan - and I
hope this is accurate - there is a path to the top of
even the highest mountain.

