Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): I appreciate
Australia's hosting of today's meeting and thank
Special Adviser Benomar for his briefing. We also
welcome the participation of Foreign Minister Al-Qirbi
and Secretary General Al Zayani. We have listened
carefully to their statements and thank them for their
valuable contribution to this meeting of the Council.

Despite the high expectations of the international

community, the National Dialogue Conference was not
completed as scheduled, after all. Nevertheless, that
does not change the fact that the National Dialogue has
achieved meaningful progress on a number of important
issues and is nearing a successful conclusion with
a long-awaited final outcome, leaving behind many
difficulties. Nor does it change the fact that Yemen
is a rare example for the region as it transparently
implements a political transition plan conceived through
peaceful negotiations. In that regard, the Republic of
Korea recognizes and commends the progress made so
far by all the working groups of the National Dialogue
Conference, including the Sa'ada working group. We
strongly support the leadership of President Mansour,
and warn all potential spoilers that they should show
restraint. We also commend the good offices of the
Secretary-General and Mr. Benomar's tireless efforts
to use them to advance the process.

The Security Council has paid steadfast and major
attention to Yemen's situation during the past several
months and has invested sincere effort in its future. The
ultimate success ofthe National Dialogue process, to be
followed by the next phases, of drafting a constitution
and holding a referendum and elections, is therefore
important to the Security Council, and the ongoing
process in Yemen has significant implications for the
relevance of its efforts.

The Republic ofKorea believes that, in the process of
nation-building, creating a national consensus through
inclusive political discourse is much more important
than meeting deadlines. However, the transition time
frame cannot remain open-ended indefinitely. We
therefore call on all parties in Yemen to work patiently
and persistently towards a final agreement and its full
implementation without losing precious momentum.
The people of Yemen should devise their own formula
to translate the federalism agreement into a political
reality and swiftly move on to the next stage of creating
a new constitution.

The most critical prerequisite for a peaceful
transition into democracy is ensuring security. In that
regard, we are deeply concerned at the current security
situation, which is highlighted by tribal sectarian
pressures in Amran province and Ibb province this
month and the simultaneous attacks by suspected
Al-Qaida militants on soldiers and policemen a week
ago. The Republic of Korea condemns terrorism in all
its forms and is also concerned with kidnappings for
ransom and attacks on embassies and diplomats. We
strongly request the Government of Yemen to ensure
the safety of diplomats.We also have serious concerns
about the Government of Yemen report from earlier
this year on the alleged transport of arms from Iran.
Illicit arms transports can destabilize Yemen's political
transition and undermine regional stability.
At the Friends of Yemen conference two days ago,
the participants reviewed the political, economic and
security sectors and discussed ways to assist Yemen.
The conference noted that Yemen is still experiencing
difficulties, especially on the humanitarian and
economic fronts. As for the Republic of Korea, we
pledged $2 million in an effort to assist Yemen.

We hope that the people of Yemen will continue
to stay on the course of peaceful transition and
reconciliation so that at the end of the day they can be
a proud model of success for other countries in turmoil.

