Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are happy to welcome you, Mr. Minister,
presiding as the President of the Security Council.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General and the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their briefings. The statement of the President
of the Central African Republic is particularly important
for the Security Council in the context of our discussion
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The theme ofthe protection of civilians is extremely
important for the Security Council. This is the third time
this year that we are having a general discussion on that
topic. In the meantime, the number of problems in that
area is not diminishing, while recently the attention of
the United Nations and the international community
has been drawn to new worrisome phenomena.

The need for the protection of civilians is a most
direct and important consequence of conflicts. We are
convinced that in order to remedy the unfavourable
situation with regard to the protection of civilians, it is
important to move away from selective and unilateral
approaches and focus on violations of international
humanitarian law. We need strict compliance with
human rights standards and the full implementation of
the relevant Security Council decisions by all parties
to armed conflicts. However, the political resolution of
conflicts is the only effective way to eliminate threats to
civilians. Its promotion is the most important function
of the Security Council.

The primary responsibility for ensuring the
protection of civilians lies with the parties to a conflict.
At the same time, in the difficult conditions of an acute
crisis, the host country is not always able to carry out
those functions.

In that connection, most of the peacekeeping
missions endorsed by the Security Council have
a mandate to protect civilians, to assist national
efforts. That is one of the key aspects of peacekeeping
operations. We believe that the actions of peacekeepers
should be holistic and involve close cooperation
among the military, police and civilian components,
in coordination with national authorities, local
communities and relevant humanitarian organizations.

When speaking of the protection of civilians by
United Nations Blue Helmets, we have to underscore
the main principles of peacekeeping: the consent of
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in self-defence or in implementing the mandate
approved by the Security Council. These conditions,
unfortunately, have recently been considered by some
countries as almost a hindrance to carrying out the
missions of their mandates. And yet we think that these
principles are what guarantees the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.

In today's conditions, when we have mostly internal
conflicts, civilians are in particularly vulnerable
situations, associated with sides in a conflict. In
some cases, it is difficult to separate them from the
combatants. In this context, it is particularly important
to establish contacts with the sides and to make clear
the impartiality ofpeacekeepers. At the same time, host
States must not only take the primary responsibility in
protecting their populations; they must also provide all
necessary support for peacekeeping missions deployed
in their territory. There is no doubt that the protection
of civilians should be a priority, but no less a priority
should be the security of peacekeepers.

We think it is very important, in developing the
mandates of peacekeeping missions, that Council
members realize how dangerous it is to link the task of
protecting civilians with conducting offensive counter-
terrorist operations. These specific tasks can be dealt
with only by specially trained and equipped national
security forces. We welcome to the corresponding
conclusions in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446), which was
supported by the members of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.

United Nations peacekeepers, in carrying out
their duties, deservedly enjoy the respect and trust of
the civilian population. That is why their actions and
behaviours should be exemplary in every way. It is
essential to take all measures to prevent any kind of
violation, including sexual abuse. Resolution 2272
(2016), on sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping
operations, clearly states that measures to prevent and
combat that phenomenon apply to all missions deployed
with the endorsement of the Security Council.

Incidents of serious law-breaking and acts of
Violence by foreign contingents, including those of a
sexual nature, are identified with increasing frequency.
Troop-contributing countries have full responsibility
for punishing their peacekeepers. Disciplinary action
is not enough when it comes to criminal violations. We
also think that when national peacekeeping contingents
operating under the mandate of the Security Council
commit sexual exploitation or abuse, it is unacceptable
to release them from responsibility. If we are speaking
of a zero-tolerance policy on this issue, the standards
for combating such violations should be the same
for everyone.

I have one further comment. In his statement, the
representative of Ukraine rebuked the Security Council
for supposedly not reacting to its initiative seeking
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in his country. I wish to note for the
record that the Security Council never received such
a proposal. Obviously, the Council is not obligated
to react to periodic public statements by Ukrainian
officials that are mainly publicity stunts and are aimed
at diverting attention from Kyiv's non-compliance with
the Minsk agreements.

Ukraine should stop its daily shelling of civilian
targets in Donbass, which has led to the destruction
of vital infrastructure and the death of civilians. Also,
Ukraine should enact laws on the special status of
Donbass and on amnesty. It should establish a dialogue
with the representatives of Donetsk and Luhansk, as
provided for in the Minsk agreements. That will be the
best form of peacekeeping.

