Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to welcome the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to thank him for his presence and for
his statement.

We also thank Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
briefing.

We welcome the adoption by the Parliamentary
Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina of the long-
awaited police reform laws, which paved the way for
that country to sign on 16 June the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union (EU).
We also welcome the concrete progress achieved by the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina towards
fulfilling the five objectives and two conditions
referred to earlier by the High Representative. That, we
believe, reflects the transfer of authority from the
Office of the EU High Representative. We hope that
such progress will continue.

Despite the positive developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we remain concerned about the ongoing
nationalist discourse on all sides and the extremist and
ethnic interpretation of certain issues. The tendency to
address such issues from an extremist and ethnic
perspective may revive tensions and undermine
stability in the country and the region as a whole.

We therefore call on the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to exercise political restraint, learn to
coexist through dialogue and respect for State
institutions, cooperate to the greatest possible extent
with the High Representative, and adhere to all
provisions of the Dayton Peace Agreement and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Such an
approach will help Bosnia and Herzegovina to become
a more stable country based on a multi-ethnic society
and culture, and contribute to the stability and
sustainable development of the Balkan region.

We further commend recent efforts to arrest the
perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against humanity
who have been in hiding for many years. We hope that
efforts to pursue the other fugitives and bring them to
justice will be pursued. Success in that endeavour
would heal the country's wounds and help it to put the
past behind it. We call on everyone to cooperate with
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
pursuant to the Dayton Agreement.

We also share the High Representative's opinion
concerning the issuance of a clear and strong statement
of guarantees to Bosnia and Herzegovina, which would
create an atmosphere of trust between all Bosniacs that
would help them to tend to the business of developing
their country. We hope that it will also contribute to the
speedy return of all Bosnian refugees who remain
outside their country.

We are somewhat concerned about the remaining
obstacles to the return of some 120,000 refugees and
internally displaced persons. We stress the need to take
all necessary measures to ensure their return to their
homes. The constitutional and economic reforms must
be pursued in support of the efforts of the High
Representative in that respect, and we hope that all
parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina will participate in
those reforms, which serve the interests of all sides and
the achievement of stability and peace and the building
of a just society in that country.

