Mr. Kickert (Austria): Let us make 2017 a year for
peace. The Secretary-General's appeal is crisp and clear.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security. If it takes
this responsibility seriously, it must shift its focus to
prevention rather than on the management of conflicts,
because when conflicts erupt, human suffering has
already begun.

Conflict prevention is as necessary as it is
notoriously difficult. It is also thankless, as, when
successful, it mostly goes unnoticed by the public
eye. Since the 2015 reports on peace operations,
peacebuilding, and women, peace and security, the
concept of conflict prevention as an essential element
of achieving sustained peace has gained more traction
than ever before. The question we are all grappling with
is how to put it into practice.

Allow me to focus on five areas in which the
United Nations could become more effective in
preventing conflict.

In order to remain credible, the Security Council
has a legal and moral obligation to prevent mass
atrocities. We therefore encourage all its members to
support the code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity
or war crimes, as elaborated by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group and already signed
by 112 Member States.

Secondly, the Secretary-General has a mandate to
play a proactive role in warning the Security-Council
when international peace and security are threatened.
We encourage him, as many speakers before me have
done, to do so proactively whenever necessary. In this
regard, we are heartened by the organizational changes
introduced by the Secretary-General to place more
emphasis in his Office on conflict prevention.

Thirdly, regional organizations, under Chapter VIII
of the Charter, play an increasing role in prevention
and in sustaining peace. In 2017, Austria will make its
contribution by chairing the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). As a regional
organization created in the midst of the Cold War
as a first platform for cooperation on a then-divided
continent, it continues to play a vital role in preventing
and addressing conflicts in the region.

In 2017, the OSCE region faces many challenges
that are exacerbated by a lack of trust and growing
radicalization and violent extremism. The Austrian
chairmanship will focus its energy on using established
formats as well as informal and alternative channels of
communication to advance negotiated solutions to the
conflicts in the region. Foreign Minister Kurz will be
in New York in February to present the priorities and
work plan of the Austrian chairmanship-in-office to the
Security Council.

Fourthly, effective prevention work needs to start
at the regional and country levels. Nothing is more
helpful than being in the field and knowing the actors.
To that end, it is necessary to decentralize in order to
further strengthen regional offices and United Nations
Resident Coordinators and their teams. The root causes
for conflict are often multidimensional; they may be
economic, political or related to persistent violations
of minority or women's rights. The United Nations and
its partners must be able to address those root causes
as part of a broader conflict prevention effort. In that
context, the Human Rights Up Front initiative is crucial,
as human rights abuses are the early warning signs of
upcoming conflicts.

Fifthly, where United Nations peace missions are
deployed we need more proactive procedures to adapt
them to changing local needs in order to prevent a
recurrence of conflict after withdrawal. Partnerships
between host Governments and international partners
need to be strengthened when missions are phased
out, in order to ensure the sustainability of peace. The
current peacebuilding architecture must become much
more flexible in support of such efforts.

Let me conclude by thanking you, Mr. President,
for making prevention and sustaining peace a priority
of your presidency and of Sweden's membership of the
Security Council. Let me assure you ofAustria's support.

