The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Egypt,
El Salvador, Germany, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, the
Republic of Korea, Togo, Ukraine, Uruguay and Zambia, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Crighton
(Australia), Mr. Kouliev (Azerbaijan), Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh), Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso), Mr.
Niehaus (Costa Rica), Ms. Aguiar (Dominican Republic), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Castaneda-
Cornejo (El Salvador), Mr. Kastrup (Germany), Mr.
Lavalle-Valde's (Guatemala), Mr. Lelong (Haiti), Mr.
Sharma (India, ) Mr. Efi'endi (Indonesia), Miss Durrant
(Jamaica), Mr. Takasu (Japan), Mr. Powles (New Zealand), Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Kamal (Pakistan),
Mr. Cho (Republic of Korea), Mr. Kpotsra (Togo),
Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine), Mr. Pe'rez-Otermin
(Uruguay) and Mr. Kasanda (Zambia) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the understanding reached in the Council's
prior consultations, if I hear no objection, I shall take it that
the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation to the
Permanent Observer of Switzerland to the United Nations
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the Permanent Observer of Switzerland to the

United Nations to take a seat at the side of the Council
Chamber.
(spoke in English)

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 19 February 1999 from the
Charge d'affaires of the Permanent Observer Mission of
Palestine to the United Nations, which has been issued as
document S/ 1999/ 175 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the Security
Council invite Dr. Nasser Al-Kidwa, Ambassador
and Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, to participate in the upcoming meeting of
the Security Council, on Monday, 22 February 1999,
regarding the agenda item 'Protection of civilians in

in

armed conflict .

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in the
current debate in accordance with the rules of procedure
and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to take
a seat at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now resume its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.

If I might simply add a note, I am particularly
pleased to see so many countries participating in this
debate. It is a debate which, as everyone knows, follows
the meeting we had a few weeks ago, which allowed
Under-Secretary-General Vieira de Mello to present to us
an important statement on humanitarian activities relevant
to the Security Council. Ten days ago we had further
briefings from the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Cornelio Sommaruga; from
the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund, Carol Bellamy; and from the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, speaking to
the issue of protection of civilians in armed conflict. At
that time, the members of the Council had a chance to
speak. We adopted a presidential statement which,
inter alia, asked the Secretary-General to prepare a report
by next September on the matter.

I am particularly pleased that so many non-members
of the Council have chosen to speak today to offer us in

 
the Council their views on how we should consider such
issues, especially any advice they might have to the
Secretary-General in the preparation of his report.


