Ms. Willson (United States): Our thanks go to
you, Mr. President and to the other Committee Chairs
for your reports this morning, as well as for your
tireless efforts in leading the work of the Committees
reporting today.

The United States is pleased that all three
Committees are considering critical issues, including
such issues as improving reporting performance. Our
counter-terrorism efforts in the Committees will
succeed only by maximizing joint accomplishment of
shared goals and minimizing duplication, a point that
has been underscored by other speakers in this debate
this morning.

The experts that advise the three Committees
have an important role to play in coordinating efforts,
and we urge them to cooperate more closely as well.
As you stressed in your own report as Committee
Chairman, Mr. President, reporting is an important
aspect of counter-terrorism efforts. We note that many
States have not yet fulfilled their obligation under
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
to make such reports, and we urge them to do so
without delay. The objectives of those resolutions can
only be achieved with the full and transparent
participation all Member States.

The United States notes with satisfaction that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) is fully operational and we expect it to help
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) significantly
to improve its performance. The CTC's emphasis on
working with regional organizations is important. Such
organizations can play a role in helping States to
implement the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). In
the area of technical assistance, the CTC must
complement the efforts of international and other
organizations, as well as donor States, and the CTC
should continue to work to develop best practices in
the areas covered by the resolution. Among other
things, the CTC should endorse the work of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) in the field of
terrorist financing.

We are also pleased that the CTC expects to
eliminate the backlog of States' reports by the end of
the year. Reporting must not become a self-
perpetuating exercise and we hope that the CTC will
examine carefully how to use effectively the
information gleaned from States' reports.

Concerning the 1267 Committee, the United
States notes that resolution 1617 (2005) greatly assists
us in the fight against Al-Qaida, the Taliban and Osama
Ben-Laden, by defining the term "associated with,"
and thus further clarifying who is subject to the
sanctions. With the clarifications to resolution 1617
(2005), the Committee should continue to urge
Member States to submit names for listing. We are
encouraged by the Committee's proactive and
comprehensive dialogue with Member States, and we
hope that this engagement will lead to better sanctions
implementation. Another step towards that end is the
Committee's work with relevant specialized agencies
and international organizations such as the
International Civil Aviation Organization and Interpol.
We applaud those outreach efforts. The United States
strongly supports the call in resolution 1617 (2005) to
Member States to implement the Financial Action Task
Force recommendations on money-laundering and the
nine special recommendations on terrorist financing.

With regard to the work of the 1540 Committee,
we are pleased that the Committee and its group of
experts have completed review of 121 national reports.
This is an important first step in monitoring Member
States' implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
However, we are concerned that nearly 70 Member
States have yet to report to the Committee, and we
reiterate our call to those States to submit their reports
as soon as possible.

The 1540 Committee has a key role to play in
educating Member States about effective and efficient
ways to implement the resolution, and the United
States stands ready to work with the Committee,
potential donors and interested recipients to address, on
a bilateral basis, States' needs for technical assistance
in implementing the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004). The United States looks forward to upcoming
discussions on the possible renewal of the 1540
Committee's mandate.

