Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): Madam President,
the convening by your presidency of this open debate
on an issue of great importance is very timely. I do not
wish to use the phrase "in the wake of", but maybe I
should say "while the third meeting of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) is taking place".

Resolution 1540 (2004) reflected a vision and
clearly set forth actions for States to follow up on, in
order to achieve the objectives, including refraining
from supporting non-State actors in developing,
acquiring, manufacturing, possessing, transporting,
transferring or using nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, adopting and enforcing effective laws,
establishing domestic controls, and affirming support
for multilateral treaties that aim to eliminate or prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs),
A decade since the adoption of the resolution,
a lot has been achieved. First, a group of sizeable,
important countries has participated in the Nuclear
Security Summits. It is noteworthy to recognize that
the specific initiatives, measures and actions that
must be undertaken have been clearly identified. That
is quite an achievement in relation to securing fissile
or radiological material. Secondly, more countries
have now adopted the Additional Protocol to the
NPT. It is well known that it is an additional burden
and an additional commitment of countries, over and
above their obligation in terms of comprehensive
safeguards once they have become a member of the
NPT. Thirdly, more countries have truly acceded to a
number of agreements or conventions inspired by the
International Atomic Energy Agency on securing such
material. Fourthly, of course, there is the inspiring
continuing work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004).

The Philippines takes its responsibility seriously
and has accordingly demonstrated its will to pursue
positive action, including, among others, the following:
the regular provision to the Chair ofthe 1540 Committee
of a comprehensive list of measures undertaken by the
Philippine Government to ensure implementation of the
resolution. Those include the development of counter-
terrorism capacities and the upgrading of facilities,
such as the establishment of a transport control
communications centre at the Philippine Nuclear
Research Institute, to monitor, control and coordinate
the movements of category 1 and 2 sources within
the country. There is also the Megaports Initiative
project, which includes the establishment of a central
alarm station monitoring unit and the National Single
Window project.

Secondly, we have developed the code for the
Philippine National Research Institute, part 27,
"Security Requirements in the Transport of Radioactive
Material", aimed at ensuring the security of radioactive
materials during transport and preventing illegal
diversion, trafficking, theft and/or sabotage of such
materials during transport. The Philippines has, of
course, ratified the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) Additional Protocol.

To further strengthen the national legal framework
for non-proliferation, the Philippines is finalizing the
Chemical Weapons Prohibition Act of 2013, known
as an act prohibiting the development, production,
stockpiling, use of chemical weapons and on their
destruction, and providing penalties therefor. The
draft legislation is now pending review. Moreover,
the Philippines has also prepared a strategic trade
management act, the purpose of which is to prevent
the proliferation of WMDs and their means of delivery
through the establishment of a national strategic goods
control list and providing a regulatory framework for
dual-use goods. The bill has already been filed with
both houses of Congress.

But we all have to do a lot more. We need to do
much more. First, for instance, when we talk about
the nuclear security initiative of a group of sizeable
countries, there is a great need to make multilateral
what has been been agreed there in order to secure
real and multilateral traction for its implementation.
Secondly, we need more countries. Not all members of
the NPT accept the additional protocol, mindful that
those are additional obligations for themselves. These
highlights the fact that even those outside the NPT must
in fact adhere to safeguard measures under the IAEA
that approximate those obligations. Thirdly, it is very
important to encourage more countries to ratify and
accede to all the conventions that secure the transport
and storage of fissile radioactive materials. Of course,
there is a disquieting effect in the disregard for the 1994
Budapest Memorandum, which has a direct bearing on
the issue of non-proliferation.

Following the success of 2010, I note that the
clarion call on the international community to move
forward quickly and to work together even more closely
concerns the overriding issue of nuclear disarmament.
Why, for instance, in the preamble of resolution 1540
(2004), are all Member States enouraged to implement
fully the disarmament treaties and agreements to which
they are party? We must do our very best to secure all
fissile radioactive material. We must attempt to do our
very best to fully implement resolution 1540 (2004) for
as long as we nuclear arms exist. Thus, one day we may
not be so worried about this, and all that remains could
be only those materials intended for peaceful uses of
nuclear energy.

Following the success ofthe 2010 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, of
which I had the honour of being Chair, there was much
optimism owing to the adoption by consensus of the
64-point action plan - 62 action points plus two major
issues of concern. One was related to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and the Six-Party Talks;
the second was related to the implementation of the

1995 resolution on convening a conference on the
establishment of a Middle East zone free of a nuclear
weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction.
There was some optimism after the Conference. It was
a watershed moment. Given the obstacles and differing
positions of Member States, there was certainly
difficulty in achieving consensus. Yet we managed to
arrive at that point.

The challenge now, however, is in the
implementation. My country is disappointed that, four
years after the 2010 NPT Review Conference, we have
not yet convened the conference on the establishment
of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all
other weapons of mass destruction. I wish to briefly
recall that this is one of grand designs that ensured
the success of 2010. It worries me in the wake of the
third session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015
Review Conference, which may put us on shaky ground
as we move into the coming years.

In many ways, that sums up the circumstances
in which we find ourselves. We have been most
active in expressing our views on our commitment to
non-proliferation initiatives. Our responsibility, and
indeed challenge now is to match those words with
clear and concrete actions, fulfilling our commitments.
Pacta sant servana'a. Only then will we be able to
positively answer the hard questions we ask ourselves
and secure for ourselves and our posterity the safe
future we deserve.

