The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

At the outset, let me express, on behalf of the
delegation of Japan, my sincere sympathy to the people
of Rwanda, who continue to experience grave hardship
and suffering in the aftermath of the genocidal violence
that swept through their country in 1994. We in the
international community are very conscious that the
response of the international community was inadequate
in coping with the tragic situation that befell the innocent
Rwandan people. It is Japan's firm conviction that the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, should never again allow such atrocities to be
committed in Rwanda or, indeed, anywhere else.

In this context, it is a source of grave concern to us
in the international community that the illegal flow of
arms into Rwanda, in violation of the embargo imposed
by the Security Council in resolutions 918 (1994), 997
(1995), and 1011 (1995), and throughout the Great Lakes
region, would appear to be increasing to a critical level.
If this flow of arms across Rwanda's borders and into the
hands of former government forces, militias and other
elements is left unchecked, there is a real danger that the
old enmity which still remains within the population
could find its outlet in an open confrontation, leading to

 

a resurgence of armed conflict and seriously destabilizing
the entire Great Lakes region.

The draft resolution before us attempts to address the
problem of how effectively to prevent this by reactivating
the International Commission of Inquiry. As Chairman of
the sanctions Committee under Security Council resolution
918 (1994) on Rwanda, I welcome this decision. I believe
the activities of the Commission will be crucial in shedding
light on the situation, thereby helping the Council to
determine just what concrete measures it could take to stem
the illegal flow of arms in the region. The information it
will gather can also be useful to the various United Nations
organizations and agencies working to prevent a resurgence
of violence in Rwanda and the Great Lakes region.

At the same time, my delegation finds it judicious that
this draft resolution takes a carefully balanced approach,
allowing the Commission to present to the Council its
recommendations on measures related to the illegal flow of
arms without actually expanding the Commission's mandate
itself. For these reasons, my delegation will vote in favour
of this draft resolution.

I wish to take this opportunity to state Japan's belief
that the international community should seriously consider
the overall question of how to address the illegal flow of
arms. Naturally, in view of the complex and sensitive
nature of this issue, I should stress that it must be
approached with utmost care, most appropriately, perhaps,
within the context of our efforts to build a comprehensive
framework for preventive strategy.

In closing, I should also like to state that the
Government of Japan has contributed $40,000 to the Trust
Fund to support the Commission's activities, in the belief
that they will make a significant contribution to the
further stabilization of Rwanda and to the enhancement of
regional peace and security.
I hope that all United Nations Member States, and
particularly those in the Great Lakes region, will extend
their full and active cooperation to the Commission as it
carries out its important work.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1998/306.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1161 (1998).

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage

of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 12.45 pm.

