Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to present Switzerland's view on the
current crisis affecting the Middle East. If my oral
statement appears limited, as requested at the
beginning of the meeting, I refer Council members to
the written text.

Switzerland attaches the greatest importance to
respect for international humanitarian law and human
rights law. It has repeatedly reminded the parties
concerned of their obligations in that respect and will
continue to work in that direction. Respect for the law
is not a matter for negotiation, nor is it subject to
principles of reciprocity. The effects of the violations
now being committed in the Middle East can be
measured in terms of death, injury and destruction.
Those acts also impede humanitarian action.

Switzerland reminds the parties to the conflict
that international humanitarian law prohibits attacks on
civilians who are not directly participating in
hostilities, as well as attacks on civilian property. It
reminds the parties of their obligation to distinguish
between civilians and combatants and between civilian
and military infrastructure, to take all the necessary
precautions to preserve the lives of civilians and to
avoid damaging civilian property, to respect the
principle of proportionality in all military operations,
and to refrain from any form of collective punishment
against the population.

The personnel, installations and vehicles bearing
emblems recognized by the Geneva Conventions and
their Additional Protocols are protected by
international humanitarian law and must be respected
in all circumstances. The parties to the conflict are
obliged to authorize and facilitate the rapid passage of
all humanitarian aid and to take all practical and
possible precautions to avoid attacking them.

In view of the magnitude of the political and
humanitarian crisis, the international community has a
responsibility to act, and Switzerland hopes that the
Security Council is in a position to take such action.

Switzerland supports the efforts of the United
Nations and the special good offices mission conducted
by Mr. Nambiar and his colleagues. In that context, I
would also like to commend the Secretary-General for
his judicious suggestions with regard to the
establishment of a sustainable ceasefire. My country
hopes that the Council will seriously consider the
proposals and act swiftly upon them.
Switzerland condemns all acts of violence,
provocation and terrorism. There is no doubt that Israel
has the right to protect its territory and its population
against such acts committed by Hizbollah.
Nevertheless, in the light of law and the facts,
Switzerland considers the reaction of Israeli armed
forces in Lebanon to be clearly disproportionate. The
repeated air strikes of recent days against civilian
targets are a serious violation of international
humanitarian law. The indiscriminate firing of rockets
by Hizbollah against population centres in Israel also
seriously violates the rules of international
humanitarian law.

It is also important to underscore that the
situation in Lebanon must not cause the international
community to lose sight of the scale of the
humanitarian, economic and social crisis in the
occupied Palestinian territory, especially in Gaza. In
that context, under international humanitarian law it is
incumbent upon Israel, as the occupying Power, to
meet the basic needs of the Palestinian civilian
population and facilitate the rapid, secure and
unimpeded passage of equipment and aid personnel.

In order to respond to the crisis in Lebanon,
Switzerland would like to stress three proposals.

First, we call upon the parties to the conflict to
establish an immediate ceasefire. A ceasefire is
necessary, given the serious and steadily deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Lebanon.

Secondly, we call for the establishment of
humanitarian corridors to make it possible to provide
full and unrestricted access to victims. We must ensure
that access to basic goods and services is ensured.
Supplies of water and electricity are becoming
precarious. Such humanitarian corridors between
Beirut and southern Lebanon, between Beirut and
Cyprus and between southern Lebanon and Cyprus, as
well as between northern Israel and southern Lebanon
and the Bekaa Valley, would guarantee safe and
unimpeded access to humanitarian personnel and
goods. They would also enable the transport of injured
and sick persons to hospitals and the evacuation of
civilians from combat zones.

Thirdly, Switzerland supports the proposal for the
deployment of an international security and monitoring
force to southern Lebanon. In order to respond
effectively to the present crisis, such a mission would
need to have a mandate to guarantee a ceasefire, secure
the Israeli-Lebanese border and facilitate, by its
presence, a negotiated settlement of territorial disputes.
Such an international security and monitoring force
could also temporarily take control of the Sheba'a
farms area while a settlement of that territorial
disagreement is awaited and in order to reduce tensions
resulting from it. The force should also make it
possible to contribute to the implementation of
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), in particular
as regards the disarmament of all militias.

As highlighted by the Secretary-General, the
establishment of an international force should be
supplemented by a set of political and security
measures that would ensure that the ceasefire is
sustainable and that the situation does not relapse into
the status quo ante.

Switzerland welcomes the efforts of all actors
who are working to resolve the current crisis. However,
it is imperative not just to manage the crisis but to find
a real solution for all the unresolved conflicts in the
Middle East. The crisis in Lebanon, like that in the
Palestinian occupied territory, cannot be viewed solely
from the perspective of terrorism and counter-
terrorism. A comprehensive approach to settle the
totality of Israeli-Arab and Israeli-Palestinian conflicts
is required.

