Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I should like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
having presented the report of the Secretary-General on
enhancing mediation and its support activities
(S/2009/ 189). We are grateful to the Secretary-General
for having submitted the report, whose main
recommendations we support.

My delegation, which associates itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of Cuba on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, is pleased to be
able to participate in this debate, which continues the
fruitful exchanges that took place in the Security
Council on 23 September 2008 (see S/PV.5979) under
the leadership of President Blaise Compaore. He
presented Burkina Faso's views on the conditions
necessary for successful mediation, which must include
resolving the deep-seated causes of conflict if we are to
hope to produce lasting results.

In taking the initiative to organize a high-level
Security Council meeting on this issue, my delegation
intended, in addition to expressing the importance that
Burkina Faso attaches to the quest for peaceful
solutions to conflicts, to encourage experience-sharing
in the specific area of mediation. That is why we are
grateful to you, Mr. President, for having agreed to
organize today's public debate, which enables all
United Nations Member States to take part in these
exchanges.

The obligation of States to resolve their disputes
by peaceful means is stipulated in the Charter of the
United Nations. Among the techniques provided for in
Article 33, mediation has proved to be one of the most
effective, cost-effective and, what is more, fruitful in
terms of peace and development. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/ 189), which well describes
the Organization's activities in that regard, offers still
further proof that mediation has always been at the
heart of United Nations activities.

We are all familiar with the Secretary-General's
good-offices and mediation missions, whose number
and scale have grown continuously in response to the
increase in the number of conflicts and, in particular, to
their increasing complexity. Thus, the question today is
not whether that role is necessary or useful, but rather
how to further build the capacities of the Secretariat, in
particular the Mediation Support Unit, which is
increasingly being called upon but which is equipped
with limited resources.

As the principal organ entrusted with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council has a natural
role in promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including through mediation, and in supporting all
relevant and related initiatives. What better way to
guarantee peace and security than to prevent conflicts,
to prevent nascent hotspots of tension from turning into
violent conflicts or, when conflicts erupt - regrettably
and despite all efforts - to help contain and extinguish
them as swiftly as possible, if not once and for all, at
least for the long term?

In other words, just like crisis management,
mediation poses the problem of prevention.
Strengthening our prevention efforts by, inter alia,

combating weapons proliferation and strengthening
social cohesion and political and economic governance
within States helps us to better anticipate crisis
situations. A certain balance should therefore be
established among the Council's functions - all the
more so because the success of mediation initiatives
offers one of the most complete and concrete responses
to the issue of peacekeeping operations, which are
increasingly costly. We thus call on the Security
Council to explore ways and means to further
strengthen its own role in that area, including with
regard to the problem of sanctions.

One cannot stress enough the importance of the
contributions of regional and subregional
organizations, given their knowledge of the actors and
the stakes involved in conflicts, as well as of the
realities on the ground. It is essential that useful
measures be taken to support their efforts and
strengthen their capacities.

In Africa, the Constitutive Act of the African
Union enshrines the principles of the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the non-use of force. In line
with those principles, the African Union has always
been present from the very onset of crises affecting
some member States, thus averting the deterioration of
those crises into open and violent conflicts, or
supporting the parties in resolving the crises. Burkina
Faso welcomes the cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations and hopes to see it
strengthened in the future.

The Economic Community of West African States
has institutionalized the practice of mediation through
the setting up of a Mediation and Security Council and
a Council of Elders in the framework of its Mechanism
for Conflict Prevention, Management, Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Security.

Because States are and always will be at the front
line of conflicts and efforts to resolve them, they must
strengthen their mediation capacities. Convinced of the
virtues of dialogue and cooperation, Burkina Faso has
placed the promotion of mediation and the peaceful
settlement of disputes at the heart of its diplomacy,
which has enabled it, through the decisive action of
President Blaise Compaore, to accompany certain
brotherly States on the path to peace and reconciliation
on the basis of the philosophy of national ownership by
actors, regional leadership and international support.

With respect to the number and diversity of
mediators, my delegation deems it timely to stress the
necessity of strengthening cooperation and
coordination. The need for cooperation, coordination
and consistent action speaks to the need to create joint
databases, decentralize coordination centres and draft
joint practices and approaches.

Finally, my country shares the concerns of the
Secretary-General on the dearth of women mediators,
as well as the low level of their involvement in
technical mediation teams. My delegation reiterates
Council's appeal to the Secretary-General, the heads of
regional and subregional organizations and the heads
of other organizations to take urgent steps to remedy
that state of affairs.

In conclusion, my delegation thanks all
delegations for their support of the draft presidential
statement that we initiated and hope to see adopted at
the end of our discussion.

