Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): It could not
be more timely for the Security Council, particularly
the non-permanent members whose terms of office
end in a few days, to address the current complex
challenges facing international peace and security. The
Senegalese delegation thanks the Japanese presidency
for choosing this topic, which is at the heart of the
original mission of this organ, namely, implementing
instruments to maintain and entrench sustainable and
lasting peace in the world. Also, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his
important briefing, which has shed light on our work.

In recent years, the international community has
stepped up its efforts to stave off threats to peace and
provide a sustainable solution to security challenges.
I would like to mention in that regard, inter alia,
the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), the reform of the
peacebuilding architecture, the Secretary-General's
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, the
establishment of the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the
review of resolution 1540 (2004) and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.

But it is terrorism, international health crises,
climate change, the scarcity of water resources,
transnational organized crime, nuclear proliferation,
the circulation of small arms in relation to their issue
by non-State actors, sexual violence, the recruitment
of children and the illicit exploitation of natural
resources - the list is long but hardly exhaustive of
challenges - that are still awaiting a comprehensive
response from the international community.

However, recent events in the Korean peninsula
have moved the nuclear weapons race front and
centre in our strategic concerns. While the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action - also known as the
5+1 group agreement - shows us that a diplomatic
solution is always possible, the North Korean nuclear
programme, the prospects of which are gloomier than
ever, demonstrates that we must proceed with firmness,
perseverance and creativity in order to arrive at such
solutions. I would like to take the opportunity of this
debate to reiterate Senegal's commitment to nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

Another challenge is that of international terrorism,
which, despite the defeats it has suffered in Iraq and
Syria, through which it has lost its territorial holdings,
remains intact as is evidenced by the resurgence of
terrorist attacks, including in Egypt, Afghanistan,
Somalia, Spain and Burkina Faso, and on goes the list.
In addition, the shocking images of the sale of African
migrants as slaves in Libya attest to the scale and
gravity of transnational organized crime, including by
the non-State actors, which take advantage of poverty
and armed conflict to thrive.

There is also a growing link among international
terrorism, transnational organized crime, migration,
trafficking in persons, and non-State actors. Hence it
is imperative for the Security Council to conduct an
in-depth assessment of the issue of non-State actors in
relation to peace and security, particularly with regard
to their access to weapons of mass destruction, small
arms and light weapons. Let there be no mistake: those
challenges will remain as long as those armed groups
have access to weapons, but also as long as we do
not address the root causes, develop more inclusive
economic and social policies, fight extremist discourse
and strengthen international cooperation.

Mindful of the complex challenges resulting
from the threat that non-State actors pose to the
Organization's peacekeeping operations, during
Senegal's tenure as a non-permanent member, and
especially during its presidency of the Council, we
emphasized two priorities, namely, the fight against
the asymmetrical threats faced by the United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the strengthening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.

While the first priority aims to make United
Nations peacekeeping operations more efficient by
improving the cooperation among the Secretariat's
various departments, from planning to deployment to
defining mandates, which must be better adapted to the
realities on the ground, the second is to create optimal
synergy between the work of the United Nations and
that of regional and subregional organizations.

The example of the African continent shows us that
those two approaches complement and reinforce each
other, thereby enabling the Security Council to make
use of regional and subregional organizations where
it cannot deploy operations with an offensive mandate
in order to respond to asymmetrical threats. Examples
abound, from Somalia to the Lake Chad basin, where
African countries have deployed their troops to respond
to the threat posed mainly by non-State actors.

That is the full meaning of resolution 2320 (2016),
which the Council adopted at Senegal's initiative, on
the financing of African Union peace operations. That
is why Senegal welcomes the initiative ofthe Secretary-
General to reform the peace and security pillar by
restructuring of the departments of the Secretariat,
as well as focusing on preventive approaches so as to
enhance the efficiency of the Organization in the area
of peacekeeping.

Because we are convinced of the advantages of
a preventive approach, here in the Security Council
Senegal has actively invested in the management and
resolution of the Gambian crisis. In that connection,
the support of the United Nations and of the African
Union for the efforts and leadership of the Economic
Community of West African States led to the peaceful
transfer of power, while respecting the sovereignty of
the Gambian people.

That same conviction forms the foundation of the
Senegalese initiative "Water, Peace and Security",
which aims to contribute to conflict prevention efforts
by promoting cooperation for access to cross-border
water resources, but also through mediation and good
offices. Allow me to welcome the establishment by
the Secretary-General of the High-Level Advisory
Board on Mediation and to renew Senegal's support to
that end.

In conclusion, it is clear that resolving the many
complex security challenges we face will require
a comprehensive approach that takes into account
the issue of non-State actors and includes a conflict-
prevention approach, one that puts the work of the
Organization on the track of a promising partnership for
peace. That is exactly why Senegal, during its tenure in
the Security Council - but above all in general - has
worked towards peace, especially on our continent,
Africa. I can assure members of my country's continued
commitment in that regard.

