Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela for organizing this debate at a time when
the international community is striving to review the
peacebuilding architecture. We also congratulate you,
Mr. President, for the quality and clarity of the concept
note (S/2016/104, annex) that you have shared with
Member States.

The review of the peacebuilding architecture is
entering its final phase, with the intergovernmental
negotiations on the identical draft resolutions to be
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly. I would also like to also thank Ambassador
Skoog for his briefing, which was edifying, and pay a
heartfelt tribute to the work carried out by Ambassador
Rosenthal and the members of the Advisory Group of
Experts. My delegation also welcomes the briefing by
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Ambassador Kamau, and reiterates its full support to
him.

Since the establishment of the PBC, 10 years
ago, significant progress has been achieved, first, in
understanding the specific challenges that emerge
from conflict and, secondly, in better coordinating
international efforts, including among United Nations
entities. However, further progress can still be made
through our collective efforts, in particular in improving
our ability to mobilize resources over the long term and
in coordinating the actions of various donors in order
to support the strategies that have been worked out with
the Governments concerned.

The Kingdom of Morocco is engaged in
peacebuilding activities, both at the bilateral level
and at the level of the United Nations as a member of
the Peacebuilding Commission for third time since
its establishment and in its capacity as Chair of the
PBC's Central African Republic country-specific
configuration since January 2014. In that context,
the Kingdom of Morocco supports the review of the
peacebuilding architecture, and its interlinkage with the
strategic review of peace operations and the review on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is crucial.
Those reviews will, we hope, allow us to harmonize all
the intervention modalities within the United Nations in
countries in conflict or emerging from conflict - from
prevention to post-conflict stabilization, peacekeeping
and the management of the transitional period. In that
regard, we welcome the initiative taken by the President
of the General Assembly to hold a high-level debate on
peace and security in May.

I would now like to highlight some particular points
that seem to us to be of central importance.

The review invites us to change our understanding
of peacebuilding and to view it through a broader
prism. The complexity of the new conflicts facing the
international community transcends the traditional
view of conflict resolution followed so far, as was noted
by the Advisory Group of Experts. Any peacebuilding
process should be part of a holistic approach that
combines all actions - from prevention to restoring
peace, peacekeeping and post-conflict State-building.

The interaction among the various United Nations
actors and external actors in peacebuilding should be
reviewed so as to ensure better synergy in the efforts
carried out both at the strategic decision-making level
and in the field. Peacebuilding must also be carried out
from a multidimensional perspective that takes into
account the economic, political and social aspects of
the conflict.

Secondly, we must ensure that all components of a
post-conflict society, all movements and all political and
ethnic allegiances are included. That is a prerequisite for
the success ofpeacebuilding efforts. Looking for peace
should not be a goal in and of itself. Rather, peace must
be constantly maintained and should be considered as
a way to bring about security, prosperity and the well-
being of affected populations. In order to be definitive
and lasting, peace must emerge from within the society
in conflict and not be imposed from outside. A peace
that does not bring together all the vital forces of the
country cannot last.

Peace should not be viewed in a standardized and
uniform way or applied in a one-size-fits-all manner.
A simplistic vision of peace that does not take into
consideration the particularities of every situation, the
priorities and sensibilities of each population will be
doomed to failure.

The involvement of women in the early stages of
the peace process is essential, given their proven role
in easing tensions, promoting economic recovery
and strengthening political legitimacy and social
cohesion. Civil-society actors and non-governmental
organizations must also be involved to a greater extent
in the work of the PBC. Their presence on the ground
and their knowledge of the situation in the country, as
well as their analytical capabilities, allow them to make
relevant proposals on the long-term strategies that need
to be adopted.

The transition process at the end of the mandate
of a United Nations mission must be carefully planned
and based on an objective and careful analysis of the
situation under review and must not be the result of
purely budgetary or logistical considerations.

The transfer of responsibilities between a mission
and the country office continues to be problematic,
given the differences in human and financial resources
between those two entities. It is for that reason that
the capacities of country offices should be further
strengthened.

Thirdly, it is time that the PBC's role and position in
the peacebuilding architecture be given the recognition
and interest they deserve. Having an advisory role,
the PBC is called on to support the work of the main
organs of the United Nations and to coordinate their
peacebuilding efforts within the framework of an
integrated and global approach. The Council has to
increase its interaction with the PBC and its country-
specific configurations beyond simply looking at
annual reports of the Commission and the periodic
reports on the six countries on its ageanda. Called on
to fulfil the three main functions under the mandate,
namely, political support, the mobilization of resources
and ensuring coherence among various actors in
peacebuilding, the PBC and its country configurations
have become a major player in maintaining peace and
promoting development in post-conflict situations. The
Commission and the country configurations must be
systematically invited to take part in the deliberations
of the Council, which should take fully into account
their contributions and proposals.

Fourthly, mobilizing appropriate financial support
in a structured, predictable and lasting way is the key
to the success of peacebuilding actions. Without the
appropriate financial resources to provide financial
support, the initiatives aimed at bringing together all
parties to a conflict to disarm former combatants,
integrate them into society, restore State authority,
reform the security and justice sectors and provide
economic recovery are at risk of not being achieved.
The stakeholders, be they of the United Nations, local
stakeholders, Goverments, the private sector, regional
organizations or international financial institutions,
must cooperate in order to define as closely as possible
the funding needs for peacebuilding activities in post-
conflict countries.

The Peacebuilding Fund is one of the components
of the peacebuilding architecture that has had an
extremely positive impact since its creation. Success
means that it is now a recognized and viable actor
when it comes to financing in post-conflict situations.
Nonetheless, although its track record is largely positive,
the Peacebuilding Fund cannot simply content itself
with voluntary contributions coming from members.
More interactions, and not only with donors, will
enable it to inform all Member States on the numerous
projects financed by the Fund. Those steps, which are
being put in place, would enable it to broader the donor
base and encourage even those countries that already
contributing to the Fund to increase their contributions.

The work carried out by the PBC on generating
domestic resources and local tax collection, the fight
against illegal flows and support for the proper use of
natural resources must be strengthened, together with
international financial institutions, in order to allow
countries emerging from conflicts to particpate equally
in the economic recovery of their economies.

Fifthly, peacebuilding efforts can be successful only
if they are part of a global and integrated development
strategy that fights the deep underlying causes of
conflicts and meets the hopes and socioeconomic
aspirations of countries emerging from conflicts. Peace
and development are independent and indivisible. To
be efficient and have lasting effect, peacebuilding
must take into account and attempt to resolve the
underlying causes of conflict. Rebuilding a viable
economy after a long period of conflict remains one of
the more difficult challenges within the peacebuilding
process. A country emerging from conflict has to be
able to ensure macroeconomic stability, create jobs
and generate economic growth. Convinced that South-
South cooperation has become essential because of the
urgency and scope of challenges facing developing and
fragile States, Morocco works bilaterally and trilaterally
to put together specific and diversified partnership
projects in productive sectors, stimulating growth and
creating jobs that help with human development and
directly affect the lives of citizens.

