Mr. Nega (Ethiopia): On behalf of the States
members of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on Somalia.
We are pleased by the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime Minister of
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of
Somalia. We would also like to express our
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Augustine Mahiga, for his
continuous efforts to promote peace in Somalia. We
wish to acknowledge the excellent working
relationship among the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), IGAD and the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia.

First, the present situation can be described in
terms of a few points, some of which have existed for
some time, while others are, in effect, recent. To start
with recent developments, which are essentially happy
ones, the progress made in the security area over the
past week, if used properly and with a sense of purpose
and determination, has the potential to change the
whole political landscape in Somalia or, at least, to
provide the foundation for such a change. Accordingly,
what has been achieved in the security domain in
recent weeks and the series of defeats suffered by
Al-Shabaab must not be understated. The gains made
should be preserved and built upon, including because
great sacrifices have been made to achieve what has
been gained. That also involves ensuring that whatever
is done in other areas does not cause a loss of
momentum in the security field. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/20ll/277) underlines such
progress. We endorse everything that the report affirms
in that regard.

The second development in Somalia relates to the
humanitarian tragedy in the country, which has been
worsening recently, making that a matter of the highest
priority for the TFG and the international community.
The activities of the TFG in that area and to be seen to
be active in addressing the tragedy will no doubt
contribute to enhancing the credibility of the TFG in
the eyes of the Somali people.

The third point that needs to be highlighted is the
fact that the political situation in the country does not
show much change. Relations among senior politicians
have once again become a source of serious concern.
For some reason, the squabble among officials of the
Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) worsens, by
coincidence or otherwise, whenever the security
situation shows a major improvement. Obviously, one
reason might be that, with the prospect of a more stable
and better security situation, holding office becomes
far more attractive and, thus, competition is literally
ratcheted up. The lesson here is that whatever is done
to improve or to change the political landscape should
not jeopardize what has been gained in the security
area.

The other major factor that defines the situation
in Somalia at this juncture is the fact that the end of the
transition period is fast approaching. There are only
three months left before the transition is completed.
What makes the issue so vital now is that the transition
is coming to an end before the major tasks that were
supposed to be handled during that period have been
carried out. In that regard, the TFIs and their
authorities have been found greatly wanting. Indeed,
whatever differences there might be on this point, there
is a consensus among the friends of Somalia on the
ways and means of addressing it.

What has made the issue all the more critical is
that it has not only become a source of much
misunderstanding among the TFI authorities, but also
further undermined the international community's
confidence in the TFI authorities. The situation has
been exacerbated by Parliament's decision to extend its
mandate for three years beyond the transition period.

While the concerns of the international
community in that regard are legitimate, it is
nonetheless obvious that allowing the transition to end
without putting in place mechanisms to ensure the
preservation of the foundation of the Djibouti
Agreement would be potentially dangerous and, in fact,
inadvertently a major reward, including for
Al-Shabaab. That explains why IGAD, and
subsequently the African Union, proposed the
extension of the mandate, although not for three years.
Even if an election has become unavoidable, it should
be handled in such a way as not to undermine the gains
made in the security area.

What to do is now the question faced by the TFIs
authorities and their partners at the subregional,
regional and international levels. At this point, perhaps
what is critical is not to jump the gun. The situation in
Somalia is very delicate. Much has been gained in the
security area, and since such progress has major
positive implications for the fight against international
and regional terrorist networks, it should not be
allowed to be reversed. One recalls the situation only a
few months ago when the terrorists were literally
knocking at the doors of Villa Somalia. The current
progress should be used to bring the threats posed by
such dangerous elements to the region and the wider
world to a definitive end.

Moreover, it is very clear that focusing only on
the weakness of the Somali authorities might not be all
that fair. Furthermore, that approach might not serve
our common objectives. In that regard, the Secretary-
General is right in believing that more help in the
security area is needed for AMISOM. to enhance its
capacity and in terms of the provision of reliable and
predictable support for the TFG in a whole range of
areas.

Regarding how to proceed, what can be stressed
at this point is the need for serious consultation with a

11-3318]
view to making use of the current progress in the
security area to sort out Somalia's political problem.
This must be done brick by brick, for nothing can be
done in Somalia in one fell swoop. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General highlighted,
Somali ownership of the process is the best approach
and, ultimately, the most rewarding. IGAD is always
ready to collaborate with the international community
and will remain committed to peace and stability in
Somalia.

