Mr. Ambiihl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this
opportunity to present Switzerland's position. At the
outset, I commend you for convening today's debate on
such an important issue, and I thank you for the
stimulating document (S/2005/3l6, annex) that you
have circulated as a basis for discussion.

The Secretary-General's proposal to establish a
new United Nations peacebuilding architecture
provides an opportunity that must be seized to help
bring about three fundamental changes. First, the new
architecture must facilitate the convergence of the
security, humanitarian and development perspectives.
Secondly, the United Nations system must better
collate and take advantage of the experiences gained by
all United Nations actors at the local, national and
international levels. Thirdly, the new architecture must
enhance predictability, transparency and accountability
in United Nations peacebuilding activities.

Switzerland expressed its views on the
Peacebuilding Commission and other institutional
matters during the General Assembly's debates on
chapters II and IV of the Secretary-General's report
entitled "In larger freedom" (A/59/2005). Today I will
focus on four strategic and substantive aspects that are
especially important to us.

The first concerns the need for a coordinated,
multidimensional approach. The process that leads a
war-torn society to sustainable recovery is long and
complex. Several objectives must be tackled
simultaneously: security, humanitarian action, justice
and reconciliation, social and economic development,
good governance and participation. In order to be able
to strive for those various objectives effectively and
simultaneously, it is essential that all actors involved
share a coordinated strategy.

Improved cooperation both at United Nations
agency headquarters and in the field is required.
However, there are limits to centralizing the
management of operations. While no one disputes the
Security Council's role and responsibilities in
maintaining peace, the Council should not monopolize
control of peacebuilding and reconstruction activities.

My second point concerns the involvement of
national and local actors. Their participation is crucial
for the success of peacebuilding activities. However,
that involvement is often left up to the goodwill of the
international actors. While the international actors may
support that idea in principle, they often put it into
practice in a limited fashion, merely undertaking
consultations or failing to heed that principle
completely. It is therefore important to strengthen
United Nations capacity to promote national dialogue
and to encourage the real involvement of national and
local actors.

My third point concerns the need for partnerships
with specialized institutions. Partnerships with
independent academic institutions, civil society and the
private sector are important for drawing on the best
possible expertise. Switzerland welcomes the close
collaboration of the United Nations with independent
institutions, such as the Geneva International Centre
for Humanitarian Demining, the Geneva Centre for
Security Policy, the Geneva Centre for the Democratic
Control of Armed Forces, the Harvard Program on
Humanitarian Policy and Conflict Research, the Centre
for Humanitarian Dialogue, and the International Peace
Academy. We encourage the Security Council and the
Secretariat to further strengthen such partnerships.

As a fourth point, I would like to stress the
importance of an approach based on law.

Respect for the law is important for ensuring a
sustainable peace process. Tensions may arise between
the rule of law and accountability for past crimes, on
the one hand, and power-sharing arrangements and
reconciliation, on the other. However, we do think that
a dialogue between all relevant stakeholders of a peace
process can contribute to reducing those inevitable
tensions. In that context, we support the Secretary-
General's proposal to create a rule of law assistance
unit in the Peacebuilding Support Office. The new unit
should concentrate its work on coordination. Concrete
activities to promote the rule of law are and should
remain within the competences of the United Nations
agencies working on the ground.

In conclusion, there are institutional and strategic
challenges to face. The international community has a
unique opportunity this September to create a new
advisory body on post-conflict peacebuilding. The
Commission will help to solve strategic challenges and
to clarify the terminology, concepts and tools used in
the context of peacebuilding. It could also provide
advice on peacebuilding mandates, facilitate the
coordination of actors involved at different stages of a
peacebuilding and reconstruction process, and thus
help to address an significant shortfall: the lack of
policy coherence in peacebuilding and reconstruction.

